Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Aysa learns words from Albuquerque.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O children, as you have completed this book, which is the last of the medical science series, to honor your father for his achievement in this field and for his insights presented herein, it seems fitting that I dedicate this treatise to you. It constitutes a portion of my own work on surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The operacio (operation) of which you speak has been completely obscured in our realm and during these times, totally isolated until the science of it was discovered; but only a few small descriptions remained in the books of the Ancients, which changed most and led to those errors and superstitions within which are closed the intentions of it, and its essence has been extended.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	I believe that you are reviving the art of this treatise by means of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; so as to come closer to the forms of tools used in joinery and other instruments for work, with due regard for both explanation and preparation which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	In the case for which it is not outdated or an art by Mays, the reason why the artist should be trained in this our time before this stage of medicine, since the art of medicine has become extensive, and that its actor must exercise themselves in the science of anatomy, as Guaillard recounts that he knew how to know the movements of limbs and their shapes, and the union and separation of them; and had knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, along with their names and strength; about arteries pulsating and quiet ones, and places where blood flows from them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	"According to Hippocrates, water is the essence of life and plays a greater role in our body than in any other element."
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	In the introduction to this book, we have said that if you are not acquainted with anatomy, beware of falling into error from which many people will die, as I myself have seen too much of those who boast about their education in this science and knowledge but fail in applying it properly through experimentation.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I saw a surgeon cutting the head of a woman and causing an abscess on her throat; as a result, some blood vessels in her neck burst, allowing a large amount of blood to flow into it which caused the woman to die instantly among many others.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	A man passed by and saw another merchant who was carrying a stone of a man who had died in his presence; the stone was large, and he brought it to him and placed that stone atop his chest on the third day after which the man died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	In that moment, I realized through the size of the stone and the disposition of the injury how it would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	In our land there was another doctor who received pay of a duke to perform surgery, and after a black knife that caused the fracture during its use; however, because of the surgeon's ignorance, he aggravated the fancied fracture, using pillows and splints with excessive tension, instead of setting it properly.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	The Lord has allowed us to follow our desires and live according to the laws of old for many days and commands that we stay away from idolatric practices; however, so ingrained were these habits that they led to disaster, eventually bringing ruin upon ourselves.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	Once upon a time, there was a young girl who longed to escape her life and find solace in the pages of books, where she discovered peace and relief from her sorrows.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the infection was already confirmed within the limb, so he could not prevent that spread of infection throughout the affected area to avoid further complications.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	A certain physician caused an abscess to burst cancerously and become ulcerated nearby the shin-bone within two days, during which time the evil of his lord greatly increased.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The main cause of this melancholcuous man is not that he hasn't achieved all his goals in life, but rather that he feels rejected by everyone around him.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	E per aquo, fils, necessaris es a vos que l'operació am sia divisa en dues devesies: son és l'operació relacionada amb la salut i alhora el treball en què hi ha risc en els majors dissenys.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	In this text written in Occitan language from the Middle Aero period (12th century), it seems to be a decree or legal statement related to water rights and land usage within a certain territory. The speaker is instructing others to respect these established laws, cautioning against fears and errors that may lead people astray.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Thus, take up your arms for the cause and in God's protection; may your sick find healing and strength to overcome.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	We use the best path leading to the grace of God for those who are lost in salvation and blessed continuity, and we remove terribly difficult illnesses with hard-to-cure afflictments, as well as your weapons of fire which make you tremble. So that you may remain steadfast in your faith and in your name so that it does not abandon you: for more remains to your glory, and then either in heaven or at the feet of your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	"Gualia jà dissec'n algunas de sus moniciones:"
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"There is no cure for illnesses like that; otherwise, you wouldn't be without any family."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	Chapter One: The Enigmaturus Chronicle
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin with the division of the free and first section of the primary portion.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first organized capital of the ancient Phoenicians, in terms of instruments and tools used for surgery as well as substances needed during operations.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The second half division.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The Second Book, of Sickness and Wound-healing, and of Cupping and Leeching, and Extraction of Thorns and Bones, and Other Remedebles; All Treated According to Their Specific Formulas for Each Instrument.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third portion.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third capital, of restoration and relocation, as well as the treatment for torture and injuries to those affected; established by the order of the head in person, along with the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	The caution of the fire and acute medical conditions, as well as remembering the opera performance.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	Chapter One begins with the entire treatise on freedom.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I inform you about the quality of the jewels found in that cauldron and their relationship to its forbidden contents.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	The language you've provided appears to be an old form of Occitan or Catalan from the Middle Ages (12th-15th centuries). This text seems to discuss a complex and lengthy speech on childbirth by cauterization, which is well-regarded for its science but also secretive in nature. Many learned individuals have spoken about it but disagree among themselves; however, I know at least part of their sermons is sufficient for me.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	I would say that "cauterize" refers to the entire process of burning or searing a part of the body using a heated instrument like a metal rod. This is done universally as it pertains to a specific substance, except for two exceptions where caution may be required due to their particular nature.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the case of dry and itchy skin condition; some people suggest that cupping is helpful in this situation, while others argue against its use, stating that cupping is not appropriate for diseases characterized by dryness and irritation, as fire - which is inherently hot and dry - can exacamoake the healing process more difficult.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	E is the antagonist of that which causes by cauterization sudden joy in all illnesses such as tail and dryness seen in men's bodies; when you compare a man's body to its moisture at the touch of fire, you find it burned.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	Oh dear friend, I've heard about an experiment that might interest you, as it seems to reveal some intriguing results. Would you like me to share more details with you?
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it does not occur on the day when that person who has already been reproached and exercised in the Capitol of Caution during their third exercise, is known for the diversity of complexities among men and the condition of illnesses in their bodies, as well as the causes of those diseebs and incidents, and the extent of time they last.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In the other complexities, it's not about your fear; mostly in leaky and damp illnesses, as all joints already get used to them, and don't forget during movement with that cautionary care on those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Listen well, children, I shall reveal the secret of healing through fire and the virtue of it; thus, if you use this method as medicine to burn, be mindful that the heat is simple, its effect reaching only the limb being cauterized and not harming any other part attached to it.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May's remedy of medicine was consumed by the person who had an ailment in their limbs and it greatly helped to bring about healing, resulting in difficult illnesses being cured with strength.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Mays the fire, for its sublimity and of its goodness, does not cause water but overflows, and it is known to us by experiment and through the lengthy service of study in the art regarding the truth of causes; hence I am excused for the length of this speech. And if not so that it were not allowed in my free time during this interlude to you, my secret friend, as well as a demonstrative philosophical discourse on the operation of fire in bodies and the expulsion thereof which dispels illnesses.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Hear ye, children, when you disagree about the best time to shave and rest during the springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	The burning is advisable at all times because the damage caused by unforeseen accidents can be overshadowed by the benefits of having a burn performed, especially if it's for severe and urgent pains or aches that do not tolerate delay so as to avoid harm. Such small inconveniences during this time are outweighed by the potential dangers avoided through the healing process.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	Yes, indeed! Here's the translation of your text from Catalonian to English:
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The cause is not as people think it to be; cauldrons are not a medicine, but rather they alter the complexity and dry out the moisture which is what causes the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, Maya's unnecessary surgerangs on the medicine due to his volatility and valor of his operation as well as the greatness of his lordship.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the illness may not return at any time in the future, depending on the severity of the disease and the location of the illness, as well as the individual's overall health, their body's preparation for surplus fluids, and what has been consumed or come into contact with them. However, if they have received a cauterization treatment for pain in the teeth, it is possible that this type of subtle illness involving a small number of excess fluids and humidity may not return to the same person as dental pain; rather, something similar may occur instead.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	The common belief is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine and it's considered effective, though I don't entirely understand what they mean by this, but I believe it doesn't provide any healing benefit through medicine or other means.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause lies in contrast to this; I understand that cauterization is not the last resort of medicine but rather it applies to certain treatment methods for diseases, and those medicines cannot be administered as such, at the end of the causal line one should apply caustic substances, and proceed accordingly.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	In the sixteenth century, Cauterization was considered one of the most common treatments in medicine, as I understand it, according to what ordinary and crude methods were used by unskilled physicians.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	They argued that gold earrings are better than iron ones, and they did not mention silver unless it was for the equality of the value or the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	They said that the place of healing does not work properly if water is not completely drunk, because I have already tasted and experienced that such a practice doesn't result in producing pure water, but rather produces other metals like copper from the others; however, cauterization with gold fire is indeed better than iron as they say. But when using gold fire, it depends on how much you apply heat for the malleability of gold, and also to prepare for beating. If you adjust over a flame, the gold melts due to the flame, and sometimes small sheets are prepared by the craftsman for that purpose.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	L'acqua ossigenata è un prodotto comunemente usato nell'ambito della chirurgia per disinfettare con precisione, leggermente ed efficacemente il sito di operazione.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	The president has ordered this chapter to be classified according to the current code of chapters and those within the volumes should also follow suit, enspert that the requester may locate it as desired.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	The headache due to cold and dampness is often treated with moxibustion, a form of heat therapy. In traditional Chinese medicine, this condition may be caused by an imbalance in the body's energy or "qi," leading to blockages along specific meridians associated with pain and discomfort.
Le capitol primier.	First Capitals or Primary Capitals refer to the original administrative centers of a country, typically established during its formation and often holding significant historical importance. These may also be known as founding cities or principal towns, depending on their role in national governance and history. Some examples include Washington D.C., Canberra, Brasília, and New Delhi.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This incision provides moisture and coldness over the affected area, which are due to both direct and indirect causes, such as a blocked tear duct from forehead to eyelid edges, excessive tearing, along with increased sleepiness, toothache and ear pain; generally of all illnesses caused by cooling, including paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions in those disecuases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows, which initially commands the evil to be evacuated using a purgative medicine that purifies and cleanses within three or four nights, depending on the virtue of the evil, age, and habits of the person.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	A woman commanded him to have his hair short and to sit between her legs on a fallen tree trunk, and then she pressed her own legs over his.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Gently place the tip of your finger on the base of your nose, between your eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, upon arrive at the place you mentioned last night, I tried that spot and found this olive grove nearby with a peculiar shape:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	The wind blows softly over that place where the healthful waters flow, with the technique that descends, which your mind gradually restricts, and you turn around it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Go to your mother's house and carefully observe the place, and if you see that any quantity of grain is exposed, raise your hand as much as the weight of errors, then lift up your hand from that iron or another at the place, if it feels cold; wait until you see the water I have told you about.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	A small amount of salt is dissolved in that over there, and left there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	A prop of the pot on the stove, continue to stir until the bottom is browned.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	A proper use of the local antifungal cream can help treat the infection within the skin fold.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	When the Roman Empire fell, the land became more fertile and beneficial because it was freed from oppressive rule and exploitation.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	After three days, the calluses should be removed from their bones and kept within a container that has been sterilamo, ensuring no other parts of the bone are attached to them.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	"Provide both the accurate water and adjusted salt quantities, please."
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Five days after the burning wax strip has been applied to the last area, the procedure continues with inserting a small metal rod into the burnt site. This is the process for creating smaller Alphabets:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They estimate that the steam from the head will last until this place disappears.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	S has been flying the flag high for long time, and it must be properly cared for until it becomes well-worn.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	I have not seen these two species of cauldrons in any other homes, except for a few chosen ones according to the rule of fear; and let that one who should be mine, bring forth greater salutation than he is; for his head is enlightened by solution of continuity as we have testified in the other members, especially when the head of evil is from natural causes.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first act of circumcision is very safe and best for you; and from that point on, everything will be alright.
Capitol segon.	Second capital.
Del cauteri del cap.	The translation of "Del cauteri del cap." from Romanian to English is "About the haircut on the head." or simply, "Haircut on the head."
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	In total, there is chronic and long-lasting headache, often accompanied by migraine attacks, as well as the use of glasses and hearing aids, nasal sprays, artificial tears, capsules, gadgets, and fake jewelry. Moreover, if it has been previously cauterized with a cautery that does not treat any of these causes, now consider whether the headache is due to significant growth in its nature; and it's not such a great deal to try another cauterization using a different type of cautery.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	A corneous lesion is cauterized on the forehead over where the hairline ends, within which the scalp is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the gum and expose the bone; the amount that we have counted is to be cauterized with an instrument in the part of the head following the cap at the location called vas, which is where the suction cup is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	The blisters on your head caused by this illness produce great pain unlike the pain of any other cutaneous sores in that area.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And behold this caustic herb in its place, for the head that bears the caustics with which you shall cauterize the corns on the crown and occiput is a more subtle caustic than that one of which it is to be cauterized; herein lies the manner.
Capitol ters.	The term "Capitol Terror" could refer to a fictional or historical event involving fear, intimeration, or conflict associated with the United States Capitol building in Washington D.C., often regarded as the symbol of American democracy and government. However, without specific context, it is challenging to provide an accurate translation or further details on this term.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Non-traditional cauterization of emigrants.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	In the case of severe head pain or when a nerve is pressed within the temple, try administering analgesic medicine and other treatments I have mentioned for the diseases; if that doesn't work, cauterize at two points in either way - with acupuncture using burning herbs or with a needle.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Mayes' caustic ointment is an antiseptic and you should apply a dollop to the wound and cleanse it thoroughly, then dry off any excess with a soft cloth or tissue. Do not attempt to use this as a substitute for proper medical treatment.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	A prophecy lies within the walls of the Temple where once a needle had entered which was hidden in its hollow place and concealed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	The strong wind stopped the descent constraint, and released those in three-hour spaces; it also released the anchors and laid down sails for two or three days, then rested at a sunken point within the territory that it encompebits.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	B) The medicine that was taken, resulted in recovery from the illness.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you'd like, here are some inflammatory medications that I have written about in the given article on anti-inflamcuary drugs.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May's use the following method to perform electrosurgery: ignition of electrocautery equipment, which has this form.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	e) the tip of it is as if formed like a small bud, and in its middle place there is some slight swelling; f) the sepals are curved claw-like, with somewhat the shape of a rosebud, and at the top they have a little prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	A small pause on the edge of pain, and release your fear - so that the archery bowstring is not stuck - and slowly increase its speed gradually.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of blood clotted in the leg is greater than that in the arm, and you elevate your legs such that the vein is not congested, therefore preventing a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Boil water with salt and let it stand over the fire for some time, then place it in clay pot to cool; afterwards add olive oil so that if sickness occurs, use it as a remedy.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you want, the tool' cufflink's tip should be cauterized according to cautery, and watch for any incision of an artery on this opposite side properly non-ancient.
Capitol quart.	Capitol Quartet is an American gospel group that was founded in the mid-1amo's. The ensemble comprises four talented vocalists who perform uplifting and inspiring renditions of traditional hymns as well as contemporary Christian music. With their soulful harmonies, powerful messages, and energet
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Ancient emigration cauterization.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	You are to administer the treatment through emigration by water, as you have previously mentioned in your medical advice, and also as discussed during the divisions of disecks. Do not prolong the period (of recovery). Occasionally apply heat for the illness that is not sufficient with the first cauterization or medication or with fire, hours before you heat up the iron instrument so that it becomes well-heated; then mark on the area of pain a long line indicating where most of this treatment should be applied. After one week (of rest), pierce the skin and advance to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	It's necessary for you to prevent the continuous misalignment of your jaw, which could become harmful if it continues to affect chewing and that the joint does not get inflamed or damaged by nerves causing pain and spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	The given text is in Catalan (language code: ca), a Romance language spoken primarily in the Catalonia region of Spain, as well as parts of Italy and France. Here'amo menting this to you because it includes characteristic words such as "es", "l’arteria" and uses specific grammar structures like the use of 'en lu al comensament'. Also, the presence of accented characters (è) is common in Catalan but not typically found in English or most other Romance languages.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	In times long gone, I recount the tale of a blood spill incident at the archery range, according to its usual manner, in the very spot of this free place.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	In this text, we have a passage that seems to be about treating an illness or infection by cauterizing the affected area of the body, as described in medieval medical practices. The translation is from old Occitan language (also known as Langue d'Oc), spoken in Southern France during the Middle Aeons and still used today among some communities:
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	Indeed, master, let us administer the cauldrons as stated in the chapter on wire drawing techniques with two nozzles, and this method provides better cauldrons with increased efficiency.
Capitol .v.	In the case of Capital v., a legal dispute arose between two parties, with one party suing or bringing action against the other in court. The specifics of this case would depend on various factors including jurisdiction, applicable law, and the particular circumstances surrounding the disagreamo. Typically, such cases are resolved through judicial proceedings where evidence is presented, arguments made by legal representatives, and a verdict reached based on the merits of the claims and defenses presented.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Cauterization of the earlobe pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	The man in the aureola feels pain due to friction and is treated for lacerations as well. Other treatments have been mentioned previously (in section). However, if the pain persists, cauterization may be considered; this is a method without any punctures and here'am presenting its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	The point of the punctum is close to the light source, and it's moved around in the entire earlobe so that a ring rotates continuously; or if there are multiple channels, pain occurs at each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	The small road leading to the oak tree is slightly winding and you should turn left at the sign.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	The burns at these points should be removed completely; also remove those that are near the bones and close to where they are saturated.
Capitol .vi.	In the United States, each state has its own capitol building where government officials work and meetings take place. The term "capitol" specifically refers to a building or complex in which the legislature meets; this is different from the general term for the seat of government within a city or region.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	The process of a welding joint for a turbine.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The healing and cauterization is not just of the spices that come by fermentation, as we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoidance of the specific species that suffers from thirst or nerve spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	I would cleanse your ear with the special blend of herbs and spices (jarras and capipurgi), and not cause you any discomfort during my treatment; then, following a short rest after cauterizing, gently apply the paste to the joints between both lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	He paused his surgery on the opposite side of the injured patient, as healing would only occur in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of caulking involves applying the hot iron directly to the upper part of the earlobe; a small portion above the top edge of the cartilage is cauterized, and then on the opposite side, you should draw out an incision as long as the depth of said piece. Then insert the tip of your instrument so that it burns off the same amount of tissue in width as the thickness of the earlobe'n.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the shape of the cauldron, and it'e a specific type of ladle; the latter has a form that slopes forward like a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, he was also subtle in that way and you do not show yourself so much like this; I know a little about your excessive extravamenancies.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Article L.10-4 of the French Civil Code states that "the owner who possesses an immovable is presumed to be its true owner until proven otherwise." This principle applies specifically within France, although similar principles may exist in other jurisdictamoins civil law systems. In legal English, this would translate as:
Capitol .vii.	Title: The Untold Story of the United States Capital Building: A Historical Journey
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Ancient Anti-Apoplexy Cautery Treatancium.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	Apoplexy is an ancient disease and the treatment you mentioned involves using water that has been boiled and given in doses as prescribed by your physician to alleviate the ailment without fever, followed by cauldrification of all four skull sutures; also cauterize the middle part of the scalp just as we have said, and then the occipital area.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of the cauterization has been performed as mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	The wound is located above the stomach opening, and it's larger in size; it needs to be cauterized with boiling water that flows out from it.
Capitol .viii.	Capital VIII. In the context of United States geography, "Capital VIII" would refer to the eighth capital city in terms of population size or alphabetically. Since there are only 50 states, none have more than eight state capitals within their borders, so it is important to clarify what ranking system we're referring to when discussing a 'capital numbered as VIII.' If considering U.S. territories and the District of Columbia (D.C.), then one would need additional information regarding how these are ranked for this designation to have meaning.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	In the medical procedure known as cauterization for amnesia, a patient undergoamoebic infection caused by free-living parasitic amoebae of the genus Entamoeba is referred to as entamoebiasis or entamebiasis. These infections can range from asymptomatic to causing severe dysentery with bloody and mucus-filled stools, dehydration, abdominal pain, and weight loss.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	At the beginning, there were large jars and pills called soothing agents.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Capacity and full details of the common illnesses and rest for the eyesight as described in the ointments treatise.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	That old pause contains some wax residues; it seems to be a fragment of a candle.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	In the second order of elements, I have said that there is water (H2O), which follows after hydrogen and oxygen in the periodic table.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	If the hair is not oily; then, three times a week, shampoo it with lucia solution at the back end of its head, which should be directed from the upper side towards the lower side.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	"There should be a pause between each of the sessions of hair removal treatment mentioned above and after ensuring that the area is adequately moistened with water."
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you have ear pain and are tolerant of heat, apply warm oil to the affected area for some time; if this provides relief, then apply a hot compress on that spot.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Apply the ointment to that area which is healed, and apply the olive oil plaster according to the form shown above.
Capitol .ix.	Title: CAPITOL IX
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Sterilization of the urinary tract and complete relief from discomfort.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	The procedure for treating the baldness and hair loss involves several steps using caustic substances that have been mentioned earlier; it includes shaving the head cleanly, applying a caustic agent to the entire scalp, burning all of the hair completely, and then performing cauterization on specific parts:
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	In cases where it's necessary for the treatment of mollification of an anal fistula, and the patient tolerates it well and the condition is severe, four times cauterize that on the skin overlying the sacrum vertebrae; additionally, apply a small caustic substance when the pain arises from sitting down.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	A is the one within which healing takes place, and this shall be an olive oil cauldron.
Capitol .x.	The name "Capitol" can be used in various contexts, but it generally refers to a building or complex where the legislature meets and conducts its business. In the United States, for example, each state has its own State Capitol Building, while at the federal level there's the US Capitol Building located on Capitol Hill in Washington D.C., which houses both chambers of Congress: the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Epilepsy surgery, also known as cerebral vascularization or seizure control surgery, is a medical procedure aimed at reducing the frequency and severity of seizures in individuals with drug-resistant epilepsy. The primary goal of this type of surgery is to remove or isolate the brain tissue responsible for triggering seizures while preserving essential functions such as language, memory, and motor skills. Epilepsy surgery may be considered when medications fail to control seizures effectively.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The correct translation for "No es la epilepsia que se trata de cortar, sino esa convulsión es por fiebre" is:
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Thus, it is crucial from the very beginning of an illness and in other cases when the disease is severe and tolerates little exception regarding medication, we must carefully consider the following matters.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	When a child does not respond to medications and has severe and persistent vomiting, it is recommended to offer only bland foods for several days.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	A Procedure for Treating Migraine Headaches and Using a Hot Compress on the Forehead:
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the pain is severe and tolerable, the hours of cauterization should be done on that part which I mentioned to have been cauterized, in order to reduce and soothe the paralysis and inflammaturms in the vertebrae of the neck and the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	B burn the olive grove according to what has been described above.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the illness is in childhood, there are times when a subtle cauterization should be applied according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	The Senate Capitol building, also known as the United States Capitol or simply "Capitol," serves as a historic and architectural symbol of American democracy located in Washington D.C. It is home to the legislative branches of the federal government, namely the House of Representatives and the Senate.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Cauterization of melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	There are several causes of melancholia including humid and gross inflammamoins which can be treated by cauterizing the affected areas as mentioned in the text.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	Melancholy is caused by excessive fluidity decreasing to melancholy; and the course of this illness is humid, thus hours spent drinking water that purifies the mind should be taken after the previous one according to the division in "Medicina Antiqua".
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	The crow approaches the mouth of the cave and circles it carefully before descending to its main entrance.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The malady is sixteen degrees centigrade and kept at a constant temperature from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	As the pasture becomes overgrown, it is no longer suitable for sheep grazing.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	The fireplace mentioned above is designed for heating and maintaining a moderate temperature; it endures use throughout the year.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	A prop to you in the middle of the field at the top of the hill within the circle, and let it be consecrated.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Every Monday a strange illness attacks the entire town, with every other group of people being healed; if you want to, perform cauterization on that spot by making small points following the most logical method: this is a specific type of cauterization which applies heat equally to the brain.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	He was about to step into that secluded spot along the edge or in the shadows of the alder tree.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII: The Capitol Building
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	The water from the drainage channel flows into the valley.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	In the beginning God created water in four separate elements which I now declare to you in this division, hours begin and end at dawn to purify the mind of that liquid element, protecting it from all forms of moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	He who eats sugar every day will eventually gain weight and risk health issues.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	The healer takes the iron blade in his hand and cauterizes that part of the wound on the patient's head; then he cauterizes a second time over two temples if it is accompanied by thirst for water, or over one temple if there is only thirst for cold water.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise the veins and vessels that are left out of the codex, and let them be cauterized on a shelf in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	When you see blood flow during the procedure of cauterization, and if you notice any bleeding, apply some kind of medical treatment that is within your means.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	Indeed, the substance extracted from these orchards and their essence along with care for blood flow is a valuable medicinal product.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Some veins are cauterized in the lower cervix, just below two bones where they produce respectively.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII - The Path Ahead
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Ancient tears cauterization.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	The tears of the springs are so ancient and deep-rooted that it is visible at the site where the head protrudes outwards; it has been verified that this fluidity superfluitates through veins and arter
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If you were to seek assistance with this medical procedure, the hours would typically require that a small piece of cotton soaked in alcohol be cauterized across all layers of tissue along the upper part of the tail near the base of the shaft.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 12 - The National Capital
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Nasal cauterization for treating foul-smelling breath (often referred to as "fetor").
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	In the division of water you mentioned, do not ingest your medicine, but rather apply it on the wound and let the patient drink it for three nights; then cut off its head and burn with a suitable or olive cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	A quick caution was applied to that red hot iron blade over the two eyebrows where some hair remained, a little bit.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	E don't set fire to that archery range.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	Cauterizing the medial clavicle is this form of treatment.
Capitol .xv.	The title "CAPITOL XV" is a reference to the fifteenth book in "The Southern Vampire Mysteries" series, also known as "New Orleans Mon Amour", written by Charlaine Harris under her pseudonym JR Ward. This book features Sookie Stackhouse and other characters from the series embarking on an adventure to New Orleans during Mardi Gras season.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	The eyelid skin depilation treatment procedure for dogs.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the palpebra (eyelid) of a stye is softened due to illness or moisture, that eyelid can be treated with cauterization using either a hot iron (cautery) or a silver nitrate solution (lunar caustic); and this method has the following form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	Cut a small piece off both upper lids, ensuring the edges are smooth and extend from the tear ducts.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let e be the length of each cauliflower according to the quantity on the plate.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not apply too much pressure on your eye during the cauterization, but follow the amount that corresponds to one-third of the eyelid' groove is attached.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	The sewing of the eyelid's edge involved converting the edges into sections and bringing them together at the corner.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	The effects of mercury are converted into accounts in the same way that I struck the mercury; they're categorized either as mining or as medicine when burned.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the hair of my forehead is burned by fire, let them cut all their hair just as those who are shaven; and if that is not possible, at least strengthen its ends with a band so it does not become worse when growing out again.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Come the raven and the dove shall come to rest, may you pause at your own peace, and gently close the lids of those dear to me, with a sign that follows the form of a mermaid'ebon, and its beginning as pertains to my personal seal.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	The process of creating an album of hawk photographs or a collection of pictures on the web involves several steps and considerpertise in photography, editing, and presentation. Here's how to go about it:
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	A prop of irons, the tools used for caulking which this is their form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	A person carefully traces over the figure, gradually shading in small areas, ensuring that the surface of the hand is completely charred as if it were the bark of a mimosa tree, perfectly resembling its texture.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	A sign of your eye health is that you should be able to close the lid of each eye and the skin around it should appear normal, with no elevation or protrusion at the site of the eyelid.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so he lifted up his hand and swore by that for three days, staying near the place border where his house was situated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	A proper application of this ointment will ensure healing within that time frame.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	Mayes returns for his usual treatment and the swelling of the eyelid is soothed; then he proceeds to do another set of tweezers on that spot, just as he had done initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the eyelashes are growing inwards on your eyelid (trichiasis), you should have them removed or redirected to their natural position, so that they do not irritate your eye. This can be done through various methods such as electrolysis, cryotherapy, laser treatment, or surgical intervention depending on the severity and extent of the condition. It's best to consult with an ophcuopath for proper diagnosis and treatment plan.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May's prescribed this medicine as an antidote which you command the illness to read into its pages that they become prolonged and balanced, and with regard to his own action he has made a scroll in the form of myrtle leaves.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Prior to the knowledge of soap and living causes, one knew how to cleanse oneself using natural substances and methods passed down through generations. People would use ash or clay mixed with water for cleansing purposes. Additionally, bathing in rivers or lakes was also common practice. Though these methods were less effective than modern soap-based products, they served as the primary means of personal hygiene before the advent of scientifically formulated soaps and deterganguides. Title: The Intriguing World of Chess in Literature and Movies This text appears to be a mix of Asturian and Galician languages, both from the Iberian Peninsula in Spain. The passage discusses making an amulet using water for good luck or protection. Here's a more comprehensvee translation into modern standard English:
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	He paused to tell her about the medicine and then asked if she would take a little because it might taste slightly unpleasant, just like hot pepper.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Thus, if you notice that the wound starts to heal and you can remove itching medication, wait for some hours before removing the medication with warm water; then consider whether your eyelids are lifted as they would be after being washed off the scar or incision, because by now it should have been a few weeks since the procedure took place; if not, return to that area where you haven't applied the medicine and there is no deterioration until it has fully healed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Article II - Prohibition of Noise Pollution Within Borders
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	It is necessary for you to keep your work attentive and vigilant so that nothing falls from the medicine onto the eye; if the eyelid is too close or any cause of hairs enters the eye, then repeat the application of the medicamo on that location where the eyelid has been moistened. In fact, do this as you did at first and also while entering your home that it gets healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of a myrtle tree's root system.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	The lengths of men's beards vary according to their size and stature, thus the style is made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	In the article, it is not implied that the path to justice will be clear for those who pursue this field of study.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII - The Capital City's Dilemeby Jane Doe
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Cauterization of a lacrimal duct in the lower eyelid.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	I will treat your wound with water from the fountain that you mentioned in the division of illnesses, and do not confer my cure upon it yet, for hours after you have done so according to this manner: command the sick person to place his head on your lap, and hold it there gently in such a way that he is neither uncomfortable nor restless.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	A glimpse of fusion in an album of coconut or a mulethwar over the hue of blue.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Apropos, the following is the description of electrocautery instruments and their form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	In the same manner as a barber uses a comb or razor blade, from one end to the other where it is made with fire.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you wish, let us delve deeper into the other limb.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	S'il vous plaît, soyez sages et essayez de faire votre mieux.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the one that is hidden is better for your own work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	When the anal fistula bursts open, it causes pain and drains pus between healthy tissue and surrounding areas.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it is not useless, the hours spent on that shed light on its essence.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	In the region of Caucasian Albania, it is customary to pause before igniting the cauldron in which a small portion of one'nose hair shall be placed at its departure from the nose; this ensures that your own health and evil spirits remain at bay. Thereafter, rest the cauldron on the gray stones (or hearth), as described earlier.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	If your initial cauterization enters into the bone, then it's okay; if not, repeat the cauterization after a few hours or days as needed. Leave that spot like so for three days and place an exsiccating ointment on it such that it heals sanely.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	May's had been ill for eleven days and he hadn't recovered, so he took a break from the acute corrosive medicine that left his bone exposed as it was prescribed in his capital (city).
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	E is a second type of caustic for treating the fistula, which involves the first method: applying it directly to the location of the fistula and then resting there until it becomes solidified through that small opening. It should be applied in such a quantity that one can melt down lead with it; and when you have done this well, do not let any maladies occur from the melted-down lead not reaching its intended target. And take care to wash off the area before the fistula solidifies through an albumen or water solution, for the caustic will remain in place and heal it with a remarkable curative effect.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the abscess has been healed with the treatment we've previously mentioned (cauterization and medication), then it is fine; otherwise, within hours, it will be necessary to administer further care through the nose and reduce the abscess back along its natural course as it occurs in its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII: The Capital City
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Cauterization of the wound closure.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Frequent masturbation can cause cracks in the lips, especially on those of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Alright, I'll guide you through the process of repairing small water leakages using a soldering iron and some basic tools. Please remember to take all necessary safety precautions when working with hot materials like solder. If you are not comfortable doing this yourself or if it is something that requires professional intervention (such as fixing plumbing systems), please consider hiring a professional.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	Let wisdom be the treasure of the second, following the subtlety of the silk thread.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	That spring day, the craftsman carefully approached those cracks where his chisel would finally reach the core of the crevices.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	C is the only color within which one can see shadows without being blinded by light.
Capitol .xix.	Title: Capital XIX
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Cauterization of an oral fistula.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	If the uvula or the palate or the tonsils are infected with an abscess, and they swell up, burst open, become old, flow blood, and form a fistula, you should apply that treatment which is received for such an infection on the fistula, but do not abandon the cure. Afterwards, when it has been healed, you may remove what remains of the abscess. According to the quantity that was received from the fistula, put that substance into a tube and insert it with your mouth so that it reaches up to the root of the teeth, or near them as far as possible. At the end, make two incisions or three according to what you think is best. Apply this liquid for curing while the area remains healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the wound is small and it heals quickly, no further action is required; otherwise, the next steps will involve identeifying its location and treating any possible damage as per your guidelines in the main content.
Capitol .xx.	Title: "Capitol Whispers"
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Sterilization of the teeth and soothing of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the cavities are relieved by moisture and the teeth are healthy, and those ones are not harmed by medicines, then at times it is best to take a break from the pain in your mouth, and shortly ignite the form that will approach so. If you pause on the drill over the tooth and insert it promptly into it, apply a small amount of heat with the flame as the warmth reaches the depth of the cavity to ensure relief is achieved.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Here's your mother being approached and treated with some local anesthesia as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	A person who complains of bad breath and a dry mouth can try this home remedy: take a glass of warm salt water, swish it in your mouth for one minute, spit it out, and repeat as needed. This should help to reduce the growth of bacteria causing bad odor, soothe inflamed gums, and alleviate dehydration-related dryness in the mouth.
Capitol .xxi.	Capital XXI (Roman numerals for the number 21) is often associated with significant landmarks or institutions in various cities across the world. In Rome, there's a connection to its rich history and ancient structures like the Roman Forum and Colosseum that were essential parts of public life in ancient times. However, if we're referring specifically to Washington D.C., Capital XXI may symbolize an important institution or structure within the U.S. Capitol Complex, such as a particular building on the National Mall adjacent to the United States Capitol Building.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Tooth pain cauterization.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When a toothache causes extreme discomfort or numbness, do not attempt any medicinal treatment; instead, opt for two methods of cauterization: using hot irons, or using a heated instrument.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	At the border of your farm and those you will take over from there, consisting of cows and sheep, as well as in the iron shed, encircle it with a fence and then surround that area by building an enclosure on top of the tent's extremity. Then, place that structure over the painful toothache point steadily until you achieve numbness.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	The following text has been translated from Galician to English:
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish to treat a toothache with home remedamo, submerge a clove or cotton in the mentioned oil and place it over the painful area of the tooth; hold it there until the heat becomes unbearable, then move on to another part. Repeat this process several times until you feel relief from the toothache.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the focus of this cauterization is that you must attend to the wound itself and not its edges, keeping your attention on the center of the wound with a careful application of heat so that it does not reach the nerve endings at the edge of the injury.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Appropriate gauzes to the shape of the area that will be cauterized, and hold it over the wound and your hand inside so that the cauterization is properly applied; do this several times a day as needed for pain relief or on that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	In the event of toothache, make an incision on the inside of your mouth and tie that area with a clean thread for one hour, then release it. This is the procedure for trepanation.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	B burn the wound which you intend to heal as soon as it is feasible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the form of a cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Certainebly! Here is a translation of the given text in Latin, which might represent something like "Capitolius" followed by a Roman numeral or section reference (in this case 'xxII' for twenty-two):
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Extracapsular excision of a pterygium (also known as pterygion) is a surgical procedure to remove an abnormal growth on the conjunctiva that covers the cornea, causing vision impairment and discomfort. The surgeon removes the tissue while preserving healthy surrounding structures to prevent recurrence.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When treating an abscess, create a small incision on the hobnail area to drain the pus; gently cleanse it with alcohol and other gentle antiseptangs. Then ignite two blunt instruments at one end (to produce smoke) that you will use for smoking the cauterization, placing them in such a way that they cover the abscess entirely. Repeat this process if necessary until reaching the point of inflammation before proceeding to cauterize it completely with an alcohol flame.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, apply heat to it for periods of time according to its size, and repeat this process up to three times a day until the area where the fire has burnt out feels better.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	A prop cure that one may attempt to apply ointment and cover with dressings inside which is healthy.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The form of the cannula or electrocautery device is similar to a conduit.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII. The Capital's Secret
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	The treatment of laryngospasms involves both cauterization and muscle relaxation techniques.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidities reach the bronchial tract of the lung, mainly when it becomes inflamed and congested with mucus, then the illness is evacuated through medicinal laxatives at mealtime, and cauterization may be performed on the blocked duct in a previously enlarged lobe.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	I watch you to make sure you don't fall into the shallow pit or injure your ankle, just a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	She burns the second stitch at the junction of the neck in the last vertebrae.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The procedure for electrocautery of your inguinal hernia follows the method described above.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	The correct form in standard Catalan would be "aquell l'aigua que s'ha precedit". In this case, the term 'precedit', which is not used correctly to convey 'preceding'. Instead, we use 's'ha precedit', meaning it has occurred previously.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV (24) of the United States House of Representatives, commonly referred to as "Capitol", is a legislative body that works alongside the Senate to create and pass laws at the federal level in Washington D.C., USA. The Capitol building houses both chambcups - the House of Representatives on the lower floor (the east side) and the Senate on the upper floor (the west side).
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	The treatment for lung disease and chronic cough involves a variety of methods, such as medication, lifestyle changes, and sometimes surgical procedures like bronchial thermoplasty or lung resection in severe cases. It is essential to consult with your healthcare provider to determine the best approach based on your specific condition.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	"The patient suffers from lung dryness and old disease, without fever or tics. Two cauterizations will be made: one on the furcula over dehydrated areas; another between two milk ducts near the breastbone."
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you burn yourself, apply the ointment and use heat-cauterization pins known as 'puncta', which resemble the shape of earache pain points.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	A certain point within cases, as well as in relation to that water source which was mentioned earlier, lies the healing aspect of those waters.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	Whether you have three or four burn areas, the cautioning process can be done in this way. If one of them is already healed, you may proceed with treating the remaining ones following these steps:
Capitol .xxv.	Title: "Capitol XXV"
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	The incision of the glans penis, also known as circumcision.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	The tendon of the Achilles is dislocated due to lubricant humidity and has not been stopped by its time of return; therefore, its dislocation occurs within the usual watering time upon its return home, so that it slightly deviates as we have testified. It is advised that you first reduce the dislocation, and then the evil may reverse onto your knee or ankle. Raise the heel which lies on the inner part of the arch to the outer parts according to what has been told by your left hand. If the joints are dislocated towards those outer parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	A propinkeys require no caps; this is the way it's done:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	The cautery should be applied on the bone between which the wire enters, and it will form a cauterization hole after four to six hours of continuous application.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	In this subtle language, according to the quantity of attempts, here is a similar form in English:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some wounds are adjusted according to this count and because they are lacerations. VIII.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	In this case, the text is not related to medicine, but rather appears to be in Occitan (a Romance language spoken in southern France). Therefore, a direct translation may not yield meaningful medical content. However, let'e translate it using contextually relevant terms and phrases where possible:
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is severe and beyond repair, the hours of caustic application are performed over the muscle, either at the clavicle joint or with cauterization points, as the joint connection is confirmed and moisture is reduced along with healing from illness.
Capitol .xxvi.	The Roman numeral "Capitol .xxvi." translates to the number in Arabic/Arabic numerals as follows:
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Stomach cauterization.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When the disease enters into his stomcuous and moist pulses are multiplied, which at this time of complication increases in size, and if you continue with curative measures and do not relent, it will soon spread over its back, and extend its legs and body parts. Therefore, cauterize that part with three cauterizations: one caustic of the weight of a small penny on his chest; two caustics in his left and right costal region to form a triangular figure, elongate between those not adjusted which will cause swelling.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	The depth of the cauliflower's floret is one-third its stem height.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	Figure S is the figure of a caustic according to this shape, and if you wish, perform a large cauterization in the upper part of the stomach following this shape; And let it be a circular cauterization according to this pattern.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	In Episode (E), if the stomach is to be cauterized, proceed by puncturing it at the desired spot that one fears from cauterization; and apply a bandage over the stomwart in accordance with the quantity you want to test. Then carry out the cauterization at said point(s). Afterwards, provide the appropriate treatment following which healing has taken place inside.
Capitol .xxvii.	Title: "Capitol XXVII"
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	The surgical removal of a benign lip lesion.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	A patient suffering from pain due to coldness or humidity and excessive wind should have their sweat glands emptied of the normal secretion by evacuation superfluous, and they must be cured with the water that has been mentioned and not swallowed. They should lie on their back for as long as the ailment is ejected onto its cervix, and three caustic applications shall be made in this way and quantity over the remnant of sweat glands from the hypochondria (region below the ribs), while they remain lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Let S be the surface which is bounded by any contour following the given thickness, and let C be a curve along the length of the direct path.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	E do not buy the cheap welding machine.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of water that clings to the quantity of a man's shadow is not sufficient; and if evil lies upon his possessions; and it does not exist, then let hours be spent, which has extended its affairs, raising its wings.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	A: Is this the shape of a caulking iron?
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	It is indeed possible for you to use sterilized surgical scissors if you have the skill and carefulness in your craft.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Do not overload the cauldron, and make sure that the entire chain is securely attached so it won't break apart, as the links are delicate; understand this well.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter Twenty-Eight (XXVIII) - The English numeral for the Roman number "capitol .xxviii" is indeed "28". In this context, it appears to be denoting a chapter or section in an English textbook or document titled with a similar format.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	In the case of an abscess in the foreskin, it may be treated with a cauterization procedure.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	Quan Endeve examines the hematoma and wants to know if that hematoma is in the flesh of the foot or in the lining of its tissue; a few hours later, if it's in the flesh of the foot, the pain intensifies and becomes more acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If S is in the lining of a pie, then its pain is intense and often makes the doctors feel very tired during treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	The disease has turned against the body itself; and without hesitation he approaches the site of the abscess; and with fire, he performs a cauterization that is shaped like a grain, as described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	He cuts the ailment and applies a caustic within that the entire chain is imbued with it, until he reaches the core, wherein sparks of health are ignited.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	A proper care for the wound in addition to treatment of other abscesses ensures it is healed correctly.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	E in this cove the form of cauterization is not used but that which he studied in medicine; however, his experiment has been known to cause many illnesseys. Nonetheless, it should be tried with caution, as its effects are uncertain.
Capitol .xxix.	Title: Capital XXIX
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Surgical treatment of hemorrhoids.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Disso the ancient cauteries of Aristotelian philosophy are applied in a way that allows one to become an author, and this is what you take from Aristotelian logic - a long argument that is found, with its density or substance intact.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	In the subclavian area: make an incision along the sternal border up to where it joins with the clavicle; and at this location make two small incisions directed a bit away from the previous point, one towards the lower jawline, and another between the fifth intercostal space and the xiphoid process. Then proceed with an incision on the sternum itself, followed by another over the abdomen. Make three more incisions behind these points; then make a single incision between the two shoulders. Lastly, perform two incisions at each lateral edge of the pectoralis major muscle.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	A) In the contract for purchasing your car, it should not be shown in the list of collatereals in the work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	The priest offered prayers and rituals similar to those used by people who employ iron rays or fires; he placed the object in a location between the coasts where we had arrived with the abscess and its surrounding infected area, just as described in the section on fever.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this performance of cauterization, he does not fear it at all, for as soon as he applies it to the site of the abscess where it is not being treated properly.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital XT (Capitol .xxx) is a fictional television network featured in the popular American TV series "The West Wing." It's not an actual broadcasting service but rather part of the show's universe, depicting the media landscape within which political dramas unfold. In reality, there isn't such a channel called Capitol XT or .xxx (which usually denotes adult content).
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	About the treatment of hemorrhoids through cauterization.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	Do you treat the melasmo disease with water as we have mentioned in its treatment in section one? In this case, do not apply your own remedy but proceed with caution and perform the following three methods of cauterization according to their rightness, all depending on the length of the melasmo, based on the figures shown for cauterization as we have previously done.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Article II - Quality and Proportions of Materials
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Do not buy the poor man's salt, and may evil be upon your head.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	E is another method of cauterization, which involves applying a heated iron to the affected area, causing pain relief in the region of muscle displacement and dilating the vein that runs along the side of the hernia, thus relieving the malevolent malady.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	Let E be the vector representing your ascent and L be the vector corresponding to a given slope length according to the direction of motion, in such a way that their cross product results in vectors parallel to the plane's normal.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	A trespasses into the domain of another through words or actions that disrupt their peaceful state.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	A) Extract the cautery and hence make four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you wish, I can provide three examples of cauterization techniques.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	A) It is appropriate to use caution when using heating pads for prolonged periods of time; however, they are generally considered safer than many other causes mentioned in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Book I Chapter XLV: The Arrival at the Capital
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Cauterization of the wound is a medical procedure that involves burning or searing tissue to stop bleeding and prevent infection, typically using heated instruments, electricity, or chemicals. This method has been used since ancient times and can be an effective way to control hemorrhage when other methods are not feasible.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	"Cats in the rain, not in a droplet but truly in their own element."
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	I will treat you with the following surgical procedures as mentioned in this section and do not provide treatment otherwise, then let him be cauterized four times on the circumcision's edge, and one caustic on the stomach, another over the liver, another over the spleen, two caustics between the spine's spinous processes, and one caustic on the right of the pelvis.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The quantity of the depth of the caustery is proportional to the growth of the cornfield.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	An appropriate application of caustic soda on the urine stain will help to remove it completely and prevent long-term damage.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	In case of an infection at the site of cauterization with waterproof cream, avoid applying additional ointments until it is fully healed and seek medical help if necessary.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the caudal appendix is such that it is cau-terized in the abdabdomen, following the form of the previous one; it is the one where both ovaries are cauterized according to its preceding shape.
Capitol .xxxii.	CAPITOL XXII - A DECADE OF DISCOVERY (2010-2 cups of tea, laughter and memories in the heart of our city's historic landmark. Join us as we relive a time that shaped the Capitol District into what it is today!
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Cauterization of wounds and scars.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the fish are exposed to salt water and filled with clear water, cover them over their bodies in lukewader that is between the ear and ring finger; lift your right hand underneath the cauterized part without turning it back, raise your own hand, and do not return until all the salty water flows out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The following is the cauterization method: A sharp-pointed needle (or lancet) should be used for both wounds, and on each injury, a cauterizing agent such as silver nitrate or hot iron should be applied to the edges of the cuts.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	S is the incision along the length of the wound: on one side, cut away the dead tissue and the other side remove a little bit of healthy tissue adjacent to the wound; then perform two cauterizations per wound.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Lassus has been a red plague for a long time because it is the place where all the water flows out of.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	A) The law should apply to those causes as we have previously mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Parliament Hill, also known as Colline du Parlement or "Capitol" in French (XXXIII), is an iconic symbol of Canadian governance and democracy. It serves as the home to Canada's federal government, housing various departments, agencies, and institutions that work towards serving Canadians across the nation.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Abdominal wall cauterization.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	In the context of treating excess stomach fluids and humidity causing vomiting, it involves a digestive system condition with retention in the stomach or intestines, which requires water to cleanse the bowels and no medications for curing. Often patients suffering from this condition are subjected to cauterization of the excretory ducts, then later cauterized at that location as described in the stomach cauterization procedure: a subtle ring cauterization around the navel and four small cauterizations along the umbilical cord; also an acetabulum subtle cauterization. Then two cauterizations on the alcatin over enlarged veins, or two cauterizations at once.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	When excessive humidity and water-tolerant diseases are prevalent, the procedure of scalding over the pentirite stone and heated pebbles, with a significant increase in intensity upon the stomach and groin areas, proves to be an effective cure for the affliction that would otherwise persist.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Title: Capital (Caput) XLIV
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	The treatment of old hemorrhoids through cauterization.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When a person is affected by old ulcers or gross humors that are corrupt and moistened, they should be treated with the water mentioned in the division (referring to specific medical treatment). Do not give them any other remedy at this time; later on, cauterize three times over the dried pus of a small spondylosis spot using hot iron. Also, apply cautery below the navel on both sides with two such irons.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	To prevent the stomach from getting too cold and to ensure that the food does not spoil or become rotten, make sure it is kept warm. Apply a hot compress on the area above the stomach following these steps: one hot compress over the upper abdaturm region, another over the belly button, and a third one at the navel using an angled approach. Leave the compress in place for some time while ensuring comfort, and do so until it is healed or relieved.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital X-treme!
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	The caudalization of the artery near the abdominal aorta.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	I'll subtract the hyphen from "a-thymy", remove your fire that is assembled in rows.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	The surgical incision is made in the corresponding anatomical landmark, and then the final main vessel that reaches the caudal artery at its opening will be ligated.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	The fish that live in the water and do not spawn regularly may require different treatments depending on their specific needs, but generally, each can be treated with the following methods after they have been counted:
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you apply too much silver nitrate on the skin burns, it may cause further irritation and damage during healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	In the United States, "Capitol" typically refers to the building where Congress meets in Washington D.C., known as the U.amo Capitol or simply the Capitol Building. However, if you're referring to a numerical value labeled as 'Capitol .xxxvi', it seems like there might be some confusion since that doesn't correspond directly with any well-known number related to the US Capitol.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	The natural fistulas will heal on their own after the cauterization process in the affected areas.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the remedy that has been recommended in its place and the patient is frightened by this, they are treated with caution therapy.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Whenever one finds an old fistula in nature near by, it is antiquated and brings health from the dryness and corrupted humidity, and hence that which deserves more attention than others is that which tries subtly to approach with its quantity of depth as previously stated.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Approximately one-third of igniters resemble rays.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	A proper application of the electrosurgical unit on this fistula, and according to the amount you insert it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"Apply the herbal poultice on that area which you wish to be burned for a few weeks or months, depending on the amount needed."
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	He watches you for inflammamoins and vein problems; if the fistula goes to the urinary bladder or bowel tract, he also watches for all those cases; and does not treat it unless when the fistula is in a non-penetrating location.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	A property located within the area that is safe.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the house is sealed off, and all materials removed for such a long period of time, you should know it has been thoroughly cleaned.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	Indeed, if the matters are not of this world, learn that it is evident or in the premise of these causes which will bring about a recollection in your place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	The Roman numeral "capitol .xxxvii." translates to the Arabic number 37 in English.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	The procedure of earlobe cauterization.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	People who experience toothache due to severe inflammastery or decay, the source of the pain is necrosis and it may be necessary to perform a cauterization on each affected tooth by using a silver wire just below the gumline.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	The operation was carried out with precision and care; first by making a small incision, so that three sutures can be placed in succession, and therefore the last ones will heal more quickly.
Capitol .xxxviii.	In Roman numerals, the number 38 is written as XXXVIII. The "X" represents ten, so three "X's" (XXX) represent thirty, and the "VIII" represents eight (5 + 3), making a total of thirty-eight. Thus, when referring to Chapter 3abxv in Roman numerals, it would be written as Capitolum LXXIX (assuming you meant to say Capitol Chapter XXXVIII).
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	The bladder inflammeblia and mollify by friction and moisturizing so that the urine does not remain in it; then, on either side of the wound (where there is pus), commence shaving the hairs with a razor blade, and cauterize using an iron caustic.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Let S be the length of each scarf according to the number of stitches in a row; and seam one with a single scarf at the lowest edge of the back or two scars if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	E is to undergo circumcision as the process dictates.
Capitol .xxxix.	In the House of Representatives, a bill must receive an absolute majority vote to pass before it can be sent to the Senate for further consideration. If approved by both chambebodies, it is then presented to the President for his signature into law or veto.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	A tonsillectomy is a surgical procedure to remove the tonsils, which are two lym cuffs of tissue at the back of your throat that help fight infection. This operation can be done for various reasons such as recurrent sore throats or tonsillitis, enlarged tonsils causing breathing difficulties, or even suspected cancerous growths on the tonsils.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the woman enters her monthly cycle and humidity increases, engagement is prohibited, menstruation becomes impure, conception gets delayed, painful vaginal bleeding may occur; therefore, it is adviswart that the area be cauterized with three cauterizations around the navel as described in the vesica's caustic treatment. Also, a cauterization on the place just below the nipples or two cauterizations should be performed and a clavicular cauterization is necessary.
Capitol .xl.	In the context of government and politics, "CAPITOL xl" could refer to a particular legislative bill or resolution numbered as XL (which stands for 40 in Roman numerals) that was passed by a specific capitol building, such as Capitol Hill in Washington D.n.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Cauterization for the shoulder dislocation treatment.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When humidity levels decrease at the beginning of autumn, and as a result of soil erosion in its location, along with signs that this situation persists longer compared to others when they are contrasted between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the earthquake is attributed in the nearby city.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	"You must cauterize the wound on the departure of the anguish caused by this cauterization process. After you have healed somewhat with the approach of the departure in a similar manner as when it revolves, ensure that the wound falls within the area surrounding the circle."
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	E is the series of cauterizations that preceded the procedure for gastric cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cauldron is not here with you now, he will burn three times in the olive grove cauldrons.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Let the treatment with cauterization be done according to the extent of inflammation on the entire limb; and carefully, when it starts healing.
Capitol .xli.	Roman numerals are a system of numerical notation used in ancient Rome, consisting of combinations of letters from the Latin alphabet (I, V, X, L, C, D and M). In this case, "Capitol xli" refers to the number 41 using Roman numerals. The symbol 'x' represents ten times one before a larger value which is fifty ('l'), while 'i' after it denotes adding one (thus making forty-one in total).
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Sciatic nerve cauterization.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When suffering from anhua pain due to excess moisture and dampness, the illness is treated with the water we have mentioned earlier and not by other methods, as this water is outdated, for some time you should get rid of the sickness caused by heavy humors using foul-smelling or artificial pills. And moreover, cauterization is performed thereafter.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterization can be performed in two ways: with caustic chemicals or with heat (fire).
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	According to two scientific methods, one of which involves burning a triangle on the broad side of your three fingers in this manner; and then you should make it deep enough.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	Let S be the spaces between each pair of contiguous cauldrons, and let their quantities be proportional to the size of each cauldron, assuming they are either olive or grain-shaped.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some of his healings were related to the use of cauteries, placed on certain parts of the body such as the head and chest, where there are four cauterizations in total.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If it breaks off, perform a cauterization along the circle which precedes the shape in the cauterization of the shoulder dislocation, and that circle should be continuous and burn away all visible skin tags.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the zygapophysial (facet) joint block technique, when pain is referred to the anterior aspect and not extended into the surrounding tissues.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	May I spread myself into the wound, and then use a heated instrument (cautery) on that part of the skin where you'll insert to relieve the pain; and another caustic substance should be applied around it for about four days on the affected area.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	Cauterization instruments come scalpels and their depth should correspond to the degree of burn on the skin.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the pain spreads to other areas of your body, you may need to undergo three or four points or more depending on your case.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the malady causes pain to be located near the colon, now it should be treated with this sterile cautery tool.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	I carefully observe the entire wound to ensure that you do not sever any major nerves or blood vessels and that for this reason your illness is of good quality or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	In this case, the text appears to be in Catalan or a similar Romance language that uses diacritics and special characters. The translation would therefore be into Spanish as follows:
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Accidental poisoning can cause severe stomach pain and may lead to death if not treated promptly.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	The pain is in two episodes, each one should be treated according to this procedure.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	In the process of circumcision, this is the method using a steel ring whose circle is mostly made of iron; its width should be approximately that of an almond's pit or slightly more. The incision should be made according to the thickness of one finger from the top edge of the ring.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	In this circle segment is a third of another one and its length equals the height of a pole. These circles are divided into two parts, and their lengths (radii) equal either one or two feet. Make these segments with proper curved handles in those circles; here's how it looks like:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Put some fuel in the fire until it starts to glow and emit sparks, then place the pan over the flame with the handle downwards.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	So, the three cutters again returned in a while.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Once upon a time, there lived a kind old healer in the village; she could cure illnesses with her knowledge and remedies for three days; then she would apply ointment on wounds at the border of health until they were completely healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diys Albucasis (Abu al-Qasim), son of this special type of cautery, has been seldamely used due to the fear associated with its application and because few have encountered those which are above it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May the gods bless those who suffered from it and destroy that place of misery.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Mays cauterize the medicinal herbs by applying two circular pieces with a perforated armhole, on which you should hang the iron gate of a forge; their length in the morning should be equal to those of two nuts or similar items.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	Se gli spazi tra le diverse quantità di grandi dimensioni devono essere uniformemente distribuiti su entrambe le estremità; ed essendo questi spazi riempiti, debbano contenere lo stesso numero in base al seguente modello:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	The apostle Peter asks Jesus about the parable of the mustard seed and buys a piece of land for Him, then digs a well in its center; as He instructed, the quality of that place gradually becomes hotter, and after an hour's time, the sick person suffers from intense burning sensations. This kind of mordication is like being burned by fire, but once it subsides, so does the pain.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	The apostle Paul says in his letter to the church at Corinth, "Now we have an even better spirit, and thus our lives are no longer ruled by human desires but by God's Spirit." (1 Corinthians 6:11)
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	In this way the harvest will last for three days and a rest period within which the darkness of August recedes, and he shall let it rain for several more days, then run through his fields; this is in celebration.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	A prop curea cei numan sana.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends into the shoulder or arm, apply ice to the area as advised in the guidelamo technique.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the Aqua Regia method, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the purification of metals.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for Alkaline and Cause No Extinct Tartar Sauce in One Part Oil to Three Parts Mayonnaise Base, with a Twist of Fresh Lemon Juice to Balance the Saltiness
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Take the fountain at the base of the wave and pour it into that alkali; as you do so, water gushes out in abundance, which will cause those around to rise up one after another. Then compress them well with your own hands, and let go until the sharp water from above dissipates across the surface of the waved-over area.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	A comes near to adjusting that water, and pour out the excess live force and other alkalis renewed, for during those times of strong heat, which is administeraturate in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other body parts, where operation acts like a furnace.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	Thus of the medicines some are those which are burned wide, so that they can be thinned and unmixed, lest their qualities may become mixed as well.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	A man from the old times underwent a surgical operation and treatment for his ankle pain and sciatica, and beautifully it seems to have worked out like this - as he tells, no other cure was necessary, and how quickly that person recovered just by bathing in hot water at that place.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	It should be of recent vintage and if not tested, it must have been bottled within the last year; also, it's allowed to be slightly cloudy and restrained in a cask for some weeks before being poured at the time of serving, or into an amphora, whichever is preferred.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Article LXXXI - In the event of a lay-off lasting for three hours or more, or any shorter period due to illness caused by work conditions at the establishment, it will be considered as time worked in regards to the employee's rights and benefits.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	A prop betwen water and bath, as soon as his feet touched the bottom, he felt pain; however, when he stepped on the floor, the pain ceased and it was healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	In this passage, the author mentions two herbs that should not be used in combination with surgery for these remedies but rather for facilitamo da purga dose (facilitation of bowel movement).
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Mays and Escorides stated that when the vein of a goat is cauterized, one must apply oil; and in this manner, the second should be done with woolen cloth anointed with old oil and placed between the fingers and toes.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	First, prepare the jar by cleaning and drying it thoroughly. Then soak the fibers inside in water until they are fully saturated. After that, lay out the wool evenly on a flat surface. Place the jar upside down over the wool ensuring all parts of the wool come into contact with the jar's inner surface. Leave it undisturbed for several days to allow the condensation process inside the jar to felt and mat the fibers together, creating felt.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Upon application of water, and before the sensation of sharpness prevails, within a moment it brings relief to the pain and aching joints.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This pattern of electrocautery is called bipolar electrocautery or current knife.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42 (Capitol)
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Cauterization of trigeminal neuralgia (also known as tic douloureux) is a medical procedure used to treat severe facial pain caused by the condition. It involves using heat, electric current, or chemicals to intentionally destroy specific nerve fibers associated with transmitting the pain signals from the face to the brain. This treatment may offer relief when other options are ineffective or not suitable for a patient.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some headaches are caused in the neck due to strain or injury through crushing or excessive vacuum, and for similar reasons, through the infusion of wet and moist material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Cauterization is a medical procedure in which a part of the skin or flesh is burned to remove an unwanted growth, such as warts or moles, or for other reasons like stopping bleeding during surgery. This method involves using heat, electricity, chemicals, or freezing temperature to achieve cauterization and it is not limited to just animals (catz in your text).
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	In cases of illness or pain, aromatic balms and salves can be applied over the affected area in three strips according to its width, enscuasifying if necessary on each line with hot waxes or ointments, depending on the tolerance level of the ailment and effectiveness of the treatment.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	The surgery involves the application of a heated metal instrument, known as a cautery, to burn and seal tissues or close off blood vessels during medical procedures. This technique is commonly used in various types of surgeramoes to minimize bleeding and reduce the risk of complications.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you are performing a surgical procedure and need to cauterize three or four cleft alveolar segments according to the following method, here's how it can be done:
Capitol .xliii.	Forty-three in Roman numerals is written as XLIII. So, when referring to a chapter or section numbering system, "Capitol XLIII" would denote the forty-third item. For example, if this were used in book chapters or articles, Capitol XLIII would be Chapter 4amo.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	The treatment of capillaritis, often known as "catering," involves addresseing the small blood vessels' inflammation that characterizes this condition. Treatment may include topical steroids or immunomodulators to reduce inflammation and prevent further damage. Lifestyle changes like avoiding irritants and allergens, maintaining good skin hygiene, and protecting the affected areas from trauma can also help manage capillaritis symptoms effectively.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Various treatments are used for this disease in children; and the sign of its onset is that it affects their growth, with an increase in appetite and activity level.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	A few rocks are on the last syllable of dose and those notes that have just begun to stand out above others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Then when you have the time and wish to forbid it, proceed as follows for creating a circular shape:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	He should apply the caustic agent on all parts of the spinal contusion.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you decide to proceed with surgery for a herniated disc, the surgeon will create two or three points of fusion on the spinal cord using a heating element called electrocautery during the procedure.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	The French sentence "Eh bien, laisse-nous passer à autre chose." translates to "Well then, let's move on to something else" in English.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	B. Within the area surrounding this lake, there exists an abundance of water that you have mentioned.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May's doctor should avoid administering caulking in cases of edema that has been caused by a spasm of the nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV (44) is the title of a chapter in an English book, likely from a larger work such as a novel or non-fiction text. Without additional context or information about which specific book this refers to, it's not possible to provide details on its content. However, if you can give me more information regarding the author, genre, or subject matter of the book, I may be able to assist further!
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	The treatment of gout and joint pain involves several approaches, both medical and lifestyle-related. Here is a detailed plan that may help allecuate symptoms:
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	The pain of joints are wasted fluids due to imbalances in the bodily humours, which become concentrated on each member of the body; that's when they experience pains in their limbs, and it is common for midwives to call this gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	Then he was indeed cured of gout due to the frequent treatment and did not experience more pain; instead, it became relieved through cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	The process of electrocautery involves the use of an electric current to remove or seal off tissue in a medical procedure at the junction point of the patient'cups electrodes.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	S is the olive caterpillar whose following form is this:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	It is necessary that the piercing be performed on the area of the lip, and the hours have been chosen to undergo cauterization of the puncture.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain is present in the throat or other joints and she experiences stiffness, three or four cauterizations on each affected area using an olive oil-based cautery are recommended.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if you must perform these cauterizations, do so only when necessary; cauterize that and not press too hard the wound with your burning tool beforehand, merely seal off the puncture hole of the vein.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pains fight within both hearts, hours distribute the caution which we have mentioned in its chapters.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	The pains are too much for most people to bear alone, and it's called 'suagra', the hours marked on the cycle of lamps as they rotate just like those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	The pain remains in the words, precise moments lit up on everyone's faces by candlelight before dawn.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain is closer to your knees or shoulders rather than your hips or muscles, hours of therapy can address all aspects of help.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	I do not treat the illness with good order and reception of medicine; if so it is made in a proper way and the wound is stitched up, may God help us all.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter LIV.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Cauterization of ruptures refers to the medical procedure where heat is applied to tissue, often using a heated instrument or caustic substance like silver nitrate, in order to create adhesions and stop bleeding from small vessels. This technique can also be used for sealing off wounds or closing up surgical incisions.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	In the village of Angouleme, a widow named Rompedura was rumored to have bewitched her late husband's cattle, causing them to die mysteriously. The locals were convinced she had cursed him and demanded justice for his untimely death. As the trial proceeded in front of the judge, Rompedura pleaded innocence but feared being found guilty and sentenced to a cruel fate within her own stomach. She appealed for mercy by highlighting that it was not her who caused her husband's demise, but rather the circumstances that led him there.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Follow the directions herein to mitlete between your feet and command that you keep your foot within bounds so as not to slip or appear with bare heels.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	E - Aprop is the angle at which two lines (chords) intersect on the circumference of a circle, forming segments that have equal lengths from the point of intersection to each chord'amo senhal (am password). It tries to break this connection by attempting to sever the bonds between them.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Approximations of the caudalie procedures which this is the form of their application:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Entró, ¿será más claro y te hagan brillar?
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	A proprietor reduces the size of his plot in order to achieve ownership stability and places his mark over the land that is rightfully his alone, without encroachment by others.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you too have wandered through the woes of illness and poverty; yet another sought solace in your company, and served alongside you on fields and roads, holding onto his own possessions.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Cauterize the place on your finger where you see blood, and then straight down in that area where you have noticed it, make cuts with a scalpel into the meaty part of your middle finger; if at first attempt you do not achieve this, repeat as many times as necessary within an hour.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	At the moment of incinerating the remains, you shall not burn the ashes entirely; only enough to prevent any harm from coming upon those who are ill or may suffer great misfortune.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	If your hands are not clean when you conduct the ritual, do not offer your work.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	A cover that the children's burn (cautery) should be done with subtlety according to their size and proportion.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	A proper use of the burn cream for three days will help in healing the blister caused by the fire.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	A proper care for others is necessary until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The illness shall not be spoken of outside for thirty days, during which time the place and person affected must remain silent.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	The healing process requires adequate nutrition over time to allow the skin of the wound to regenerate and prevent the bandage from slipping out due to effort in moving around.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	He who takes his time in making decisions may lose the opportunity but gain wisdom for many days to come.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	Let S represent the set of activities related to working and resting from eating and drinkamo, as well as strong desires; then whoever fully adheres to this regimen of health shall be entirely cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	In case of ruptures in the other parts of the stomach, begin by addressing those first and do not hesitate to cauterize them during the procedure; hours afterward, apply heat to that area again according to the amount of blood lost, as well as the third portion. Moreover, follow this same procedure with water as before without any delay.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	Firstly, let's translate the Occitan text into English: "Elles disent que la première coupure a été cousue à l'aide d'un cautère en forme de triangle selon cette méthode, et qu'il a ensuite été recouvert."
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	The line you speak of is the equator, located in Earth's southern hemisphere after the break-up, and another one above; pause your hand on the first knuckle joint (hitch-mount), but the second joint is longer and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46 in the United States Capitol is dedicated to honoring African Americans. Officially named "Labor of Freedom," this space within the United States Capitol Visitor Center highlights the contributions, struggles, and achievements of African American men and women throughout history.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Surgical treatment for torticollis (wry neck) involves several potential methods, depending on the underlying cause and severity of the condition. Some common surgical procedures include:
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	A member complains of pain due to a fracture or impact and the pain persists for long periods without relieving with any medications; they may require heat therapy or targeted cauterization using cauldrons.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	"E" denotes the severity of burns on all body members according to its magnitude and smallness, value and dilatation, location of blistering, and degree of pain experienced.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If it is not your first time undergoing cauterization, then you're fine; otherwise, the hours repeat the procedure of cauterizing; as per usual practice with those pains that are punctures on a body part close to 'u', in order for one to achieve relief from such aches when they have healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	In the context of legislative bodies and governance, "capitol" typically refers to a building where a state's legislature meets. For example, the United States has a Capitol in Washington D.C., known as the U.cuimontis (United States Capitol), which houses both chambers of Congress – the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Leprosy cauterization treatment.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The broken potions often administered during great illnesses and to a lesser extent for the type of leprosatury caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Hence let thee beware of the disease that is leprosy and to use the water as mentioned in the division and do not delay nor disregard it. Beware lest the corruption encompamoore the entire body of you, with all its consequences; henceforth cauterize said place on your head using a v-shaped instrument: on one side near the forehead where hairs are situated; and another behind, adjacent to the nape or back of the neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	The surgeon should first cleanse the wound with a disinfectant and dress it with a sterile bandage to prevent infection. Then, using an electric scalpel or laser device, make small superficial cuts around the edges of the wound to remove any dead tissue. This will help promote healing by allowing new, healthy cells to grow. Next, cauterize (burn) the wound with a hot iron or electrocautery tool to seal it and stop bleeding. Finally, apply an antibiamoisss ointment to prevent infection and cover the wound with a sterile dressing until it heals completely.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	It seems you've provided a text in Occitan related to the treatment of leprosy (also known as Hansen's disease) during medieval times. The translation below is an interpretation based on historical medical texts:
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Look at the nerves that are on top of you, which do not ignite those fears. (A metaphorical encouragement to not be anxious or worried.)
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	In some cases, certain areas are burned using a heated instrument known as a cautery on the leg of the patient and another one on the mouth of the stomach, and another one on the wrist.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Know well that those who are often burned by hot irons become more resilient and better adapted; but know also that those without pain in the burning may be like one shocked with a sword, as their bodies have already been stunnebly affected.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	According to the members and joints, large or small depending on the species of tools being used.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	A proper care includes the use of cauldrons for boiling wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedcuar treatment within which it is cured until healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII (48) - A New Era Begins: The Formation of the United States Congress
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Sterilization of the stupor site.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is injured or falls asleep and you apply medicines, linens, and bandages to it, but they don't heal, then thou shalt cauterize that part using a caustic agent according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	F be the tip of a cauterizing instrument entering a small incision in the skin barely.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	I hope you are feeling better after that remedy which helped you to recover.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Some wounds are treated with cauterization; i.e., the numbness affecting limbs and nerve fibers of both sides which can result from said member is relieved by this treatment method.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	"Aqueducts are not only about water but also that which is preserved in the anatomy of limbs and nerve exits throughout the body."
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX (49) of the United States Capitol is an important landmark in Washington, D.C., as it houses various government offices and serves as a symbolic center for American democracy. The Capitol building itself plays a significant role in U.hemocratic processes by hosting sessions of the House of Representatives and the Senate, making laws, and conducting official ceremonies such as presidential inaugurations.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	The excision of the hemangioma, also known as a port wine stain or nevus flammeus.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	Quan albares is antiqua et non comferis a l'alcui de medicina, tolls-te un peu segons la quantitat de la substancia entra que és remugiada la blancor e la color de lù, i la cor per acostuma sí haurà estat modificada.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	First, take equal parts of whole wheat flour and lentils, rosemary leaves, and rose petals; one portion each, all mixed together. Then pour the mixture into a bag or container and let it sit for several weeks until fermented.
Capitol .l.	The U.n.s. Capitol is the seat of the United States Congress and the home to the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C., serving as an iconic symbol of American democracy.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	The craniotomy procedure involves the surgical removal of a portion of the skull to access and treat brain tissues, often for tumors or other abnormalities. This allows surgepsons to directly operate on the brain while minimizing damage to surrounding structures.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	Quantum theory explains that particles behave as waves and vice versein the quantum circuit just like how they revolve in a circular motion.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	Several times they had tried to burn it down there, but I did not see that, because I feared it would get infected and I have seen this happening several times before.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	C is more directly connected to the power source than B in this series as we have described, I have included two connections.
Capitol .li.	The capital of Liechtenstein is Vaduz (Deutsch: Vaduzer). This small, landlocked country in Central Europe shares its borders with Switzerland to the west and south and Austria to the east and north. Despite being a microstate, Vaduz serves as the political, cultural, and economic center of Liechtenstein, showcasing impressive architecture such as the Prince's residence and various government buildings.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	The process of soil fertilization.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When certain animals are delayed in reaching maturity, and hence it becomes excessive to feed them, or due to old age, poor health, little strength, or the time of year; you want to hasten their growth by breeding - at this point, cauterize a part (for example, the testicles) on the circuit with a sharp instrument. This will prevent further maturity in feeding.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to drill your horse's hoof, then at the time of cauterization use fire on it and allow that heat to transfer to the point where you want to perform the procedure. Then place it in a clean area for dressing inside which the nail should penetrate.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the wound is in that place where there was previous discharge, to ensure that the arm's body is healed within and as soon as possible.
Capitol .lii.	The English equivalent of the term "Capitoli" is "Chapters". In a book or any written work, chapters are divisions that help organize content into manageable segments for easier reading and understanding. Each chapter typically focus지 covers a specific topic or aspect related to the overall subject matter of the document or story.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Cauterization of ulceration.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	The rust creeps upon the limb, which it devours just as fire does to dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	If you see a burn on the part that was subjected to cauterization with heat, then apply small or large dressings as appropriate for that location where there is a burn.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	A proper cauterization should be done in such a way that you completely eliminate the decay and do not cause any further damage or harm.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Apply this remedy for three days, and place over the burnt areas previously mentioned, mixed with an oil that ensures all scars are entirely removed and total corruption is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	The apple, which in that garden was born with the essence of life-giving blood (referring to the biblical story where Eve eats from the forbidden tree), nourishes and sustains us all.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	May the healing cream be three times as effective when applied to a wound that is not infected, but if the wound is infected, apply heat therapy over it for several hours in the affected area until improvement occurs.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	The extract is used in certain cases as a component of acute medicine; it's commonly found at the site of cautionary measures.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, the fire had a healing effect as it burned away the swelling and pain.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	You have to consult your doctor about the side effects of this acute medicine in that division, and therefore take only as much as you need.
Capitol .liii.	In chapter III of the U.S. Constitution, also known as Article I, Section 9, several important clauses are outlined which place limitations on Congress's power. These include prohibitions against passing bills of attainder and ex post facto laws, imposing taxes or duties without apportionment among the states, keeping standing armies in times of peace without consent from Congress, and making anything but gold and silver coin legal tender for payment of debts. Additionally, this section also addresses issues like granting titles of nobility and requiring that all bills for raising revenue must originate in the House of Representatives.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Cauterization of styes and other similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Translated into modern Spanish and then to contemporary English, the text becomes:
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Mays cauldrons have fire like you are going to use for the cauterization; they should resemble a small bell and be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the nail of the entire piece, and it should be very thin.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	A prop (close to) that spark hovers over the key, and as it revolves around your hand placed on the welding circuit through which the current arrives at the depth of the key.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Let her stay for three days before she begins to braid hair.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	A traditional Catalan recipe involves marinating the salted cod in olive oil along with garlic and parsley for one night, after which it becomes detached from its scales.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	C is responsible for the sale of any meat generated within that area which is healthy.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	Although the text appears to be in Occitan (Occitan: ), it is not directly translatable to an equivalent Old Norse sentence due to significant differences between these two Romance languages and Germanic language groups, respectively. Moreover, there are no direct parallels or cognates between the two languages which could facilitate a translation process that respects both meaning and grammar structures of each original text.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	In the water, they touch each other when moving over all of them which are in their path.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	A proper care is essential to prevent those problems caused by the removal of nails, as it may lead to infections and injuries where the skin comes into contact with water or other substances.
Capitol .liiii.	The Library of Congress Classification (LCC) is a system used by libraries to categorize books and other materials, making it easier for users to find them. It uses alphanumeric codes that correspond to specific subjects or fields of knowledge, arranged in alphabetical order. Each book or item has been assigned a unique call number based on its subject matter.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Cauterization for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you feel trembling in a limb or due to fever from any cause resembling such, four hours after the onset of symptoms, apply four hot caustics (cauterization) at intervals between each vertebrae of your back; and one caustic over the foot arches, as well as one upon the stomach.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	The trembling of the leaves brings a pause to the spreading of the infectious disease.
Capitol .lv.	Capital Live or "Capitol .lv" is a term that may refer to various online platforms and digital media services offering live streaming content, including news, events, music, sports, or other entertainment from the capital city of a specific country designated with ".lv", which typically represents Latvia. However, without more context about your inquiry regarding "Capitol .cv," it's challenging to provide an accurate response.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Accidental cauterization of the labia to the vulva.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the external part of an abscess is opened and the pus-filled cracks that result from the corrupted thick substances are exposed, during meals a caustic application should be made over all parts of the fistula as follows - with delicate cauterization throughout, using olive oil or similar liquid; by extending the tip to the focus through heat; or by prolonged erythrotherapy; or lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Some malignant growths are cauterized with a hot iron before the expulsion according to this method; they do not cause fear and reduce excess flesh, healing those affected.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, she knew that this was the time to perform an emergency evacuation and apply first aid measures.
Capitol lvi.	Article LVI of the United States Code pertains to the judicial branch, specifically discussing appeals and writs of mandamus in cases involving district courts or certain specialized federal courts. It outlines the processes by which parties can seek review from higher courts when they believe that a lower court has made an error in judgment or procedure. The article also addresses the jurisdiction and authority of various circuit courts and the Supreme Court in hearing such appeals, as well as provisions for expedited consideration under certain circumstances.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Cauterization of skin laceration due to incision with a scalpel blade.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Worn troops flee from the arrows' flight and avoid taking the plague that follows them; they start to develop boils or burns on their limbs, and accordingly, such conditions are difficult to recover from.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Come with acids to the water, let your tears flow as you remember your mother's horrific death from an arrow, and pause on that chair where you first uttered those words of vengeance, now seeing only the fading bloodstain left by your father.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	In the center of the park are numerous olive trees and tall cedar trees that release a pleasant scent, especially in warm weather.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Apropriate pre-op measures involve the location of those small or large veins depending on the severity in which the artery is ruptured, along with that venous network swiftly retrieved from your aforementioned site and entering into it shall be cauterized and narrowed.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	When you withdraw your needle from the wound of the artery and immediately remove the caustic agent, then another caustic substance is taken from among the ones that are being heated in the fire; therefore, do not cease to apply this until the blood has coagulated.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	But look how you do not burn with anger here and bring yourself to further illness or other malevolence.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	In cases of aneurysms in the arteries of the brain, it is not possible to treat them by restricting blood flow when they are too large. There are mainly four methods for treatment: 1) Cauterization as mentioned before; or
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	The one who grants a just restriction of the law and its enforcement shall not confer it arbitrarily or based on flimsy reasons.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	"In case of a deep vein thrombosis, if there are no doctors or physicians available at the time and you need immediate attention, follow these steps carefully until you can seek professional medical help. Firstly, try to stay calm and avoid any excessive movements that may worsen your condition. You should elevate the affected area above heart level to reduce swelling and pain. Applying a cold compress or ice pack wrapped in cloth on the thrombosis site for 15-20 minutes every hour can help with discomfort.
Comensa la segonda partida.	The second round begins.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Title: Incisions, Perforations, Ventilations, Flebotomy, and Plague Procedures (and their resemblances)
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are sentences in the Basque language.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have composed the first chapter of a comprehensive treatise on all illnesse wherein caustic substances and medicinal applications are appropriate, their occasions and causes, as well as the necessary instruments and methods for cauterization; along with directives pertaining to the treatment of the head within the scope of surgical operations.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	In this process of issuing a warrant in this capital for that purpose, so as to have the claimant arrested at once after he has demanded it, during the hours specified above when he made the request.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Now that you've begun the journey, friend, son, listen to what I have to say about this capital and its association with a certain type of torment found in the first chapters of cleansing by fire.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	In water that comes from the main source, caution must be exercised during the operation outlined in this chapter which involves repeated emptying of the vessel as it is under scrutiny. The life depends on spraying or making an incision over the abscess or uncovering existing wounds, draining pus, extracting a stone, or performing a kidney biopsy and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	Out of all those who accompanied fear and trembling, death came to the masses in their midst.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	I beg you not to let any water fall upon you that is stagnant or murky, for it may cause illnesses akin to those of contaminated wells.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	E of lor es alcu q's irai a la sònbra dins la seva malaltia y es lieggerat del vos, e així per la vehemència de aquo que troba de sa malaltiro, y enamorada de la qual significa mort.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	The one who gives you both health and wealth is the desired one; but the sickness of their own body is harmful to them.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Therefore, let there be no deceit in that which you wish from him whom this matter concerns; and your caution should outweigh your covetousness, and your rapacity. Do not assume any cause about it unless by certain knowledge which verifies what you ought to do, leading to a praiseworthy outcome.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	In this prayer, you are asking for divine intervention in the treatment of all your illnesses related to prognosis and direction towards the place where it is healed, as well as assistance in gaining fame and memory, glory, and praise.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh Lord, guide our thoughts and actions according to Your will; be with us always as we follow the path You have set before us. Protect us in every step of this journey, for it is within Your divine providence that we find safety and guidance. Amen.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	In the previous chapter on Caesarean section, we outlined the procedure for treating head injuries when access to skull bones is needed; this current chapter distinguishes itself from that by focamg the management of intracranial hemorrhage (ICH), providing you with information as requested and necessary.
Capitol primier.	First capital.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	The lead content found in children's drinking water.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	The disease causes recurrent fevers during pregnancy and, when the queen becomes pregnant for the first time, she suffers from constant fatigue.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	A few lawsups are pending for alleged causes that remain unclear.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	This is not a disease only in children; and to all those whom I have seen suffer from death, it seems like such an awful work has been done on them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	The child had a head full of water; his hair was so abundant that it could not be contained within the greatness of its size and also made the moisture increase until it became a deadly mold.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This humidity is added between the duct and the tooth or it's added below the tooth onto the gums.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	If the condition involves a humidity between the ear and the bone with minimal abscess, then you should make an incision in the middle part of the head within a length of two inches on either side to ensure that the humidity flows. This creates the shape of the cavity or fistula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	If the humidity is increased and the crack becomes wider, according to this pattern here are two factors that may affect it:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is above your hair, it signals that you often cross your eyes completely and water drips when you squeeebum that thing on your own body all over and not in front of him/her.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Describa cómo podría crear un agujero en el centro de la cabeza con tres grietas siguiendo esta instrucción.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	The following translation is from the Occitan language to English and pertains to the application of a herbal poultice for various types of inflammebilities, specifically rheumatic afflictions:
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	E is another method of incision, which I consider appropriate for the size of the abscess and the collection of water, as some cases occur more in the occipital area, or anteriorly, or on the right side, or on the left; therefore pay attention to where you make the incision so that it corresponds with the location of the abscess and facilitates drainage.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	He observed that he did not separate the artery, and it resulted in veins of blood and caused pain due to this flow of blood being removed along with the removal of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Capitol II is a sequel to the popular video game The Political Machine, where players can continue their experience by stepping into the shoes of another political figure and navigating through campaigns and elections in various U.n. locations. This strategic government simulation game provides an immersive platform for understanding electoral politics and the complexities involved in running a successful campaign.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	The cutting of the arteries which supply blood to the ears are called helixes.
Capitol segon.	Second Capitol Building
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	A certain cataract or rupture of the eye is outdated and does not result in the healing through this water, but rather initiates with those two arteries from there.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Thus let us carefully examine those who seek to judge the cause of the evil that lies beneath their heads, and approach the difficult task with respect for its significance; and consider how much power is in each one's hands. And where the hair follicles are located on every part of their bodies, particularly over areas like the scalp, eyebrows, and chin, as they often conceal themselves from ordinary eyesight without a special tool.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	In the art of archery, focus on each arrow released and its trajectory, contemplate upon where it lands; let this awarener guide your mind to a broader perspective as you strive for excellence in all endeavors.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If you pull the plug out of the hole, water will rush through and tighten that joint on both sides.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	E is the length of the incision made by two stitches adjusted together, whereby when one vein is severed blood flows out and a pulsing effusion occurs, which repeatedly jumps forth.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the archery range does not appear near your home, you may measure from the earlobe three times to determine the space needed and attempt it securely without causing harm or injury in doing so.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	The amount of CO2 that a sink absorbs per unit volume is measured in micrograms per cubic meter (μg/m³). This measurement reflects the concentration of carbon dioxe molecules within a given volume of air. Monitoring and analyzing these levels are crucial for understanding various environmental processes, including photosynthesis, respiration, and greenhouse gas dynamics. At the time of his death, he left me a certain amount of money, and all else follows according to the value derived from the nature of the illness and the recovery from my shoulder injury.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Fear not the rain, for it shall bring forth new growth and life, as it nourishes the earth with its precious gift of water. Rain has always been a source of renewal and replenishment, without causing harm or leaving any trace behind. Embrace its cleansing embrace and trust in nature's wisdom to guide you through this cycle of rebirth and growth.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	In the presence of the storm and heavy rainfall, I must dry my fabrics and linens indoors to prevent them from getting wet. Furthermore, for those items that do get soaked, I'll use a cleaning solution or detergent suitable for their fabric type to ensure they are properly sanitized while being washed.
Capitol .iii.	III. Legislative Process in the U.S. Congress
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	The extraction of arches that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	Quan acolá accecés emigraven antiga e catèrtz agutz, per humiditat agroníal e per qualitats en les lacertes d'eines templas, o sòdo antic e semblanat es medicant als malalties extracció de las arcerias en aquests tempels, o cauterització de aquells asim com hem mostrat.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The process of extracting such harmful substances that are found in the temples involves an apparent archery within the temple itself; and understand this as it has been shown through your own palms, and is hidden from most people due to the strength of faith.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If you are sensitive to certain substances, do not use this product or expose yourself to any other products containing these ingebients; and avoid close contact with hot surfaces as well as exposure to water once it appears on the fabric.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	A long time ago, there was a great kingdom ruled by a wise and just king. This kingdom was known for its prosperity and harmony among the people who lived within it. The story of this realm is as follows:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Approach the code and make it more accessible for you to reach the archive; then move onto step two wherein you extract that data from the upper divisions within which lies the code and uncover those of the files they correspond with entirely.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If Mays' artery is very fine and wraps around the end of his finger, he may cut it apart according to how long the extremities are, and there will be no blood flow as if they were not severed; thus, he would not find any blood at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	The proper procedure for the evacuation of an infectious wound is as follows: En tres días o menos.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the arc is great, and you wish to place it in two spots with strong cedar or oak cords, do not leave them rotting before the consolidation of the flood and rising tide flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	In the case of excess between two parties, and fair allocation at that time or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish to proceed, use the heated cauldrons and pour hot liquid on the metal piece inside that has been etched with cuts so the extra materials come off, then let it rest in a place for finishing work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	E is better than the bad health there fever or it's from a chill; cauterization helps with those causes that aid in drying out wounds, and therefore is much better for healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	The healing of the arches that support an old location involves carefully removing debris from the ground and placing stones neatly, as well as using herbal medicines dried to make a paste for nourishing the flesh and calming any inflammableness within it.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	When you witness another person experienncing a nosebleed, try to remain calm and follow these steps to help them out:
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	Neither shall any cause outside of your presence pause in the pronouncement that sanction be carried out or within a body of water subjected to vigorous chilling wherein saturation is suspended and it tightens according to its nature.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	The water that makes it easier to extract arsenic is that you cauterize the vein using a caustery with two tunnels; so you have both sides open and insert whatever suitable tool, making sure they reach the bone and split the vein in two places, so that the section between them is elongated, as it will not be completely closed by this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of a cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	Let e be the accuracy of the two sample angles.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the knife is too blunt, two butter knives are better than one; as sharp ones can easily cut into any food and do not scrape the meat at high speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	When the heat of the fire is in those places and there's a lot of grease, it's more likely that the flesh separates easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than any other and he would lie about it.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Let S be the space between two walls, determined by the thickness of the said wall.
Capitol quart.	Capital quarter.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Treatment of acute and sour water wells.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	There are few lamentable cries of acid tears, and it is the course of those veins which lie on the head's forehead test, and do not cause any medical illness in these cases. Often the face of this malady shows signs of reddening and feels a sense of wandering at its front as if it were a formicary (ant hill), so much that those poor souls are worn out by it, scratching themselves to such an extent that their hair is no longer recognizable, and the skin scales off due to the acidity of tears. The old sores from previous illnesses become agitated in this process of these operations, but none are healed without delay.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	C is an entity that commands the dark forces to form words on its forehead and then deeply pierce through it with three evenly spaced lines according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	The length of the canthal fissures is as follows: the first one has a distance approximately equal to the width of the nose in its median front location; the second according to the width of the lashes which are on the lacrimal gland, and the third from the opposite side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	He observes the initial arches that are both short and prolongs his jaw from the continuous formation of two lower jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	If the space of each item is determined by its respective quantity, then there should be three adjustments in total for each category.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	Is it a peculiar sponge arrangement or cloth pieces that become dry and cause the blood to clot?
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	In Latin: "E propter medietatem lineae duorum acutarum extremitatium, hoc est species inscriptionis hujus:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	Title: "Journey to the Second Temple: A Pilgrim's Tale"
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	The given text seems to be written using the Esperanto alphabet with some words replaced or altered. To find out what it says in English, let'este reconstruct the message by replacing each Esperanto word (or part thereof) with its corresponding English translation. Here is my attempt at deciphering:
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	A prop of the first action and get involved in another endeavor other than one using a cutting tool, either made from steel or some other material.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	The lynx grabs the hare firmly by the neck and pulls it into the crack in the rocks; then, with its teeth, it separates all of the skin from the flesh, and as the bones come loose, it drags everything down to its lair.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	The water flow should continue along the crack appearing on the wall, and then turn into another nearby crack.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	If the amount of blood loss is equal to or less than one liter, apply pressure on the wound sites.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	A propitious wind blows through each crack and crevice of this old house, carrying with it a mix of dust and memories from years past. It settles upon antique furniture and faded photographs, gently waking them to life once more as they remain untouched by the ravages of time.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	On the third day of Easter, there is a tradition and great enthusiasamo della distribuzione di acqua salata con la benedizione, e poi si beve per ottenere guarigione in caso di malattie o ferite; inoltre, è possibile bere l'acqua bendata che contiene basilico ed altre erbe utilizzate nelle preparazioni per le piaghe curate.
Capitol .v.	In the United States, a capital refers to the city that houses government buildings and institutions of a state or country. The U.S. federal district is known as Washington D.C., which stands for "District of Columbia," while each of the 50 states has its own capital city where their state legislature meets. Some examples include Sacr지�, Austin, and Albany.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Treatment of kidney stones and their origins from the descendants of parts outlined in the chapter.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	All of these signs indicate chronic inflammamoents and extensions of the disease; the pain is acute, deep-seated, and persistent in nature, which leads to various complications such as ulcerations on the eyelids and hair follicles around the forehead. Such symptoms arise not from local causes but rather from issues related to distant blood vessels originating within the body.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best cure for this condition is to instruct the evil spirit that resides in your forehead, and with a pointed object, make a small incision on the middle of the forehead (starting from the fissure of the left temple towards the right temple; insert the object into the hole and extend it along the bones of the temples which are the evils that you should crush), exposing that part of the skull.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	The sponge or gauze moistened with sanitary fluid is inserted between the two lips of the vaginal opening or draped across it.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	The swimming pool is closed for maintenance and will reopen next week, so you won't be able to get the usual rash from it this time around.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	In order to prepare the traditional remedy for sore throats and swollete glands, mix two parts of wheat flour with four parts of colophony and blend them together. Apply this paste onto your throat as needed when you feel soreness or inflammation in your throat muscles due to cold weather or other causes; it should bring relief similar to that of a drying agent reducing the swelling.
Capitol .vi.	In the context of government and politics, "Capitol" typically refers to the building where a legislature meets or to the seat of government in a state. For instance, in the United States, the term is commonly associated with the U.cu Capitol in Washington D.C., which houses the Congress - the bicameral legislature consisting of the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	The healing water for animals in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Total causas for cats in the ears are of four species: one is a mineral stone or resembling it like iron and copper; another is from plant as with lentils or beans; another flows like water and vinegar, or similar to them; or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Thus, when pebbles enter the ear or another similar cause that does not fit nor are believed in through the ears, and pulls away from the sunlight, and sometimes sees the pebble, at times it drips into that unknown cause of violent oil or squeamishness, and therefore promotes extraction thereof, and causes to sneeze under certain conditions.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	In many cases, wearing earrings involves inserting some pieces of metal or wire through the earlobe(s), and then dangling them from these points due to fashion reasons.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If not forbidden, the hours bestow an extraction of his/her chosen musical instrument in a somewhat whimsical and intricate manner that takes this form. The time allows one to draw out melodies from their preferred music-making tool with a playful yet complex technique. This can be seen as a way for people to express themselves creatively while also making use of the hours available to them.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is a high tide at the time of gesture, then it's good; otherwise, he allows for extraction by using a slightly less forceful method to double the pull.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	If the earwax is not impacted or if there are no obstructions, gently insert an earwax removal syringe into the ear canal and pull back on the plunger to create a vacuum. Carefully insert the tip of the syringe deep enough into the ear canal without touching the eardrum. Fill with warm water or saline solution mixed with mineral oil, which should not be too thick but rather liquid in consistency.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	A prop of extreme wind and weather conditions are likely to be encountered as troops advance through this area due to the high water levels caused by heavy rains. Caution is advised when proceedatur in these challenging environments.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If Mays is not fitted in this pattern, she needs to take off her shoes or wear specialized equipment which involves strapping the wings with a certain amount of tension and then wrapping that area securely towards the end of the foot, ensuring it's tight enough.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	A prop is inserted into the ear canal to ease discomfort, and it also helps remove excess moisture from the ear.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	If not, these are all the causes that we have listed, sometimes your pain could be due to an external factor such as constipation or spasms.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	In the beginning of the procedure, sanctify your hands according to the method of holiness and cleanse them with holy water as instructed in the book of virtue; then proceed to select a suitable bone fragment from among your larger ones and turn the earlobe towards its side. Make a small incision near the base of the earlobe where you want to place the gold, ensuring it is precisely measured for proper fitting.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	E is the crevice of the lunar figure within which you arrive at the rock, and when the rock is overturned, place your instrument accordingly; and with great speed seize that crevice in that very moment to ensure its capture.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If you believe the swelling in your ear is caused by one of these oils (such as coconut oil or castor oil), then it may help to administer a treatment and extract the buildup; however, if you do not adhere to this advice, later on you will notice more subtle symptoms following this pattern:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	The wizard cast a powerful spell on the object that he had caught in his ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	E cannot make that water you think has already evaporated due to the heat of the sun, and rests on peaks as if it were lightly touched by its rays or gently stirred beneath the surface; however, this is merely a result of the process of evaporation.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In the ear canal, there is an opening through which malignancy causes sneezing as a condition at the beginning of consumption; it fills its entire channel and then flows over that same opening from where it was drawn out earlier on, but if this happens again, it becomes better. If not, many large stones or lions according to the length of said ear canal will follow thereafter, and they'll heat up in a small flame. The patient should then insert one of these into their own trachea (the tube inside the throat leading towards the ears) using this method. They'll strike it against another rock on that same rock which is located within the ear canal, causing further impact and vibrations for relief.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not cease, water within that stone contains all the water it has gathered.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	In order to obtain a fresh aqua fountain, you should use paper or glass bottles. He held one end of the wire in his ear and stretched the other end so close to a flame that it started melting from heat.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	In E prop met i autre gonç e fai aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l'aigua sia forjada, e estratz aquel am canul així com desús és dit de la pèira extra-sora.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of animals entering into that ear, if it is a small animal, so much poorer and similar, as we have said in the division; but if it is a large one which causes harm to the sheep's side, the hours administer the extraction of its legs and joints, and the reason for this is more likely than all other reasons that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	Mays in the extraction of wormwood in the ear canal, when you carry out that warm water we've mentioned in the division and treatise on distillations, don't use your method to apply it; hours cover that you pay attention to the ear canal under sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If there is any cause of the worms here, it might be due to certain actions in the past or subtle ones that are not obvious. However, if no such cause can be identified, this could take the form of a narrow and slightly expanded tube-like structure as shown below:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	The subtle extremity reaches into the ear depending on the quantity of illness it is exposed to; and apply this thoroughly in that area with a strong suction, and do so multiple times until all worms are removed from the body.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If Mays does not obey your request for information, then he will remain in the circuit of the catheter until we have said so; at that point, we shall administer distillates which had been previously used in the treatment of worms, and you will find this under the section on distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	E is the type of fountain through which these oils are used as medicine in the ears, and this instrument has this form.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	A silver or copper vessel of narrow width with a small opening and slightly tilted.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	Thus, it is essential for the conservation of this continent that we are here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the rod and wrap it around the tip of your index finger, then insert a drop or two of medicinal liquid (herb extract, water) into the cavity of the ear trumpet - which is in the earlobe - with the rod inserted above and compress gently. As soon as you feel that the liquid has been expelled into the cavity of the trumpet, ailments perceive its effects.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	An apple that has been embedded in the eardrum is already heated by fire to some extent.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	Here's the translation: "Let him watch out that the cause for which he poured it into his ear is not too dirty, because remedies for the ear do not like water."
Capitol .vii.	The Roman numeral "CIIVII" corresponds to the number 107 in decimal form. In this context, it appears that "Capitol .ii." could be referring to a section or page number within a document related to the United States Capitol. Therefore, "English:" does not directly translate from Roman numerals but seems to imply the language of content on the referenced page is English.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	The cure for oily skin involves adopting an appropriate skincare routine and maintainer certain habits to help manage oil production. Here are some steps you can take:
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some small bumps in the ear canal may be present from birth and do not cause perforation of the tympanic membrane; however, sometimes they can lead to acute complications in adult ears, such as blockage by a growth or tissue protruding into the ear canal. This blockage causes some small bumps on the outer part of the ear canal which do not cause tearing, and some occur outside the main structure.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	From that which occurs in the field of physics, the concept not understood immediately, is among the major principles difficult to grasp for healthy comprehension.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	In that place where you can see the sunrangs, turn your ears away from evil and look towards it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If we consider the subtle space below that this form is of, then it would be equivalent to saying 'beneath its surface' in English. This phrase implies there are deeper or hidden aspects not immediately visible at first glance.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of her dress is small in width, from which one half is sharp and the other not; and its pattern has two lions on both sides that do not make noise to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	If the octopus is cooked in the ear or in its flesh, it takes a few subtle and quick cuts for the meat to become completely tender.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	The earwax is secreted in the outer part of the ear canal, hours before it hardens into a subtle wax plug and heats up slightly, then gently pushes that bit further down toward the bottom of the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	If you are suffering from a severe earache that causes difficulty in hearing, try to allewart the pressure by yawning or swallowing frequently; also be cautious not to strain your facial nerves.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Take a piece of the ear that's affected by wax buildup and wrap it with gauze or a clean cloth after soaking it in lukewarm water for about ten minutes, allowing the ear to dry completely. Afterward, apply the warm oil - which can be olive, almond, or jojoba oil - into the ear canal using a dropper or a cotton ball, tilting your head slightly to one side to allow the oil to reach deep inside without causing discomfort. Leave it in for 5-10 minutes before lying on that same side to let the oil penetrate further while you relax. Repeat this process daily until there is improvement.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Mays decides to stop the flow of blood by submerging an sponge or cloth in running water and placing it over his ear for a while, then uses another remedy that stops the blood flow, which is called "distillation" in the treatise on distilling.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII - The Capital City of the Country
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	The curare plant, from which the drug is derived, can cause paralysis of the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Not all eyelids of humans have lashes; some individuals are born without them or may lose their lashes over time due to various reasons. Eyelash hair can also be very thin and sparse in certain cases, giving the appearance of having no visible eyelashes. There is nothing unusual about this condition as people vary greatly in their physical features.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	In the old days of yore, people believed in various mythical creatures and their magical powers. They would often tell tales about these beings who could grant wishes or bring misfortune upon those they encountered. Nowadays, we've moved away from such beliefs but still enjoy hearing stories about them as an entertaining part of our culture.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	When your blood vessels start to swell, the hours will come when you must use fine-point tweezebrushes for removal.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best sterilization method is before surgerebbe incision or old wounds; and when sterilized thoroughly, any remaining infections are burned away and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Ix Capital refers to the Roman numeral for 9, which is associated with financial concepts such as IX (ninth) in ranking or indexing systems within various industries and markt structures. In this context, "Capital" can be related to investment firms, funds management companies, banking institutions, or any entity involved in the accumulation, allocation, and control of financial resources for economic growth and development.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Large bags under the eyes of those who are tired.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Motas veined on the eyelids of some people are caused by various factors and become prominent in their strength and thickness; therefore, they are referred to as "máculas estaiadas".
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	"E is the addition of heavy moisture in the lower and upper eyelids."
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	The opera house in their view is that they consider hours if the growth is evident on both sides where apart from the eyelid and it'ebbs throughout, and the cause of this is dubious.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Go over that crack in the wall and grab onto it easily as you pull yourself through, then suspend your body and pry apart that section of the rock to make your way forward.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	It seems like you have provided text in the Asturian language and are requesting an English translation. I'll translate it for you:
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, adjust the stitches accordingly and ensure it heals properly within.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it's scarce, you won't suffer from what remains of its anger as it returns to earth and rebirth.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the edema is decreasing from the edge of the eyelid area, then let'cued by a few hours, the eyelid may return to normal; if you suspect another onset beginning, examine that first and press it all over, and if the eyelid due to ignorance becomes elongated, there is no apparent reason for this.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	A) Begin by rinsing with salt water; and heal the wound as soon as it is cleaned inside that it contains only freshwater.
Capitol .x.	Washington D.cu
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	From the curve of the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcianthus is an herb that is often found in the glands of the upper eyelid, mainly during childhood; it aggravates those eye ulcers and causes them to worsen due to its irritating properties; they cannot bear sunlight as tears continuously moisten their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	E for thee to times and often talk about the late ones, even when they sleep; and their eyes' lower lids have wet brows, which already hid a flicker of sadness, and imminence is apparent in their gaze; and as thou drawest close by them, thy senses are filled with those words.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	In any surgical procedure where an infection is present on the patient's head or near it, and at least a piece of hair falls into it, one should make a circle according to the quantity that contains all parts of the fallen hair, then place this circle over the area with humidity accumulated by fissure width. The fissure must not be wider than the one made during trephination.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the event of a divorce or separation, May's pre-nuptial agreement shall remain in full force and effect until you both reach your respective retirement ages, provided that any division of assets upon dissolution follows the terms agreed to within this prenuptular contract as stipulated by White's Guide on Prenuptial Agreements.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Find the hidden words within these phrases that are included between my words, and move from right to left as long as it is scattered.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	Look, I don't adjust in the crack to make sure you have enough space and that they won't reach this far or get lost on those steps over there.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If Mays does not appear at your door in the beginning of the crack, then you should adjust into the crack a small facilitating tool that processes afterward; and follow as we have said; and submerge it with cloths in water and wet them well and pause on the spot where they lie while drying out those threads.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	E, a liquid that flows through the cracks of the quarry, in pursuit of the confinement caused by those rocks which contain water from the previous moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A person who enters here shall be healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Mays decides to go to the church for a blessing; then he waits until that wound is healed with the blessed cloth applied inside it so that it can be cured.
Capitol .xi.	Roman numerals, also known as capitals (in the sense of "capital letters"), are a system of numeric notation using certain characters from the Latin alphabet to represent values. The most common form of these numerals is based on seven symbols: I, V, X, L, C, D, and M which stand for 1, 5, 10, 50, 100, 500, and 1,00amo respectively.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	The mayor of the town gave a speech about unity.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	In some cases, the artificial eyelashes cause discomfort and irritation in comparison to natural ones; they are often old and worn out. This leads to persistent tearing, eye moisturization, and weakening of the lashes, which is caused by rubbing against them - a phenomenaturally called "tactile lashing". Treatment can be done in four ways: 1) with heated cauterization; 2) using an acute medication as described in the chapter on cauterization of wounds; 3) performing tactile lashing by scraping and suturing; or 4) using herbs, as mentioned earlier.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And thus I command thee to gaze directly at the source of evil in thine own eye; use your left hand to close it shut, and if done so, well met; but if not, insert a needle into that by which thy faith resides on the side opposite to the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate beyond, towards the margin of the eyelid where hairs grow — nearer to the follicles, and pull the thread from above the eyelid; then twist it as per my instruction.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	In the anatomy of the human eye, on both sides of the lower edge of the eyelid lie tiny glands called Zeis' glands or external sebaceous glands that are positioned adjacent to the tear ducts from the lacrimal sac. These glands prop up slightly and pause upon the lining of the eyelid, secreting a small amount of oil or dust particles, before they attempt to sweep over the eyelid in the form of a leaf's shape.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the shape may vary depending on the degree of eyelash elevation, as this is diversified in men, with some individuals requiring a considerable amount being cut from the eyebrow according to the extent by which it is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	The tear duct is the structure responsible for draining tears from your eyes into your nasal cavity. It begins at the lacrimal sac and continues through the lacramoinal canaliculi, which are small channels that connect to both upper and lower eyelids. As you blink, these canals help move tears away from the surface of the eye towards the tear ducts for proper drainage and eventual expulsion into your nose when we cry or produce excessive tears.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	Your crack is as natural as the wrinkles on a person's face, just like the king'amoeba's thickness.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	The bishop enters the church at one of its two doors and proceeds to strip it entirely, then he carefully trims both lips with a fine woolen comb, cleansing any blood that may be present, making sure not to leave excess hair over the eyebrows in some cases. If you wish to do so, he does; if not, nothing happens.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Appropriately stitch the wound within three to four days or as soon as possible.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If you want to perform an eye surgery, first wash your hands and put on sterile gloves. Then make the incision at the edge of the eyelid where it is thickest, securing the wound with sutures, and carefully moisten the area with water that has been warmed. Make sure to close the lid tightly over this area so that you can add stitches in a manner similar to how an ear would be pierced. However, instead of using metal studs like for an earring, use surgical sutures.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in his own words regarding illness, he is of good intentions and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	E is an alternative method to close the eyes, and it has something about lashes that look like little olive trees, as they elevate the eyelid with three small movements following this pattern.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible that there are two circles in a figure such that one circle lies inside the other and their radii are unequal, then draw an arrow pointing upwards within the figure. Then insert another arrow opposite to the lacrimal gland'annoient (tear duct) major, and a second arrow parallel with respect to the lacrimal gland minor. Adjust both arrows so that they have equal height from the base of the figure on which we started as described above.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A physician adjusts the double lips of the patient during surgery and stitches them up once healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	May I help you with treating your abscess? You should clean it gently and apply antibiamoic cream or ointment to it, as well as covering it up. However, please consult a healthcare professional for accurate diagnosis and treatment advice.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Some eyelash extensions require the natural lashes to be curled so that they can be properly attached, and in this case you should use a solution of water as mentioned earlier for sensitization. However, if it's an artificial set, make sure to follow proper adhesive instructions carefully.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Ataxinir is a fictional character that you mentioned. Based on your statement, if ataxinir were to say something in Spanish ("Spanish"), the sentence might be structured as follows:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	The eye that you will convert and split the figure according to which I have counted; then, through artifice, provide thin canvases or fine strips whose length is in proportion to the length of the eyelid and their width to the breadth of the space between them.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	He too has cut off the extremities of some pieces, and you hold their threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Aprop should add a certain subtlety underwater that surpasses the depth of the eye, and tighten the stems of some divided parts with a strong tie, then leave it for several days until the node dies and is denied and begins to rot within which they could insert a cutting.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If May is late, the hours will be shortened and time flies by too quickly until it arriveback to normal again with the arrival of spring.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Once you are fully awake, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prickle.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	Sí, aquí tiencu unes instruccions en català para preparar paellas (cannes). Segurament el teu gust será diferent i potigues buscar recetes a la carta. Aquí tens un exemple básic:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	The distance is given in terms of longitude and latitude, without specifying units or measurements.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	The rise of pointed nails on the whiteboard when the board is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	"The oils that are non-natural, strong and sharp as well as pungent, the operation in which you take small sips and pause at that edge of subtlety and lemon, and then adjust your extremities gently until they resemble a smooth curve."
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	Let E be the length of fields corresponding to a given quantity in units of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Come to the next chapter with subtlety and use these guidel지lines if you wish to do so.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	"Fix your gaze upon the sun and let its warmth be reflected in yours; for it is through subtle and fine work that thy task shall shine."
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	The needle is inserted into the edge of the eyelid that has been adjusted and requires a thread. Then, you must gently push that into the eyelid so as to remove any excess natural hairs.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	The bird must nest within these trees and not interfere with one another; each tree will hold either one, two or three nests but no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	B) A prop from your eye, within that which is outside it naturally lies in the eyelid.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Mays, if you become jealous and don't trust the deal with which I have composed for you these remaining parts of this property within whose boundaries it lies.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Eve that you may see the vision of the oil, how seven days you will grind and mix it with water, and on both sides of this vessel let there be claws or nails, then leave it for two to three days until the oil adheres to its place and rises over this good meat.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is much shorter than natural hair, adjust to a longer length of artificial hair, or choose one that you can extend by about an inch or so, and then increase it.
Capitol .xiii.	"Capital, Volume III" is the third part of Karl Marx's critical analysis on political economy and capitalism titled "Das Kapital". It delves into the complex processes that occur within a developed capitalist society, focesteering towards an understanding of how different parts of the economy interrelate. This includes discussions on ground rent, the impact of interest-bearing capital on economic growth, and the role of financial systems in perpetuating class divisions.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	About the cure of treating a condition that appears in the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the lower eyelid deviates away from its normal position due to weakening of the orbicularis oculi muscle during contraction towards itself either on the right or left side, caused by poorly healed laceration or tear or cauterization, it is called a lazy eye. This deviation can be natural or acquired and is made through consolidation of lacerations, tears or cauterizations, or similar treatments for bad conditions.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The technique of the lip operation involves creating a small flap on your lips and then separating them to create space between them. Then pause for a while until they are just touching each with a thin layer of skin in between, and then close that area so it heals properly.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	In the harbor where you use as a cure for your pain caused by various reasons, let it be firm; because if you make this return often, it may become worse than at any other time without having fire around.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	The following text is a recipe in Old Occitan (a medieval language spoken by the troubadours):
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The translation of your care protocol is that you should perform all necessary steps so that nothing is left unresolved according to the initial form it took at first.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation which we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of oligarchy that does not restore the form of the place according to its original state.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XII - The Capital City
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment of eyelid ptosis, which is done on the lower eyelid edge.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This is the lacrimation that occurs in the lower eyelid, which is genuinebly called tear production; and it can be either naturally occurring or caused by an external factor.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	May's accident was caused by a fall, a tear, burning or other similar event.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The procedure of the operation is to take a double-ended needle and keep it in place on your skin. Then make it pass through the left tear duct into the right one, so that the thread reaches both ends of the tissue.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	The bread extends beyond the usual in terms of size and texture; it has an additional depth that adds to its crusty exterior.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	If you want your eyebrows to appear thicker based on the arch of your brows, yes I can; if not, take the pencil and pause at that in the divided figure, then turn that towards merging the two gaps into the lower part of the upper eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The lengths of the two sides of a triangle that intersect to form an angle are equal to half the sum of their opposite sides' lengths, and this is called the Law of Cosines. Given a triangle with sides \(a\), \(b\), and \(cu\)nterclockwise from side \(a\), where \(C\) is the measure of the angle between them:
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	No, "landa" is not a Greek letter; it appears to be a word from another language or possibly a misspelling of the Latin term for 'land'. The Greek alphabet has its own distinct characters such as alpha (Α, α), beta (Β, β), gamma (Γ, γ), delta (Δ, δ), and so on.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	A drop of that liquid is left in the quantity from its previous consumption when it dries up on the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	A applies adjustments to the separated parts and those along with that of wool; he also cures those which have been treated with soothing medicines and calcines wherein they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	When creating an eyelid crease using a laser or surgical method (flap technique), the healing process usually involves that your incision follows the natural fold of the upper eyelid as indicated before.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	A prop separates the two liquids between the lips after they have been spoken.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the composition of the salad cure from artichokes, when they are overripe or wilted, that it runs in your operation, according to how you have prepared them following the artichoke's form, and this takes on a form of various textures.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	The skilled artisans should always be ready to adapt in any manner possible within the time frame required for the figure to return to its natural form, or as close as it can get to that shape; and according to what is necessary based on the operation and tools used under major adjustments.
Capitol .xv.	Capital XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Attachment of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	This agreement aims to protect the homeowners from having their eyelid surgically lowered due to excessive sun exposure on their eyeball albumen, and it restricts ease of movement and natural functions, therefore requiring you to interfere with the external part of the eye socket, elevating or stretching that area.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	B delicately approach the adherence of fat tissue, which should not be subject to cutting incisions, having a small opening so that maladies are not aggrave by this procedure and maintaining the smoothness of the area without its sharpness being affected.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Here is the translation of your text in English: "Let E be the entity that ensures the removal of any adhesion within the time frame allowed for the return of the eye's palpebra (eyelid) to its natural shape and for all adhesions to be healed."
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	A prop to put in the boiled water saltwater from which you wash, or distill it on top of a sunny vessel containing diluted water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	A prop separates between the eyelid and the outer corner of the eye, and pausangs over the outer layer infuses in almond oil, and this third day uses curative causes within which it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	In English, the Roman numeral "XVI" translates to the number 16. The term "Capitol," however, does not have a direct numerical equivalent as it is generally used to refer to a building or structure where legislative bodies meet. If you are referring to something specific related to Capitol and the Roman numeral XVI, please provide more context so that I can assist you better.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	The infraorbital foramen and the superiority of the frontal sinus's bony ridges.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	It is said that wart is of two kinds: one being nervous and somewhat subtly resembling; the other non-nervous, appearing as white chilled humidity, which when touched becomes slightly firm but then immediately reverts to its original state.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	The tears do not commingle except from the tear duct, which gradually covers sight and impedes light entry and eye movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	Mays' method involves focusing your intention on the goodwill that causes the malady to leave his head and work on yours, elevating the palm of your hand towards your eye, then gently closing your eyes with occasional doubling and extending it towards both sides.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	The needle gradually gets inserted into the eye and continues to do so until it reaches the lens at the center of the globe (eyeball). It pierces through this area, adhering to the crystalline lens; then, extending outward from all sides, it scrapes off the edge of the lens, which covers the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	Assistant, follow me and keep within the group towards that place over there.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	A precise incision into the region of the tear duct involves a subtle subcutaneous or small scalpel technique, which obstructs the natural tear canal to prevent continuous outflow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The translation of the given text from Catalan to English would be as follows: "Some leaves fall on the ground where they have spread or fallen off, so as we said, and he placed his extended leg like this is the shape of a lion."
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	I watch as you do not touch the posterior chamber and prevent it from breaking, enspect that the pupil is punctured.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Add the intention of getting some salt to a little bit of seawater or dirty water made from sinigrass, and let it sit for another day; then add clean water so that it becomes purified.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle or it does not stick in that spot, this type of ingrown toenail can be healed with certain medicines, and it will also recover as I have mentioned in the section.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	To separate that which you wish, hours your work will be free of illness and then subtly capture the fierce lion' cuisine with this form:
am subtilitat.	An art of subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	Once, when the herb is rare and collected at the right time, one can distill its oil in the scent of chief factories or an important church, or even from the salt marshes, capturing its fragrance until the following day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	In the event of an injury where a thorn or splinter is embedded in the skin and not removed completely, resulting in continued irritation and pain, it is advised to soak the affected area for several hours until the object naturally works its way out; if the object remains after this period, consult a physician.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Apologies, but the text provided is in Venetian dialect and translates to "Please provide an example of your operation within that same reason for which it was created." If you are looking for a different kind of information or need assistance with something else, please let me know!
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	In case of carotid artery lacunae, if noticeable in the ultrasound with significant damage, it should be evaluated further; and only remove part of that area, avoiding any procedure that does not clear excessive tear flows.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	A popular remedy for treating tear duct obstruction is to apply warm compresses to the affected area several times per day, along with massaging the lacrimal (tear) gland near the nose bridge. Additionally, keeping oneself hydrated and avoiding irritants can help maintain eye health.
Capitol .xvii.	The text provided is likely referencing a chapter or section from an academic source, specifically "Capital," which may be Karl Marx's seminal work on political economy and critique of capitalism titled "Das Kapital." In this context, the reference could indicate that the reader should consult Chapter 17 for more information. Here is how you might include it in a sentence:
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	The temptation of home-cooked meals and the water that emerged from boiling meat in the pot.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	In some cases of amblyopia (lazy eye) in children, the vision is reduced to only one-third, and it becomes covered within that area over the pupil or gets close to closing during sleep on the eyelids, which can eventually lead them to stick together. It may also result in a 'racquet' shaped bridge of the nose due to constant squinting.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	Mays' operation involves gently placing the malady upon your head and working on it; then carefully extracting all of that flesh which is suitable in quantity and at a convenient consistency, and with a forceps or similar tool, cut through that flesh beginning where everything is finished up to the incision line, while being careful not to harm the vessel you're operating upon.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	E be the your intention and to enclose within it those details regarding the glaze that we have mentioned in the previous discussion, or small tools which are used for scraping according to the form of this chapter as will arise.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Your intention has been fulfilled and is commended by all. Now let the salt water fill your mouth fully, or let it drip onto the palm of your hand like an ointment application, resembling the use of corrosive medicines. Pause for a moment with the wet area covered in a secure towel that protects against sores.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If any person is wounded and becomes inflamed or infected, let them wash the wound with water to help reduce the infection, and apply this ointment over the area that has been affected by such swelling, and similarly treat the adjacent skin of this type of swelling.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you shall avoid any activity that could cause total or partial numbness of the penis by natural or accidental means and do not engage in any of these activities while healing is ongoing for which there has been such an operation performed.
Capitol .xviii.	Capital (Roman numeral representation of the number 18). In this context, it seems like a chapter or section title in a book rather than a question itself. If you're looking for information on Chapter XVIII from a specific book, please provide more details so that I can assist you accordingly.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Collecting wool on the hill.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	I request to know which tests are performed on the blood and how you prevent its deterioration during transportation, as well as preserving it for an extended period of time.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	It is necessary for you to consider whether the food in question is healthy and if it does not represent another illness that causes sickness; then choose that food.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	E is to command the malevolent one to pause his head in your lap and suspend those veins for an instant or two, depending upon your wisdom. Then let that second moment be filled with a subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Two prominent artists in the surrealist movement are Salvador Dalí and René Magritte. Both revolutionized art with their unique interpretations of reality, dreams, and subconscious thoughts through symbolic imagery and unexpected juxtamnent of objects. Despite sharing a common interest in challenging conventional perceptions, their styles diverged significantly: Dalí's paintings are characterized by elaborate, almost hallucinatory details, while Magritte preferred more simplistic compositions with thought-provoking paradoxes and metaphors.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	A propinquity of those veins are subjected to subtle forces; subtleteys absterge the blood continuously while these veins remain swollen and circulate.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Take care not to drag your feet along the floorboards; and if you work in the afternoon facing the sun, do not let your veins sweat during your activity except for those necessary ones.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	After completing the work hours, your mind distills into one or another green or red thought so that your thirst may be quenched by the water you have drawn from the well.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Mays si aquo no es tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssamo lu per alcus dias entro ke sia sedata la dolor de lu e ke sia asegurato de apostema kaut.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	A loop that goes over the second list only if all items in the first list are sorted correctly.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	En inglés, el término "forfex" no tiene un significado directo o una palabra equivalente en el idioma moderno. Sin embargo, si nos remontamos a sus orígencuinas (de ahí la forma 'forfex' que parece estar relacionada con la lengua latina), podemos encontrar algunas posibles interpretaciones y usos de este término:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX (19) - The Capital of the Union
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	The reduction of saltiness in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	I treat wounds with hot antimony cream after the aforementioned case of lu and no healing, hours do not suffice in lu but instead punctures over the abscess as it reaches maturity, and extracting all the moisture contained within which is covered by a powder that reveals bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Hence comes the bone of evil and times in your heart lead to its corruption or darkness. Now you realize it's a symbol of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	E is not a simple cut, but rather an intricate forging technique; it involves the grip being held as securely as possible while creating indentations using a sharpening stone or diamond paste for detailed engraving (similar to the following method):
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Pause that layer above the rotten core of the wood, and carefully scrape it off between your words, until you know that this decay is completely removed.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Water is useful in treating various wounds and to provide restoration for dry and cracked areas.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the location is consolidated and in a good state of health, but separates from its core for forty days without renewing or becoming pus-filled or causing an injury, then you may know that it is healing.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	E signum (E), hours not in line but to reduce the crack into the shape of the nose, and according to this pattern. And it is that you uncover from along with one or other sharp object or acute medicine. Then, after covering it, let it rest for a while following this procedure:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The length of the other side of the right-angled triangle is extended to its tip so that it's also multiplied by the same factor, like this.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	In the passage above, we see references to a mysterious malady affecting the eyes and surrounding areas, causing painful sensations that spread with every breath. This might allude to an eye infection or inflammamation such as Conjunctivitis (pink eye), but without more information on symptoms like redness, itchiness, discharge, etc., it's hard to pinpoint a specific condition.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	In the old times, restoring a pharmacy with medicine from plants was so common that everyone knew about it.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Thus, when the flesh and its place remain intact, matter that was spread into various parts returns to the nose; therefore, there is greater certainebtness regarding the illness.
Capitol .xx.	Capital XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Descending from the promontory of Huel's peak.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	The complete healing of wounds depends not on harmful actions or neglect in dressing them, but rather that you take care to prevent and cure the illness; also, rest during stormy weather should be avoided due to skin damage caused by winds, and instead promote good healing. Apply a liniment made from acacia sap, aloe vera, ointments, and sarcophagus resin, while ensnaring heat with powders over the wound.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The number of threads in the lion's cloth is such that each piece is doubled four times over; and these folds are made from those pieces.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	B) Apply paint in layers, with the amount of thickness required by each specific color.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	The traditional method of cupping therapy involves applying the glass or bamboe cup to the area requiring treatment, ensuring it is dry and adheres firmly to the skin; then heating the air inside with a small flame before quickly placing it on the desired spot. After that, wait for the suction effect as the air cools down and creates a vacuum. Finally, remove the cup at regular intervals during daytime and night-time sessions for maximum therapeutic benefit.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	May's tension is eased when the ligament heals; soon it will be strong enough again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	The apostrophe placement in "a've" is correct, but it would be more appropriate to write the full word "have." So, the corrected sentence in standard English should read: "The people have come here during both day and night as if they had said."
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the eye'cups have been reduced, yes indeed, and if not, we will continue to apply ointment on the swelling and bandage the wound as necessary for healing.
Capitol .xxi.	I'll gladly assist you with your request in English. Could you please provide more details or specify what information or topic you would like to know about? Whether it relates to the U.amoeba proteus, a species of amoeba, or Capitol Records and its catalog number .xxi., I'd be happy to help.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	From the prominence of the vasceback's uveal tract.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When an external disruption occurs in the vascular layer of the eye (the uveal tract), it may result in protrusion outward through the eyelids as if by a slight pressure, and the affected area appears reddened. The operation involves inserting a needle into the edge of the uvea from its outer part to its inner part while keeping the eye moistened, then introducing another needle along the pathway of the lacrimal duct on the side opposite the original insertion point. After making an incision in the doubled fibrous layer, lift and separate that portion of the uvea through the channel created by the first needle, ensuring proper alignment during the procedure.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	The grapes, after the harvest and pressing process, are then fermented in a staincuve within which the juice is extracted from that come out of the vine through the grape skins.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	A proper diet rich in fluids can help those within who are suffering from the flu to feel better.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some drops collect altogether within the circle of fabric placed around the eye' cuff, and appropriately puncture it with a fine needle to reach near the pupil, allowing moisture to enter the anterior chamber, and descend downwards; almost instantly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	A proper strengthening strategy within the context of health refers to a well-planned approach that combines various elements like exercise, nutrition, and rest in order to improve physical fitness and overall wellbecu. This could include structured workout routines, balanced diets rich in essential nutrients, adequate hydration, sleep hygiene practices, stress management techniques, and regular health check-ups for optimal results.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII of the U.S. Constitution is commonly referred to as "The Electoral College." This section establishes the procedure by which the President and Vice-President of the United States are elected, including provisions for electors, their selection methods, and the process for resolving disputes in voting results.
De curacio de alconati.	Alconat's care center.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease that is called Alzheimer's does not actually correspond to the illness depicted in the drawing; it resembles waterfall and is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Mays's method of healing involves foce the evil spirit upon the prepared and dried herbs, then holding his head in your hands between two parts while guiding that force which directs health towards these limbs; ensure it is dry and does not descend, keeping its light. The disease proceeds as directed herein.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not go down in its source, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If Mays is not prepared to descend into the surgical procedure we have described, then let an unpleasant complication arise among your most valued assets and without warning he will affect that area beneath the thin membrane overlying it with a focus on the continuation of the conjunctiva and cornea in the crown (entering this location), when the disease has been completely removed from the site.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And so you've been removed from the race, now it's time for you to mix some water with honey in which you have blended malt or in which you have already built flaxseed and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	E assiduamente cura-se com as demais causas envolvidas para que seja saudável.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII: The Legislative Process on Capitol Hill
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	The purification of the water descending from the well.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	When you want to extract the essential oils from water in its division and decide on when to pour it into the recipient for declaration, proceed according to the instructions below:
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Lahore's Cove is a place you should definitely visit if you are fond of picturesque landscapes and serene surroundangs; it offers breathtaking views that will leave an unforgettable impression on you. It's nestled in the heart of nature, surrounded by cliffs and overlooking crystal-clear waters. The tranquil ambiance invites visitors to relax and enjoy the stunning scenery. Whether you prefer a quiet hike or simply basking under the sun with a good book, Lahore's Cove has something for everyone seeking solace in nature's embrace.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	On the eyelid of his left eye lies a drop of water, if he sees with his right eye then it is the droplet of the right eye; or on your right hand, if he sees it there.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	If the helm is to your right hand, then turn left; if it's in your left hand, then turn right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Gently press the extremity of the almond near the crown towards the thickness of the ray in the tear duct region, and carefully rotate the almond to access your mother'amoetary gland there.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	A sudden realization hits me as I listen to the entire album and feel that it has already been accomplished due to vision.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	The edge that surrounds the black of the eye up to the outer corner is called the limbus, and it's the crown of color; thus you see in that pupil the vision of the hue for the brightness of the corneal coat.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	In the dark depths of water lies a place where evil resides; and if you throw something into it at one point, soon after, the water will descend, bringing forth this malevolence upon those who dare to look, engulfing them in its embrace.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	A short break if there's little water; otherwise, when the water descends, it takes that much longer for the previous stage to be completed than added.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	Then, when you go to the bathroom and pour warm water over your hair, it will loosen some of the dye and make it easier to remove. Wet a cloth with clear gemstone salt (sodium bicaraturate) and gently rub the dyed strands; then rinse thoroughly in water. Apply olive oil or almond oil mixed with albumen from egg whites, let sit for 10-20 minutes, then wash it out completely.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	The ears of those past and present listen to the song that resounds through this tome of wood.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If he does not comply with your request within the given time due to his stubbornness - for he is one of those men who are very hard-headed - I hope you will take the necessary steps. The measure which goes by the name "coercive diplomacy" may be considered:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Therefore, he pierces through that particular situation and does not end with his task at hand, but rather proceeds towards an underhanded alliance in a subtle manner.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	I apologize if my previous response was confusing or incorrect. Let's try to address your question properly this time. Could you please rephrase or clarify it for me?
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	I must say how impressed I am by your creation. However, beware of the bad dreams that descend upon you while sleeping on your back in a dark room, and it's forbidden for all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	During the sunset in nature's beauty that is about to unfold, one must not look right or left from start to finish.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	F bequeaths his lands to G according to his disposition before the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	In that very dark and gloomy mist, he suddenly lost sight of the object, but upon closer inspection, he could see some causes; then he returned to the camp on July 17th.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	In the cove, at the moment of the high tides or occasionally near the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	The waters in Habanco Bay can become excessively and vigoraturally salty due to strong tides, which is something that aliens should be aware of.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	Mays decides to have an aspirin attack, she experiences pain the next day and corrects the amount of water that caused the attack.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	The sun wipes away your tears and rests gently on your face as it reignites the fading light for another day'anno, present in the darkest hours of morning.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	A propria ditta di quella magica gradualmente ed evolvendo nelle sue cause, cioè l'abilità in continuo miglioramento attraverso la pratica e la confronto con situazioni diverse.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	In Aquae Sulis (Bath), it is not exempt for the student of vision to take certain breaks, and sometimes he may be daring in his approach towards work.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	We hope to inform some of those who are at risk, as well as those who have noticed smoke or flames near the Lake Maggiore dam, which may cause water damage.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen in our land a person who had perfect water, nor legal water among the free people of old; and it is possible that this water is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	In these are the forms of the spices from Magdalaon, which is about those: [incomplete information]
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	The sharpness of their iron blades, and the added edges are this subtlety triangulated, as those extreme points are also the shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV: The Legislative Process and the Role of Congress in Policy Making
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	The cure of mercury poisoning is essential for one' cuisine.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When multiple caruncles (nodules) are formed in different parts of the body, one of which causes an accumulation leading to scrotal pain or polyps in other areas; this illness is referred to as polypus because it resembles that particular type of growth.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	P é un gros mammal with a dark brown coat and long horns; and p is also a large mammard that has a lion-like coat but not of a dark brown color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	In that which is in these Leon lands not fraudulent nor cankered, let the evil disease take hold among your kin and settle at your sunlight, and leave their nerves cold, and pinch them with pains on your finger joints in those limbs.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	E is extracted from the earlier parts and inserted here what has been understood from those matters about which you are aware that totally the matter has already occurred; so that if a Roman of none of its reasons for which the excision was possible, it should happen to you as soon as with the instrument subtle contained within which without any reason you cut.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	The lady speaks of the healing power of honey when it comes to treating infections caused by wounds; if these are malignant, soon you will experience pain and have to burn within that part where the skin has separated so that all cavities may be cleansed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	The corresponding text in English is: "Let's take a closer look at the concept of how to agree and communicate with each other."
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	When the nerves inside your tongue are affected by fluid retention in the palate, you may already feel better.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If Mays' humidity doesn't penetrate according to the cover, you will know that nothing but skin remains on the upper exposed bones and joints from which it didn't reach absorption.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	The hours dictate that you should not interfere with anyone's faith in which there is any great significance, and do not meddle in the matter of marriangs, but allow each person to have the quantity of time for his own matters, and avoid causing harm or intervening excessively on behalf of a third party by means of persuasion or other cause.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	But this will happen when he does it, that as soon as his fragrance enters the canals of the nostrps, and is exhaled through his nose, too many children make it seem like they're going to school due to such action.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	A brief pause from the two excerpts of the text, one part that goes above your nose and the other that hangs down in front of it; and then you apply a key to open the flesh wards present within the vial, and do so until you know that the liquid has reached the neck of the vial.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Extract the entire file, and pause in front of the abstract image of a crow that is present therein, and pay attention for three days or more to avoid completely losing touch with your body'cups (senses).
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	At the end of the trial, he is granted permission to use a silver pipe for days within which he has been cured.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May she be healed who seeks it, may she use that cure.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	This is the form of an apparatus used for producing essences and making tinctures in pharmacy:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	An iron or silver vessel shaped like a small open lantern, similar to a tiny jug, and its mouth similarly formed.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish to make an open-end syringe like a cannula so that it is as thin and flat, with the end of the instrument having a nozzle or tube for pumping and being uncovered; place your thumb on its last part at which point you push air out or liquid that you want to suck from the tubes and sources.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	"The E advent candle is priced at the following recipe ingredients: castor oil wax, white beeswax, eucalyptus resin, and safflower pigment for coloring, as well as long pepper, cassia gum, spikenard extract, and a hint of lemon essential oil." The Cumfizey's make a sugar cake and chocolate balls, and they place one sugar ball in the mouth of water that has been warmed up, then turn their heads towards eache other in celebration.
Capitol .xxv.	Title: The Capital XXV - A Political Drama Unfolds
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They're known for their extravagant costumes and lively performances during the festivities of Easter Monday.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The translated text in English is as follows: "Beware of those who are masked and lurk outside the door, for they will be magnified and honored on the days when it concerns their own interests." This translation maintains the original message but corrects grammatcuations and syntax issues present in the given Catalan text.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	You shall grant me the water source that you inscribe at the beginning of its appearance and inherit all that it entails.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Apropriate application of the local anesthetic that is used in its location involves ensuring it's free from contamination and applied correctly for effective numbness or pain relief during a procedure.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	If Mayse's appetite has not subsided by the time of Magnificat, then consider if it is inflamed; red and dark in color with little feeling; do not touch that hard bump which is an abscess on his knees; many seem to be after that person who incites this abscess out of great malice towards him.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the apostema is of a lion'nature and not a dark color, and if one tries to conceive it in all that way, then at times it will evacuate the pain and inspire without fear, and cure the heart with water that dries up and compels to be healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	"Capitol .XXVI." in Roman numerals translates to the Arabic number 26 in English. The '.' is often used as a separator for thousands, but there does not appear to be any use of it here that would change this value. Therefore, Capitol XXVI simply represents the number ninety-two or twenty-six (depending on context).
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Nasal, lip and ear suture techniques where continuity is interrupted by a stitch or similar method.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Heard that certain measures have been taken to ensure continuity in one of these cases, but little was conveyed about it except through rumors among a few individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Indeed, if you come across any wounds or injuries that may be infected with fresh blood in your body, and then at times adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches to ensure it heals properly within.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of a small cut are not separated and each one is made healthy again, then you should carefully trim away any visible flap of skin that may have come off.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	A applies the ointment with force to adjust and strengthen those lips which have been stitched; he then sprinkles some powder of dragon'nard over them and places thin sheets (of bandages) over it, or other dressings that have become firmly attached. Let this remain for two or three days, then carefully remove the dressing and replace with a fresh one, allowing those lips to separate by themselves; then apply an ointment within which they will heal properly.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The stitch technique you use should include the addition of a continuous or interrupted suture on the abdomnentum, or add a suturing material as previously recommended for this type of sutures.
Capitol .xxvii.	Act II, Scene iii - The National Capital Legislative Palace, Rome. A grand hall with columns and statues of famous senators from history adorning the walls. In the center is a raised platform where Senator Gaius speakeback in debate over a new law.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	The extraction of that cause which arises in both lips during the departures.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	A variety of mosquitoes tend to infiltrate the homes within their respective neighborhoods; some appear soft like butter and others seem harmlcuess while some are minor nuisances, and others major ones.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	And then he said that you shall transform the lips and gaps of each one of those hard stones, so that their cavity is filled with three parts wine within which his blood may be strengthened, and also washed with warm water whereby it may become clean, within which it may heal.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capital City XXVIII (28th). In the context of Roman numerals, "Capitol" often refers to a significant edifice or structure in Rome dedicated to Jupiter Optimus Maximus Homo Primus Idem Triplex, while ".xxviii." simply denotes the number 28. However, if you're asking about a specific location named "Capital City XXVIII," it would be necessary to have more context as this does not directly refer to any widely recognized capital city or historical site in terms of Roman numerals.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	The attachment of the tooth to the surrounding gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Granirez valgueres sobre la gingiva carnosa ajustada que vos antigues apelabulis, acuit que vostre suspendatz aquella onza u aquellas forfecs e inscides aquelles deuessen escaurar, e deixatz la salut corregir o sius sang.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Pause before making the decision to switch from another type of powder, such as antacids or laxatives.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If the flesh returns, the hours will devour it again, and burn it afresh, as the fire does not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Title: "Capitol XXIX"
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On account of the rain, we will have to cancel the event.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	On the surface of teeth in orthodontic treatments and forensic cases, as well as between gums, some shortened, sharp, smooth, or slightly yellowed are due to gingival recession and are characteristics of healthy teeth that have undergamage contact with gum tissue.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, I pray that you wash your face thoroughly in the morning and before going to bed, combing your hair neatly; brushing your teeth and maintaining cleanliness of mouth, so as not to cause any offense or discomfort due to neglected appearance. Also, take care of removing darkness and brightening up with proper grooming habnits for an overall tidy look.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If it is the same water that you drank at your meal when you became ill, then I am correct; if not, repeat the reasoning for those ingredients on another day and the next and the third time within a week at the interval in which you wish to retry.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Sapiences that the teeth require various cleaning agents in different forms and shapes, depending on your specific operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	E perchè non lasciar li rasoio a la parte della partenza di detto rasoio è altra parte del rasore, ed ecco le varie forme dei rasoi che devi essere pronto ad usare secondo altre forme, e queste forme di rasori sono:
Capitol .xxx.	In English, you would refer to it as "Capitol X." The 'xxx' represents a placeholder for the specific name of your project or entity that needs to be capitalized and branded appropriaturally. If "Capitol" is already part of an established company or trademark, then depending on its official registration, you might need to retain it as is without adding "X," unless there's a unique aspect about this particular project which justifies the addition of 'X'.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Tooth eradication or tooth extraction refers to the removal of a tooth from its socket in the bone due to various reasons such as severe decay, gum disease, or damage that cannot be repaired by other treatments like fillings or crowns. This procedure is typically performed by a dentist or an oral surgeon using local anesthesia to ensure patient comfort during the process.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	I can tell that you're suffering from terrible toothache and it has persisted throughout the day until its complete removal. However, there is no substitute for this absence when it is removed because it is a sublime substance within which lies an excuse in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Mays Covas Quan Le Malaltia Es Forsat Aquella Dent Eradir Que Fermentament Deves Tu Hai Certificat Quala Es La Dent Dolenta, Quart Motes Vaguades El Dolor Descep Le Malaltia E Cuga Que Hi Ha En Dent Sana, I Tu Eradicis Aquella I Aprop El Dolor No Cessa Entra Que La Dent Malauta I Dolenta Hai Eradir Ada, Quart Nos Ja Havem Vist Aqüo Per Operació dels Punts.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	The translated text from Old Catalan is as follows: "Donc, cómo deberás te certificar cual es la diente dolorido y que sabes bien, las horas cobres que tú escariques en el circuito de la diente am espastum en el cual haya alguna virtud, entro que haya dissolvut de la diente de la encía de toda parte, y aprop meal aquel amb tots dits o amb los forfexs sutiles al comiençament petit a petit entro que aquella concucesquas."
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	A proper approach to dealing with large teeth or an overbite is crucial for maintaining good speech and overall health. It involves the use of specialized tools that can be adjusted according to your needs. The following steps should help you find a solution without causing further discomfort or pain, ensuring not to exacerbate any existing issues:
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	If not through a forum or getting together, hours are spent on one of those instruments and it helps make the work easier from every angle right from the start. Therefore, things get accomplished this way at first.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If your tooth is chipped or corroded, you should visit a dentist as soon as possible in order to fix that flaw and remove any sharp parts at the end of the root so that it won't be caught during the tightening of the crown over that tooth.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Here is the translation of your text from Esperanto to English:
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	I see that you do not adhere to the fact that ignorant barbers in their folly and audacity seek to eradicate it, since they do not manage what we have mentioned; for many times this leads to great illnesses coming upon men which are more difficult to be cured than those previously, and all of its causes enhanced or some of them extracted from the gallbladder in such a manner as many times testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	In the event of accidental ingestion, rinse your mouth immediately and do not induce vomiting or drink salt water.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If blood flows out in jets, like a jet venting, let some amount of salt and vinegar be poured over the wound, and if you don't plug it up with that paste, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tweezerties which is inappropriate for those used to bite at the beginning should be long enough, short enough to hold easily but thick such that they cannot be bent when performing operations with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	The big hands of the clock move through time that when you first see them they are not doubled, they have large ticks.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	The wings of the Indian peafowl have distinct features and their outer feathers are connected with each other through a tight constriction; some even resemble the beak of a stork named Ciconia, which is strong and well-formed.
Capitol .xxxi.	In English, "Capitol" is typically written as a single word without any abbreviations or extensions such as ".xxx". So the correct form would be just "Capitol." Here'angs an example of its usage in a sentence:
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Removal and extraction of teeth roots from fractured jawbones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	The eradication of the tooth which has been broken off due to a Roman cause should be postponed until it is sufficiently healed; therefore, you may pause at the site for one or two days until the area is mollified. Additionally, you may use tweezebarbs or forceps with handles resembling the base of an eagle's beak (ciconia) or scissors:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extraterrestrial beings, who are quite tall and slender, stand about five or six feet in height.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not heed this instruction about these forceps or pliers, it is important that you examine the tool closely and insert the entire handle of which there is no name but resembles a small lever. The shape is as follows: [Describe the specific shape or provide an illustration if possible]
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	The translation for this sentence in Catalan would be: "La cervesa debe ser de una fermentación media a larga y no es para empezar por sí mismo porque no se pueda tomar." In English, it means: "The beer should have a medium to long fermentation time and not start on its own because you cannot drink it."
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If per aqua the ratio is foretree-divided, it's okay; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument has a triangular end extension in which there is some thickness.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have subtle extremities.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	To use this tool, follow the instructions below for its two modes of operation. The details provided correspond to Mode A and Mode B respectively.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	The text you've provided seems to be in Old Occitan or an older Romance language. It appears to describe a large musical instrument with strings that the author has previously played using their fingers (rasura de dentz likely refers to playing by plucking, as "dents" could mean fingers). Here is my best attempt at translating this into modern English:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	The edible portion of the shortened crust or dough, which may be any thickness, but has not been started to drink unless it is already drunk up.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	Another species of the same kind as the dental tools and similarly, other types of instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled artisans are knowledgeable and subtle in their crafts, carefully selecting for themselves tools according to the meaning that each operation conveys; various diseases have diverse forms of different types which ancient people did not describe nor ponder upon using proper instruments.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If Mays breaks the jawbone or other bones in the mouth during tooth extraction, or if bleeding occurs, his treatment should be as follows regarding that area using the instruments and forceps we have mentioned for the removal of teeth:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	E be an alcun grosseza, petit à petit, and keep it in the mouth to ensure that it does not escape or flee through any hole; then rest on the spot with suitable remedein water nearby.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May's honey is a small but powerful remedy; it helps with the healing of wounds and skin blemishes, and cleanses them from within once they have been treated.
Capitol .xxxii.	CAPITOL XXXII
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	The care of emerging teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are very prominent due to natural reasons according to one's body type, and especially in women and particularly young virgins; therefore you should consider this: if a tooth is not attached to another or can be removed without filling or lining with anything, then it becomes loose. But if it is not connected to any other tooth, then use the instrument that has the shape for such cases; it resembles a pig's tusk and is made of sharp Indian iron from afar.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	E be the key to your mouth and ensure it is placed around all teeth for their whitening purpose, but not another set of teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the tooth enamel is worn down, at this time you should use an Indian brand of toothpaste which has the following formulation:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Let E be the set of iron tools used in India and their margins; let it include points as sharply sharpened as possible with needles, whose teeth are carefully filed every few days to facilitate use, ensuring no other edge is blunt or worn.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	A line that is drawn in the sand and a rat that claims all resources.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If the party is to blame for causing injury or harm through its speech, and if it has been proven that within this context of controversy there was an intentional expression aimed at tarnishing one'n reputation, then you must ensure that any such language is removed and amended so that the wording does not lead to further defamation.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capital (LXXXVII)
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	A tooth restoration of gold or silver fillings is required.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	The injuries caused by concussions and contusions due to percussion or impact, and the illnesses cannot heal beyond that which you carry; therefore, you have provided him with astringent medicines, but your treatment has not been successful. Soon after that, if he does not recover in those areas that are bruised, seek assistance from an honest gold dealer, as silver tarnishes and deteriorates quickly over time, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	E shall be the thread in such subtlety and thickness according to the amount that enters between the teeth; and the form of the recess is that you take up the thread, and gather twice as much loose ends between two healthy teeth, or if one or more threads are tangled, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	A) Expand your knowledge within the scope of the topic you have chosen and apply yourself with wisdom and diligence to ensure that it is not misguided.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	E shall be your shield and the faith I hold, protect you from the harsh words that may come after.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	A careful incision into the excessive tissues of the gums around the teeth or incisors should be done, and those tissues should be repositioned to each specific location, and transformed as well as concealed between the healthy tooth and unhealthculed ones, so that no harm comes to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	R. Explain that sentence in the same way as a Roman would.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	May seems slippery or sloppy; strengthen her in such a way throughout the entire time that she remains consistent and steady.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of two healthy teeth and their figure on a straight line, as shown in these pairs combined:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	Whether you return one or both of the bricks from any given location and store them as such collected, then they may be reused accordingly.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	The eagle does not make the sky, but artists and observers do save it.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some tooth replacements are suitable for certain causes of cow bone defects and are made in the form of a tooth, then inserted into the location where the tooth is missing, and held firmly as described above; it remains effective for long periods of time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	I'd be happy to help you translate that! The Roman numeral "Capitol .xxxiv." translates to the Arabic number as follows:
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	The decree of the language which exists in the tongue and forbids speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This language which follows below belongs to the group of languages known as Romance or is native to it, where people no longer speak it or due to historical events and influences it has become assimilated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The surgical procedure involves working on the mouth of the patient, your head is present in my hands; and I lift his tongue, then carefully cuts that ligament nerve according to the width entered by the tongue at its base.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	In case there is any rust or dirt, and the water has been used for purifying purposes, you should gently scrub that part within which you have cleaned it and let it be fully dissolved so that all residue is removed.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	He looks to see if there is any crack on the skin and that it splits into strips, bleeding blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	"Wash the remnasters of insincere words or false promises, and remove the deceitful tongue; but preserve the honest language. Beware of uttering such falsehoods in any night that may not be redeemed."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Mays decides to apply flux on the wound and wait over the clear glass tissue strip; then, he lets the blood clot, using a hot iron (cauterization) as required for stopping bleeding or sealing off small vessels.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	The priest cures not only those physical causes, but also the other factors involved in healing.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital V5 or simply CXVL
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	The drainage of the ranula left the tongue exposed.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some accidents on the tongue cause a small swelling, preventing its normal operation; and it is greatly enlarged when pushed into the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation in question involves removing the tonsils located at the back of the throat and addressing any presence of an abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you turn the black or white pill, which does not relieve the pain quickly, do not take that one twice a day.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it is reduced to white color, with a degree of humidamoistness, after one hour put the onyx in oil and shake it thoroughly, then insert that amber into a thin glass tube; if you blow air through during the time of your procedure, an hour later your pause will produce a triassic stone.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"The person who returns to the work you have taught them shall receive my highest praise and appreciation, as well as yours; and if they are injured by water or salt in their recovery process, I will also address that issue."
Capitol .xxxvi.	In Roman numerals, "Capitol" would be represented as C-A-P-I-T-O-L. However, the ".xxxvi" seems to refer to a page number in a book or document rather than being part of the word itself. If you are looking for the Roman numeral equivalent of 36 (which is what "xxxvi" represents), it would indeed be written as XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Extraction of bilateral ear perforations and that which is not healing in the auricle, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When an abscess on the scalp is formed, it consists of glands that are grouped together like seeds, which when cared for with water as instructed in the division (instructions), if not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and painful. In this case, do not touch it again with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If you have a young kid and the vein is thick, do not touch that damaged artery for blood flow; wait until it has fully matured, and then proceed with caution or risk rupturing it.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If the sky is of white colour and the wind direction is subtle, it could be a sign to prepare for rain later on.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The procedure in question that you should consider, after performing your operation, is whether the swelling from your abscess has subsided or if it has reduced somewhat; and how long ago was the onset of this malaise under the sunlight. Also take note of the color of his complexion, and upon opening his mouth, inspect his tongue as well. The servant should then gently press between their fingers at the base of the tongue to remove any debris using a suitable instrument. Here is an example procedure:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	S is full of cunning and deceitfulness, like silver or refined copper, yet subtle as a serpent. (Proverbs 30:13)
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	First, take the tongue and expose it to air; then apply your antiseptic cream or ointment over that area. Hold onto it for one minute, then place it back in the mouth, pulling it out as far as possible without causing discomfort. Repeat this process several times a day until the white coating goes away and you feel better.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another liquid that you throw into the tunics causes one to become infected. Here is an example of this device:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	The forceps have been assembled, but their exteriors are curved, so that the grip of each one is at the opposite end of another, making them sharp and iron-bound from the beginning.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not in your possession, the hours pass of that one being from which this form originates: it has a sharp end on one side but not on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	A person who has been bitten by a snake should immediately apply a clean bandage on the wound to slow down the spread of venom. Then, they need to keep the affected area below heart level and seek immediate medical attention for antivenom treatment. Additionally, it is adviseby washing the bite with fresh water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May's experience is similar to the flow of blood, having been affected by a decoction of hazelnuts from last autumn or myrtle leaves and other related remedangs pertaining to such causes in which the flow of blood has become narrowed, and proper care should be taken as it did when healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	In some gardens there are roses among the flowers and other blossoms, while others have only olive branches; I suggest choosing these according to your preference for either one of them.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	A physician treated a woman suffering from an abscess in her throat which was turning brownish, with little feeling; the throat had become closed and the woman was breathing with difficulty. The doctor also prohibited her from eating or drinking water. If fever persists for one day or two days more, she may die if not properly treated.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The aposthma had grown so severe that there were periods when he would cough up phlegm through two throats.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	I will certainly and immediately fix it for you as well as provide an abundance of information regarding the issue, and then proceed to understand that part which comprehends the other thread, and obligate its mouth (as in opening or addressing), comprehend its tongue (meaning language or terms used), and accordingly place myself within that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	A prophecy brings only a small amount of sanction with it, and not the full course of it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	The swelling of that woman is quite evident, and she soon began to drink water and consume food in excess; as a result, I could not stop the spreading boils for long periods, and it caused another swelling where this one persists and extends even further.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And I shall sow and tend the field of my life in such a way that I may harvest good things from it; thus, I will walk with intentional steps, not knowing what God has prepared for me on this journey.
Capitol .xxxvii.	In English, the Roman numeral "Capitol .xxxvii." would be written as follows:
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	The hive incident when it was attacked.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh is on the head, and it's swollen and long, at times it's called a perpendnial; and when its in the lower part, thick and round, then they call it a buba.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	May's water is healed by the waters we have mentioned in the division; do not entrust your healing to it yet, for sometimes an abscess persists despite its use and becomes thinner; hourly cover that wound with what has been added roundabout; if it extends long and is bloody or darkish, but not much so, soon expect the tingling of relief therein, as in that area fears the illness no more.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	In this old Catalan recipe for making cured olives or green olives called "llimoi verds," the process begins by selecting fresh, young and long olives of a certain color and size as indicated earlier in the manuscript. The selected olangs are then thoroughly washed to remove any dirt or impurebes.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	In this custom of yours that you do not inscribe the soul but rather the thing placed upon the natural term and its addition, if you instead write down my name, you will lose your speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	The proposal was to use the same water that had been mentioned twice in this section and during that period when it was safe.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Mays was very afraid of the pain caused by his condition, so he used an ointment in the cauterization process to ease his suffering. The tool used for this procedure is not just water but rather a live substance known as "cauterium". To perform the cauterization, apply the instrument (which we have mentioned) directly onto the affected area of your body, and then gently pour the ointment over it to soothe any burning sensation. The tool should be filled with just enough ointment - not too thick or thin - to cover the concave part of its surface as described below:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The appendix of knowledge in which medicine is paused functions similarly to the culher of ray, and the instrument used for medicine is placed over the wound so that illness emerges from its core by the inherent healing properties, preventing any further complications or escalation.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Apologize to your mother for the medicine and squeeze it onto the uvula until you feel a tingling sensation that makes you yawn; then, the medicine will be darkened and numbed by its bitterness.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	Take the end of that bone and wrap it with a cloth or gauze bandage; immerse the bone in the medication you have, then insert the ray along with the bendy part into a hollow tube, ensuring the bony part adheres to this tebuton. Do so for as long as desired from the cauterization of the grapeskin; leave it until it dries and falls off in about 3 or 4 days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you undergo this medical treatment repeatedly, the wound is cleaned at the beginning of its circuit on the skin border and purified by that water which is in the circuit of its liquid medicine; it is washed with running water, treated externaturally with antibiotic ointment, and then healed through gauze soaked in a solution.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This type of treatment is far less painful than expected and has a longer duration.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some drops are cured with the oil of onion that is as subtle as cauterization and incision, which is healed by subfumigation in this manner: recipe calament, hyssop, origan, ruda (rue), sclareo arabic (syrian thyme), camomile, brodium (brooklime) and similar herbs; adjust all those remedies accordingly or use some of them individually in a glass vial, submerged in strong wine vinegar, then shake it well. The vial should be sealed with a cork on top which has an instrument attached according to this method (presumably for piercing), made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	Let S be the extension from the edge of the malocclusion where steam rises to the uvula over the spindle, while the uvula remains unobscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	He always pays attention to those weeds that grow during the dry season and ensures it does not lead to an outbreak of abscesses, as this would be too intense for a mild acne situation; thus, he should proceed with caution instead of resorting to aggressive treatments.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If Mays is not at your service with this instrument, he will soon grow a beard and make in its extremity a hollow of wood so that the mouth of the mallet may be covered; for the cavity of the wood prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for your health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	The text "CAPITOL xxxviii" is written in Roman numerals and translates to the number 38 in standard Arabic numeral form. In this context, it might be referring to a specific section or chapter of legislation or rules within an organization or institution named Capitol. If you could provide more information about where you encountered "CAPITOL xxxxviii", I'd be able to give you a better explanation.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Removal of thorns and stuck water from the vineyard as well as other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Broken wings attached to the wing plumage or tail feathers, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Extract the water that is visible on the surface, upon which you place your gaze, and press it with the edge of a spoon forward, so that you may determine the liquid that is in the hole.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	The water that you do not taste is hidden in the throat, prevent it from vomiting evil before the food becomes spoiled in your stomach, because a strong cause nearby the throat may induce vomiting; or dissolve the evil with a pinch of salt or a rinse with fresh lettuce, or a sip of dry peppermint; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and let it soak in water well, and then apply that strongly to the evil place, for it will be expelled as soon as you go through the spot where there are thorns and is extracted.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	A man catches a large eel and ties it to his left foot, then dives into the water and swiftly extracts it; or he captures a loaf of bread and swiftly puts on his shoes and starts running.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	I don't understand your question as it is in a language that seems to be Catalan. However, if you are asking how to record something using an iron tool according to this method, here's what I can suggest:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	S is larger than R and in the radius of your circle you intersect it at a point where tangent lines are easily drawn.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	The man raises his head proudly and watchpressure of the touch on his throat, to ensure that he clutches at his clothes and hair, or pushes out his chin or spine, lest this doctor strike him with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, that evil interference he makes is indeed his own, due to his knowledge of the cause'ebbed and embedded in him, and pulls out its motherly instrument in them all, according to the quantity which has been prepared within it when infused.
Capitol .xxxix.	In the United States, "Capitol" is often used to refer to buildings where legislative bodies meet and conduct their business. The term most commonly refers to the U.S. Capitol building in Washington D.ebra, which houses the Congress of the United States (the Senate and House of Representatives). This iconic structure features a prominent dome and stands as a symbol of American democracy and governance. Additionally, many states have their own capitol buildings where state legislatures convene for similar purposes.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	The extraction of the annealed sword from its sheath.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	The sanguisughe aquosa administered in the course of therapy and do not consider it as part of medicines, but rather take into account hours in relation to the duration of the illness along with the fact that you have acquired the instrument by which you reported them.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you look at the suggestion, there's a hint of something quite small or subtle improvements made carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it's not the right one you mentioned, a few hours ago I placed a concave tube into the throat of the illness, and now I ignite a small fire in its concavity. Do this as many times (until the bloodletting is finished and removed from the throat) and refrain from giving any water to the sick person for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	A person approaches a full jug of fountain water and pours the contents through their mouth from one side to another until they have emptied it completely; then they drink some more, as much as they can handle at once, for soon the thirst will return again after feeling the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If Mays is not allergic to seafood or the ingredients mentioned, she can try this recipe for a delicious seafood dish served with musical accompaniment:
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Water flows under a bridge.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	E is another method of administration in comparison to that one, it involves taking an inhalation where there are carbon dioxide emissions and the inhalation is covered by a mask on which is a trap, and attached at the end of the device; just before exhaling, direct your mouth towards the end of the canula, and seal your mouth so that the inhalation is not blown out again until you know that the inhalation has reached the lung tissue, as the lung tissue will quickly absorb it.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If you do not have cat's claws, try wearing protective gloves and avoid the bad habit of drinking excessively; instead, eat salty foods and almonds, don't drink water, and so it is necessary that this regimen be discontinued.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument by which it was once used to extract sugarcane juice, and its appearance resembles that of pliers or scissors; however, there is a certain degree of curve in its structure.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The table is located at the corner and its extremity resembles an ibis' beak, which is edged with lime, for protection, whenever someone takes a case away from it, that person shouldn't look back.
Capitol .xl.	Capital XL is a popular software used for creating and editing presentations, spreadsheets, and other documents. It's part of the Microsoft Office Suite, which includes programs like Word and Excel, among others. The "XL" in its name typically refers to an older version (Excel), but it can also be shorthand for "extra large," signifying a more robust or feature-rich edition depending on context.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the discussion on apothecaries and their sections.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Many kinds of spices and herbs are recalled in this book, according to each individual's memories from various places.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	So many diverse tools in piercing and sectioning of their precious materials, one of which is specifically for the type of punctures required on it and because they buy from various sources of moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second mood of verbs is used to express actions related to causes or accidents, such as the inflammamoin in the head versus an inflammation on the back due to accident; and inflammation at a specific location which is different from inflammation at a joint. Each case has its own effect through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	"E. coli infections can occur from consuming raw or undercooked products such as lettuce, leafy greens, and other vegetables that have not been properly processed during the maturation of the pathogen."
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So other types of abscesses which should be treated when they cross the skin and are not matured according to their compliment can be compared with those that occur at joints; thus an abscess is extended within as long as it remains unhealed, so the tissue or nerves of that joint become damaged due to this cause, causing contracture of that limb. Or if it's an abscess close to a main member, and you delay piercing until it has matured, do not puncture it before; instead pierce near the rectum since it hasn't matured yet - so that the peritoneal sac does not rupture but becomes extended from its parts into the anus, creating a fistula or remaining unhealed at this place.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	May's Cove understands that you are aware of the time for the incision and drainage of the abscess, so it is when it becomes ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	When Echinacea is mature and its flowering season has ended, it exhibits properties that alleviate pain, reduce fever, decrease headache and pulse pressure symptoms, as well as head congestion related to the abscess. These other signs also show improvement.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	The needle is used for draining abscesses and purulent material resulting from the healing of an inflammation at a certain location.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Perforatio tostemps is indicated for long incisions of the skin or body, as well as abscesses located on limbs or body parts, and near joints, nerve cords, arches; and finally, at all places equivalent where there is no reflection. In areas that reflect, use perforation according to the affected member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	The mouth of the Apostle is located in a carnose place, and its melting is when you pierce it before its digestion is confirmed as second compliment; thus we have said. Therefore, if you pierce that spot right there, it prolongs the course of your point and mud sordidness, and very strongly hardens the lips of him and deepens his wound.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	May's lockout apostemas according to the Latin name of the wound or part of the body that you need it, or depending on the time when you require this member.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	I would administer a small puncture for minor abscesses, while larger abscesses require wider or multiple incisions depending on the size and extent of the abscess.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	In the case of other apostates for whom it is decreed that their property be confiscated and they are to be exiled, when it has been done thusly—that is, with bread and made in time so as to arrive already stale, like those who perish due to hunger and diseases.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	"Diseases that involve the formation of three angles in a section; and those where it is located as if it had a conical shape like cone-shaped growths on glands."
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	In the lands of England and Wales, there exists a legal system which is administered through two separate courts that bear resemblance to one another - namely, the Crown Court and Magistrates' Court. Both these institutions function round-the-clock to dispense justice in accordance with English law.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	The air that cannot be filled in the same way as surface boils, causes you to pierce it through such a shallow or flat penetration only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	The abscess is large and has caused considerable pain so far, which should not lead you to drain all of the pus at once; take out some part of it one day, then a larger portion the next, gradually increasing until fully drained according to healing progress.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	The majority of these illnesses affect women, children or the elderly, as their immune system is weakened and thus more susceptible to disease, often leading to a severe course of the illness, and unfortunately, death.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be careful when reading this chapter; proceed with caution and pay attention to the puncture you are making in which you puncture these abscesses, take care that you avoid any plague or consider if the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section, then apply your remedies accordingly; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures from the puncture are numerous, pay attention to stopping them by applying a compress with whatever herb enters in it.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the apostema breaks off from the canthus or has formed in the circuit, cover it with cotton wool or fine gauze soaked in olive oil; similarly as when you're wrapping pans or rusty tools, keep its moisture. Keep this within until the third day and then proceed to treat and cure it using anointments that will promote healing.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	Mays decides to apply a sanitary napkin during her menstrual cycle. She takes breaks to hydrate and eat some vegetables while lying down on the spot where the blood flow occurs most frequently.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	May you persist in the flow of your blood, the life force that I command to regulate and cure, as well as dusting those places which I have recommended in this land of our free and divided realm.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	During the winter season, the area affected by hemorrhoids becomes a place of swoln veins, hours spent wrapping bandages with linen and oil applied, resting those over the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the places are humid, times when you may feel the urge to take showers with cold water or warm water, so as we have said, and times when you need to avoid sores and keep them clean by applying suitable healing water inside until they heal.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Essentially, understanding the general principles of wound care is essential for treating all types of hematomas according to the methods discussed earlier regarding specific techniques for each kind of hematoma individually.
Capitol .xli.	"Capitol. XL." in Roman numerals translates to the Arabic number "40" in English. In this context, it appears that you are referencing a particular chapter or section of a text denoted as "40", likely with "Capitol" being part of the title or subject matter of that content.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	From the section on staphyloccuas, those that come into contact with the scalp hair.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the gland of the capillary tip, and among other node types that contain tunics which are their own facts; and the spices of its own roots.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	E peaches and plums are his favorite fruits, especially those that contain moisture similar to limes.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	"All liquids that have the appearance of foam or froth, and those that are rocky, hard."
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	On the field of all things, 'e' is in the extraction of those who do not fear; similarly, you should extract from those who do not cause harm.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation in the section regarding those who attempt it is that you strive to obtain this tool using the form provided herein, which is referred to as an application or request for assistance within our guidelnace. Please make sure that your application contains all the required information and documents.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	"Calculate the volume of water that is being transported by a certain section after dividing it into smaller portions based on their length and surface area according to this formula:"
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	E commences in the section of the line between B and G. Thus with the moisture being evacuated, your skin excretes what it contains from that moisture, and not leaving any trace of it at all, because too many troops return to Rome due to this cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Submerge the cotton cloths in an Egyptian envelope solution if available or alternatively in water and salt; then fill it with that liquid and keep it inside for another day, as warm water corrodes all the dirt that is attached to that fabric layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	I walk through the ancient Egyptian garden mainly and occasionally stopping to admire its beauty, where I assure you that there is no Roman influence whatsoe'er in this film; later it shows the healing of a wound as nature intended.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	Si te apare un absceso con nodos gras y grandes que te causan molestias o dolor, sigue estos pasos para drenarlo correctamen:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	The anatomy section has no shape of a cross, and there is an image between its lips that extends all the way through, focussing on extracting your virtue from the robe in which it resides.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May I express my dissatisfaction with your carving? Could you please take the time to explain why this happened first?
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	In order to create an effective poultice for an ulcerated abscess using the method you've suggested, follow these steps carefully:
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	In some cases, the heads have small lumps associated with these apostasms which are located at the top and in certain men who do not possess any humidity; this cause is due to us separating an apostasm on the head of an old woman causing it to become as hard as a stone, rough, white, one that could not be crushed. And if anyone was struck by such a thing, it would greatly harm them.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Mays in the other accidental swellings of the head, not being this capitol, just as the swellangs that come to the heads and ears of children, rubbing them gently along its entire surface area.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	The cessation of drilling activities by those from the lower group was due solenly to concerns about their health conditions in the lower regions.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Person A shall provide those who are in need with the water that is appropriate for their treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII (42) of the United States Constitution outlines the process by which a bill becomes law, requiring approval from both houses of Congress and presenting it to the President for signature or veto. It also addresses issues such as the ratification of treaties, appointment of ambassadors and judges, and how vacancuaries in the Senate may be filled.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	From the section on Scrofula, it was noted that an outbreak occurred in the city.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	The old pine trees in these clusters are affected by various diseases, including fungal and bacterial infections. Some infected areas spread to other parts of the forest.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	These are those that have occurred in the groin area and those conceived between them, and all forms of scrofula from these must be included in their proper tunic, as well as with lumps and boils on the head, similarly to how we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	These varieties of scrofula are classified into three categories: those that contain stones, those containing moisture, and the ones that are harmful and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	In the case of good health during the treatment, when the color of urine is clearly manifest as yellow, it'cuidde bad in all aspects and not associated with the nerve of the neck, nor with the veins, nor with the arteries, and not swollen. Cove (indicates) that you should make an incision on the superficial part from the top to the bottom of the line from G to B within the line BB, and remove it completely in all aspects as we have said in the abscesses of the head. If necessary, extend both lips of the urethra with one or two small cuts.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	F is more careful than getting cut in a vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	E be the salves of no harmful matter that may not suit your own illness or distress, nor cause further evil; but if it enters anywhere where it is needless to enter; so if you incise veins or arteries and forbid yourself from any activity, let there be a pause in fever for three days or other powders which prevent the flow of blood and begin removing the swelling. The blister shall then soften and start to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	Caesar then cuts the Gordian knot.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Please return to your office once you have completed the task.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	In your inquiry if there is any connection between the smallpox and other similar diseases such as chickenpohem and measles, I will highlight that they are all viral infections but caused by different viruses within the Orthopoxvirus genus for smallpox and Paramyxoviridae family for mumps.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	The Scrofula grapevine spreads faster than the news of its roots.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Cove that you hold firmly believe and let that enter which may harm thee not.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	As you have already conquered the Cairo plateau, now proceed towards that location in Egyptian territory.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	The entire ulcer is deep-seated; after some time, you will notice that the two lips of the wound heal quickly without any excessive swelling.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you notice that there is excessive moisture due to the size of the scabies, understand how to reduce its spread, and remove it while providing proper treatment and care.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	From the type of scrofulas that contain moisture, there is one that causes a superfebrile condition at its place of maturation and halts urine flow due to it being sited lower in the body, as we have mentioned earlier.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Inappropriate behavior and actions can lead to the erosion of values that are essential for a harmoncuous society, causing gradual decay in societal morals and norms.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	Whenever the plague shall be vanquished in the world, those hours will cure that love as anointed with a generous ointment before being healed. (Translation may not make perfect sense due to the poetic nature of the original Catalan text)
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII (43rd chapter) in the novel "Capitol" by Beatrice Prior is a pivotal part of the story that takes place within the dystopian society depicted in the Divergent series, written by Veronica Roth. In this particular book, characters face complex challengamoins and developments that will impact their roles and decisions moving forward in the narrative.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Accidentally, the devil's axe struck into a walnut tree.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Dierius's actions in this section of the poem are not seen among us on our land; I have yet to witness anyone who has done such deeds here.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	Here is the transcription of the sermon on those matters.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	The people and men have an obligation to avoid causing harm or injury with their words; hence the removal of this slander, as by water not causing ripples throughout all its course, should be made for it does not lead to any illness in them entirely.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those cases where there are styes in the mouth or earlobe or two eyelids, when the disease is not in the head, it's adviseb to consider escaping from epilepsy as a potential cause of the impending loss which is caused by perniciousness.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	If you wish to extract water from the well, first remove three of the circles from the circle's edge in this epilote diagram (or cut out a small section for the diameter if it lies between two circles, and the section is evenly sized), so that the section does not include any cartilage. This location is suitable for cutting as there is no meat or blood vessels to be found nearby.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the wounds are deep, cover them as soon as possible after they occur and avoid touching any blood vessels or nerves in that area to prevent further injury.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	A proposal inserted below consists of citations that have been referenced; and it pertains to the section of the channel through which fluid flow occurs, specifically at a depth where it has become turbulent and for calculating velocity head.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	E lassò la pioggia cadere per un po' di tempo.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	When the time comes to pierce it (the nipple), reinforce with additional lip tissue from the lizard'amoeboid and use that same material as a barrier or shielding.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	A proper administration of drugs is necessary to ensure that the patient heals without complications.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	For five days and nights he applied the remedy as previously described; however, it was not effective. The veins affected by these swellings had already burst, resulting in worsening of the illness, leading to death, with its remaining vitality being exhausted. As a result, Albusasius would attempt to pierce the epiglottis so that he could breathe through an opening created at the site of the swelling during respiration. This was his only hope for survival.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	The commander shall administer water upon the appearance of a fever caused by illness; it is considered to be sick for three days; then the commander will allocate hours until recovery occurs within those affected.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	The water that you see me bringing to you comes from a servant who placed a bucket and a basin in her own stomach, and then cut off part of the hair on her arm; I was called before the court, and thereafter came out as loudly as the dead do. I discovered the wound and healed it with blood that had been collected from near the injury.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	I suppose that the ship had not encountered any storm or wind, and indeed the weather was fine as it sailed into harbor with its cargo unscathed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	The sentence in Occitan translates to "E does not commit the fault if it does not shout during voting and returns shortly afterwards to its usual position."
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	In the section about epilepsy, there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	A thrombosis of the cavernous sinus, which can occur outside the skull base, is also known as a carotid-cavernous fistula (CCF).
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This hernia in the groin area is called a "crural" hernia according to its location, and it mainly occurs in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	"E" is pronounced as a long open-mid front unrounded vowel in phonetics. It can be considered either a natural or an accidental sound based on the context of its occurrence within speech patterns and dialects. In linguistics, there's no strict categorization of sounds into 'natural' and 'accidental'; rather they are classified as allophones, which vary according to regional accents, stress, and individual speaker variations.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	E is not a natural cure in itself.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The accidental is second to two methods of which the one resembles a node wart, and the other method resembles an abscess that occurs due to an artery blockage, and in this case there's concern.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	The use of force is not presumed unless in the case where he is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	You should examine that wart carefully and if you find it similar to normal skin, and not attached to any of the veins, then cut into it as close to the surface as possible using a sharp tool; otherwise, thoroughly inspect its entirety and approach the area with care where healing is required.
Capitol .xlv.	Title: Capital XLV
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	From the section of spices node.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	The Dalits, also known as the "untouchables," are often assigned menial jobs and face social discrimination in society based on their caste. They are not allowed to touch or consume certain spices along with higher castes during meal preparations in accordance with traditional practices.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	Certainnly! Let me explain the difference between a "node" and an "exit" in programming, specifically when it comes to tree data structures like Binary Trees or AVL Trees (which might be referred to as a 'cove' or 'exitura cum fassa dubitacio').
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	I declare that it is curative and fever-reducing when one gets rid of the excess through perspiration; and it is completed by putting an end to the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	May's lymph node isn't swollen, feverish, or painful and is the one referred to as 'the white lion' that belongs to his own herd.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	E is determined by the color of its rind and when cut it appears like a cheese; it can be major or minor depending on two factors - whether they are made from cow's milk (quar) or sheep's milk (so grassas), and the moisture content. The colors vary according to the moisture level, as explained in the following classification:
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	When you arrive at the Node healthcare facility, ask for the individual named "Intromes" who will be present during mealtime as pertains to their role mentioned in the following chapter according to this protocol.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	E is an instrument for investigating pustules and other nodes, which you should take and insert into the most humid location where you find the pustule, and then slowly twist your fingers around it until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	The latest technique for treating an abscess involves assessing the size of the abscess and then applying ultrasound-guided drainage to remove the pus, taking care not to damage surrounding tissues or structures nearby.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the current moisture, of any kind, is removed, then for several hours it will form a superf groove as mentioned in other types of erosion.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If the remnaturess of your intestines lack moisture, periods require that you consume more healthy fats.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	La eca secció que té forma d'una crota està basada en una geometria especíanci. En primer lloc, hi ha la base circulara del plato propriament dit "crót". Aquestes bases són normalment de diferents sizes segons el tipus de pasta que caligui fer amb ell (pastissos, pizzas...).
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Certainly! Here's the translation from Catalan to English:
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	Mays is broken in the operation, it's not possible to extract that piece of tissue, and many times it remains embedded there, and later it gets partially removed when something doesn't cause any harm.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	The Roman writer with the least or most cause shall return according to the month.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you come across a small portion of an ancient Roman remedy, apply it throughout the day as needed for skin irritations caused by corrosive and sharp powders; pause over any boils or infected areas, and heal other wounds that have been cured.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If you are a great person, the hours will turn into days and heal that water element embodied by him.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If Mays' vein pulsates in the opposite direction, or is non-pulsating, then your worry and anxiety shall cease at that place where you are observing the rainbow for two to three days until the storm passes and calm returns with its healing effect; and it will return to separate out what has become melted from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI. In the United States, "Capitol" typically refers to the building where the legislative branch of government meets and carries out its business in each state or at the federal level. At the federal level, it'amoing to Congress which consists of two houses - the Senate and the House of Representatives. The Capitol is a historic and iconic structure located on Capitol Hill in Washington D.C., serving as the meeting place for these legislative bodies since its completion in 1800.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Among the essential tools for bending and drilling in sectioning processes.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	From those who seek interference, and of three kinds, some are great, while others are moderate, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The correct form in Spanish is "esta," which means "this" or "it is." Therefore, the complete sentence would be: "La forma de intromisión grave és esta." This translates to "The serious intrusion method is this one" or more naturally as "This is how a serious intrusion occurs."
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of "intromés" in Catalan is this one in English. However, the word itself does not seem to be a standard or recognized term in either language. It's possible that you may have misspelled it or that it'cuál es una palabra específica o término que quisieras traducir al inglés? Could you please provide more context or clarify your request so I can assist you better?
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The small intestine is this shape: it looks like a long, coiled tube. It's usually about 20 feet (6 meters) in length when measured from end to end, but because of its twists and turns, it can fit inside your abdardom!
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Inflammation of the ears, nose and throat due to excessive exposure can cause unpleasant sensations during an attack of epistaxis (nosebleeds).
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	Here lie the forms of experiences, and they are known as dreams; one of them is called a nightmamo.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	So there are three spices; cumin is the most prominent, followed by lesser amounts of others.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The shape of the experience is like a light bulb:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The shape of mixed experiences: the form of light.
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of experience "paux," also known as the form of light:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Gather those who suffer from boils, abscesses, and festering ulcers due to the aforementioned causes related to the bones or other reasons.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	Once again, I'll try to rewrite this in a clearer way. The text seems to describe the creation of harnesses and their various components:
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	E is fascinated by black plum experiences, which are associated with the fact that for some there are abundant fistulas in the depth of these reflections, which are reflected upon their own lightness through those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	C (in Romanian) = 3*L + 2*(M-G), where L stands for lambs, M for goats, and G for pigs. The quantity of each type should be adjusted according to the capacity of the wound and its narrowing.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the great lead experiment:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the migrant worker's lead pipe:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Little Red Riding Hood: A Short Story
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	There are two types of molecules that consist of atoms from various elements; the first ones being simple structures where there is only a bend or curve present, and those consisting of three species: large, few and small fragments.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	Four cups of flour, one and a half teaspoean spices, and three different types of extracts (vanilla, almond, and lemon).
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	Stars of two different types have no curves and those of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	S is of three kinds and belongs to three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Water is also essential at its location.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Simple large form and lush form.
Forma de unci simple migier:	Simple past tense conjugation of the verb "to mix" in Spanish is as follows:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Simple Past tense (Pretérito Simple) and Present Subjunctive (Subjuntivo Presente):
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of an oval egg: An egg typically has a symmetrical shape known as an "oval" in English. This is a three-dimensional figure characterized by its smooth, curved surface and rounded ends. The mathematical term for this shape is an "ellipsoid." In summary, the shape of an unci orp gran (an oval egg) can be described as having an elliptical cross-section with symmetrical curvature.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of an ox herd, shape of a hill.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Una forma de ocho poca o una pequeña forma. En catalán, podríamos decir "una forme d'ocho poc" o simplemente "un formeix". La frase completa en español sería "Una pequeña forma de ocho" y su traducción al inglés es "An octagonal shape" o "A small eight-sided figure".
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large bowl with two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	A shape that has two curves. In Spanish, this can be described as "una forma con dos curvas". This could refer to a variety of objects or figures, such as an ellipse (an oval), certain types of waves, or even the profile of some animals like dolphins or camels with their distinctive humps.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a few having two curves: The shape described could be that of an object with a concave and convex curve, such as a crescent moon or the letter "S". This implies the presence of one internal bend (concave) and another external bangle (convex), resulting in two distinct curvatures.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of an oval having three curves.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a semi-circular wave having three curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape with only three curves: A teardrop or a droplet shape. This is a simple form that has three curved lines - the top curve, and two symmetrical bottom curves. Another example would be an hourglass figure or certain types of boats like kayaks which have smooth contours and exhibit three distinctive curvatures along their length.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the types of scalpel blades that are used for cutting and trimming nodules and abscesses; there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Title: Grand Scapel Style - A Compreh #273
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the shoulder blade: Scapula. The term "scapula" is used in both English and Spanish to refer to the anatomical structure known as the shoulder blade, which is a flat, triangular bone situated at the back part of the shoulder girdle. Its primary functions include providing attachment points for various muscles that facilitate movement of the arm and stabilizing the shoulder joint.
Forma de scapel pauc:	Pauca forma de escapela (Sparse Bow Tie)
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The lymph nodes with acute suppurations are sharp and the others without acuteness, but not stagnant in such manner; rather because they were formed during the drainage of veins or nerves, and for which it is healed the ailment along with peaceful tranquility. A slight incision is required to prevent inflammamoination due to suppurative abscesses.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	Here are three ways of preparing soups, each with different levels of spice - strong, medium and mild, just as in Valais (Switzerland).
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of Magdalene'n Gran:
Forma de magda migier:	Title: Magdalena's Journey (Spanish: Viaje de Magdalena)
Forma de magda pauc:	Magda Pauck, a renowned scholar and historian specializing in medieval studies. Her passion lies in uncovering the intricate details of European history during that time period, shedding light on forgotten stories and cultures. With her extensive research skills and dedication to historical accuracy, she brings life to tales from centuries past for readers worldwide.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	The old woman was asleep, her face bearing a resemblance to the one who had consumed alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	E is in the left limb of an upward arrow hidden and there it goes to both parts within and beyond, whenever you wish, just as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of Spati-mis, which I have mentioned among the ailments that may result from bladder stones are perforation and not feeling pain in the ill ones, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	These are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The ways of veins from where the blood flow separates into three kinds: large, medium and small; the types are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Citrus fruits are round in shape and have a subtle flavor.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	These types of suction cups should be large, medium and small ones, as for those with bleeding from ruptured vessels, swiftly in urgent need, and also during the first time when medicine is not required yet.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	The text appears to be in Occitan (a Romance language spoken primarily in the southern part of France). Here's an attempt at translating it into standard English:
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Certain financial instruments are similar to bills of exchange and promissory notes in appearance; according to this form, the debtor is discharged when payments are made by bank transfer, or due to an assignment of receivables.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Un círculo es una figura geométrica definida com un conjunto de pontos equidistants d'un punto central, on la distància més gran entre l'origen i els punts del circulo és el seu radio. En termes matemàtics, un cercle puede ser descrit en diferentes formes:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	The treatment of male breasts, which are formed due to feminization.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some of the breasts in the paintings by Alcuin look slightly swolerened compared to those depicted during meal times; they seem puffier and more prominent on women's chests, with rosy cheeks as well.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of this medieval Occitan text into modern English:
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Mays when the gum declines from previous injuries and is soothed by its magnitude, it grows in such a way that each half of them appears to resemble the figure of the moon; wherein one contains the other as each daughter line is contained within another according to this form of lines B.G., and the cord which lies between two lips of the mouth should be moved aside, along with the thickness, so that what we have mentioned about the suture and powders can be applied during healing until it has been cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the request of water that I desire to drink because of thirst and blood loss, within six hours, please fill up the submerged container with corrosive liquid and place it inside until the water is fully dissolved; then remove it from there once purified.
Capitol .xlviii.	In chapter 48, the story continues to unfold as the characters face new challenges and embark on their journeys towards resolution and growth. The events in this section of the book play a crucial role in shaping both individual character arcs and overall narrative progression. As readers delve deeper into the plot, they will find themselves engrossed by the twists and turns that lie ahead.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	From the puncturing of boils that arise, comes itching.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	The rain brings forth the fragrances from last season's lavender fields; a tale told of healing spices for scrofula and rheumatism that were once extracted from this herb.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	The fluid from those vessels that contain humidity and are inserted into the lunar section according to this figure, between lines G and B; when all water is evacuated from a suppurative abscess, it heals in two or three days.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	"Both the old and new methods have been carefully examined in this study to find an effective solution for water treatment."
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	The apostama (abscesses) of the spices in the lymcuits are, as well as that of the scrofulous lesions, should be separated at these intervals just as we have mentioned about the scrofulous ulcers previously in this section.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the fire is spreading faster than we can control with water and shoveling, then time should be managed according to which areas have been burnt previously. This means prioritizing resources for containment in regions that are at a higher risk of burning again or where the potential impact could be more significant.
Capitol .xlix.	Title: Capital Chapter XLIX (49)
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	From the outbreak of abscesses that occurred through scratching or via veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the cord is constricted above it, blood clots are formed leading to inflammation and thrombosis in the artery or vein; thus when thrombosis occurs in the artery it's long-standing swelling is felt on one side of the body. And if these thrusts push against the inflamed area, you will feel a stridor there.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	Whoever it is that goes through by vein shall be rewarded at the sight of the cross.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Section regarding this abscess is incorrect, mainly in those who are allergic to aspirin and other NSAIDs (non-steroidal anti-inflamamoble drugs), as well as in the case of ulcers or bleeding within the stomach. This can cause a severe reaction; therefore, care must be taken that treatment for such individuals avoids these substances. If affected areas include near the head region or scalp, it should be avoided altogether.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	In this old Occitan text about falconry (the art of training birds of prey), it describes the process for separating the right leg from an unwilling raptor to break its spirit and weaken its strength, and then how the handler binds the bird'amo. The translation would be:
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	The thread passes through the needle and penetrates into another thickness; this double archery is found in both places, as I have shown you in the extraction of these two arches that are in the cathedral towers.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	A prop of the oil extract found between two layers is applied where the fire has spread throughout that area causing the clot to be completely dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	A proper administration of care involves providing appropriate treatment within which the wounds can heal, and enscribing that such treatments are suitable for promoting recovery at an optimal rate.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If you have an abscess in the vein section and it is possible to reach your artery with water, then introduce the needle at the previous location where you reached your vein, and let that penetrate; be inside the double thread which you extracted from the other side earlier, and move the abscess along on both sides of the thread according to what I told you in the grape section of two parts at the extremities of the filament.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Mays fears that they might remove the thread; he spends hours intertwining his faithful needle with those very silk threads and strengthening your thick fibers in four looms.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Avoid wearing tight bands at the place where you usually feel heat while urinatury, especially during hours when there is excessive fluid intake; leave enough space for urine to flow freely.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	A physician heals those who have been afflicted with illness and injury by administeramo the appropriate treatment which has been prescribed, and ensures that they receive the necessary medication within a reasonable time frame for them to recover.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capsule L of the abscess, which leads to nerve compression and pain.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Ayssi suffers from cluster headaches and nerve pain, and it appears as if the latter is caused by trauma or overuse injuries.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	The corn stalks are cut from the base of the auxiliary or main stalk, or in any location where the joints are strong.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	"E is a serious abscess, and it's swolamooned to the color of the other side, and it appears on its larger areas with its own veins, and when it becomes severely inflamed, one feels in it the ill sign of stupor."
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	The sentence you provided seems to be in Catalan and it translates to the following in English: "E is not an apostrophe added at the end of the word, so only the code remains, and it's wrong for all parts and won't work ahead nor behind."
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	The waters that meet at the junction should not be stored in a metal container as it may lead to rapid corrosion therein.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	The one that is on the head, either at the top or in front of it, has hair.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If you have a minor bruise or swelling, it will usually heal on its own within hours to days as the blood clot dissolves and the body reabsorbs the leaked fluid. Applying ice can help reduce swelling and pain; however, avoid placing ice directly on your skin—use a cloth barrier instead. If you're experienamo, elevating the affected area above heart level may also provide relief by helping to drain fluids away from the injury site.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is great, then let your hand be stayed from touching an open wound, and do not close that which has been opened up; instead, bind the cut with a bandage, and care for him while he is being healed.
Capitol .li.	The website address for the U.S. Congress Library of Congress is www.loc.gov, and its corresponding domain name in Lithuanamo would be www.lokro.lt. However, it's important to note that "lokro" doesn't have any particular meaning in Lithuanian language related to the library or archives; instead ".lt" is the country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Lithuania, and would be used to identify websites based in this country.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	A saddle thorn is a condition that can cause discomfort in the mouth and stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Also known as shelf or hoof fungi, some species found on the trunks of trees and other parts of those stems can resemble mushrooms in appearance; however, their gills are subtle, while the cap is large. The edges of these formations become smooth, and they belong to a group that includes small but magnificent fungi known as hoof-like or shelf-like.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	In his belly there were two things that seemed to be fungi, and there was no difference between those white spots of small size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	His lips were turned inward and cracked, with constant moisture flowing from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Do you consider and approach the ones in Chapter XVIII, section 1? On the one hand, there's a beach and on the other, a quay.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	The operation in the event of such illness is that you should consider hours if the pain is severe and the color of exudate is white and viscous with a subtle odor; place it under warm saline for some time, then apply cauterization in front of me (the physician), so that much pus from the sore may be expelled. If there's bleeding occurs during this process, you should also cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If you are suffering from fear and anxiety, beware of becoming obsessed with iron. Instead, try using freshly made lead-based remedebut please note this is dangerous! Apply it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Approaching within the confines of the rope's twist; thus, keep on pulling the main cable strongly until it is untwisted and falls apart by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Mayes is somewhat afraid and worried, especially during moments of insecurity; particularly so for those who are pregnant.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you could separate the majority of him, and make sure to treat that area so it does not reappear.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	A) The one who enters here is cured of the plague.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	You shouldn't assume that just because something is dark in color means it has little feeling or regard; for there are some who defy this stereotype and are quite compassionate.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	Indeed, let us fondly remember those courageous crusaders from the past.
Capitol .lii.	The United States capital is Washington, D.C., which serves as the seat of government for the country'amoelier, comprising of three branches - Executive (President), Legislative (Senate and House of Representatives) and Judiciary (the Supreme Court). This city plays a pivotal role in shaping domestic and foreign policies while representing American democracy on global platforms.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Eminent ulceration of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Umbilical hernias are characterized by the protrusion of tissues for various reasons; or due to umbilical ring fissures that appear on the abdamen and skin around it, as in other ruptures; or due to blood vessels flowing from veins or arteries depending on their location ahead mentioned, or due to coarctation constriction in that area.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a lung fissure and for the sedimentation of the fabric, hours later the color of the abscess resembles that of the core; and it feels like severe pain, appearing in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	"If it is for an exit from the cave, there are moments of such intensity during that time you mentioned, where a more diverse array emerges and as soon as you grasp onto those words, it seems to be hidden again; yet firmly it returns, magnificent in its return with a vehement display of beauty."
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	By the virtue of moisture, hours are like lions and not hidden when you reach for your mother'cuidar, they are neither compulsory nor believed in.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is for sanction, hours are represented by this symbol with a descending black line.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	When the skin is infected, blisters are large and hard, and they form according to a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it's windy in May, hours belong to Leo (the Lion).
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The procedure in question concerns the consideration of hours if there is a prominence of the umbilicus, either due to varicose veins or tension; you should avoid treatment on that area, as I have mentioned in chapter where I discussed abscesses caused by varices and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	The eminence of the navel, which is known as "umbilicus" in medical terms, lies between two folds of tissue called "fascia". These fascial layers cover the umbilical area and extend to form a circular pathway around it. They are tightly connected on top of each other over their own respective spaces. The fascial layers wrap closely around the entire circumference of the navel, creating a firm barrier. Following this, you will find the most significant part of an umbilical hernia, which typically extends several centimeters beyond where these tissues have been stretched or weakened.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	The aposthema has spread over the belly and is entering your body; if you have not yet discovered or guarded against it during the meal, then immediately become aware and drive the tumor away from within the abdinal cavity.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	If the fabric is worn out, then a new one shall be woven in its place; and excesses will be removed from it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Mays (if you are opposed to the archery or vein), return to your work and then take two needles and put them through those holes firmly, and insert the needles into the circuit that you have made around the abscess in a cross shape; then pull on the abscess from four directions using the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, remove the thorns and wash the wound with water before letting it bleed; then pierce that which is swoln up, as when it begins to turn pale, near where the ointments were applied until healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the omphalic eminence is not of much flesh and there's little moisture, cover it with an ointment as we have instructed you to do, then keep it warm and dry by applying a cloth soaked in lukew water; also take care to protect that area with some kind of bandage or dressing.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter III - The Capital City
De curacio de cranc.	The treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	In the division, a specific kind of cramp and in what manner it affects its healing by using medicines, and how it acts as an accelerator for healing but is not ulcerated; they have said that cramps are generated in the larger part and caution regarding the treatment of such.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The old ones that are found in places where it is possible to eradicate them, such as the crab with one claw or one leg, and their appearance of members allocated for pulling everything out, especially when they're small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	In olden times and of great lore, there was said to exist such treasures in your land that we could not even dream of healing from them or see others who have reached those shores.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The work in question is performed as we have said; that you should precede and leave the evil and cleanse of black plague certain spots, and immediately report it to him if verifiable.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Article I - Definitions and Interpretation
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Lassus run with haste, and do not delay in this matter; press the wounds tightly, and thoroughly cleanse the blood away completely using your hand or an object that is available to you among the tools at hand.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you are bothered by a large ingrown hair or scratches, at the time when the blood flow has stopped, apply heat to that area until it is healed and continue caring for it as usual until it fully recovers.
Capitol .liv.	"Capitol Records, LLC" is an American record label established in 1ve - Los Angeles County by EMI's US division on April 6, 1942. It was founded as the first and last of Hollywood's big three historic film studios to be focused exclusively on producing music records; its initial catalog consisted primarily of classical (concert band) recordings made for RCA Victor in Camden, New Jersey during the late 1930s through early 1940s. Today Capitol Records is one of the most successful and influential labels in the American music industry with a rich history spanning over eight decades.
De curacio de ydropici.	The healing properties of ylang-ylang.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	In the division of water drops, we have described the types of flavors and their symbols for each type, as well as the cures for various disecuases.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	The one cured with iron is not the species of Althaea (marshmallow) alone; it's not close to the species of Timpanistra nor to that of Iposarca because this last one is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	Evanthus from the medical field states that for this type of ear inflammamoines medicine should not be prescribed; instead consider it carefully because if the illness has been overcome or is another kind of disease with similar symptoms, such as those related to the throat or stomach and so on, take care not to treat them with iron, since there is a risk involved.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you are suffering from an excessive fever and it's not another illness but just thirst, neither for children nor the elderly, the method of treatment is to increase your discomfort among those around you, and give them extreme measures such as squeezing your stomach and pouring warm water over their feet according to this manner:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It should have two sharp points long, with an acute extremity as such like the stigma; however, it must also have in its length a slight shortness, so that in operation, one does not pass into the cavity, and thus avoiding any issues.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	E should consider if the generation of waste is from baskets, as it may require you to carry the basket by hand along with your belongings underneamo's arm for the specified amount of three pieces mentioned in the contract on the right side, adjacent to the writing desk.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	The hydrocephalus generation period is not necessarily associated with diabetes. However, if you have concerns about this, please consult your healthcare provider for personalized advice and information tailored to your specific situation.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	Seed generation of light occurs for the melting, therefore your section will be in the right place.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	In the village where your section lies, on the shore by which you wish to converse about evil, lest excess occurs in that place frequently.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	C is using a special instrument to clean the entire canal, and inserting it into that section, while raising your own small spatula between the canal and the shaft, and scraping off that amount of one grain or less.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	B) I will drill the well as soon as it reaches the desired depth and water level.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	In case you find yourself having to deal with an issue related to a particular tool, please follow the instructions and guidelamoins outlined below in Catalan.
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is a slender silver tube; it was made of silver or gold or ivory, and on the lower part of its shaft there is a small stud, while along its sides are three studs - two on one side and one on the other. The tip of its shaft is cut off in the shape of a quill, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	E in the vicinity of its supreme ruler is a watchman, who when the instrument approaches water, determines at that time how much water to evacuate from the container so that if you empty it more than necessary at that moment, you may cause great harm to your spirit animal or come very close to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Mayes removes from that place according to the amount of his merit and also according to what he had intended for your orders regarding the misdeeds of his soul and the goodness of his heart.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	A. Extract the instrument, and turn on the water valve which causes it to be retained for a moment by the cord that holds the pump over the pipe you are referring to; then instruct them to follow the procedure outlined below.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	In order to prevent the risk of illness and maintain proper hydraturality, it is recommended to alternate beverages throughout the day, enscribing a small quantity of water, and providing ample fluid intake over several days when necessary. Be cautious not to spill any water but just a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are afraid of illness and see a large quantity of water shedding from the eye, bury that eye in sand for some time, apply slight pressure on it, expose to sunlight for a long time; treat that area with drying medications once healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	In the human body, on the stomach wall and where gastric juice is secreted, there are mechanisms to extract water from chyme, as I have described in the section above.
Capitol .lv.	www.capitol.lv is the website of the Saeima, the Latvian Parliament. It serves as an official source for information on legislative processes and decisions made by lawmebakers in Latvia's governmental system. The site provides access to parliamentary documents, bills, laws, debates, committee work, and other essential materials related to political activities within the country.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	The children's exposure to lead in places where the urine is not permeable does not affect them.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children were conceived through rape and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it's tightly sealed, or it's not in its right place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	De acordo com el contor dels costers, amperament nació un moviment sutil segons esta forma.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	In the quiet pause before a subtle turn of events, time seems to stand still for three days or so.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	If you have difficulty or changes in the amount of urine, please return to that location immediately.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you don't stop the flow, it might be possible that the urine falling on the floor doesn't seep through this hole.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	The extract of which we have previously mentioned that is applied to the knee cap and treated as a poultice for several days until it becomes enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	In those cases where the penis is not in its proper place, due to congenital causes or other reasons, it can lead to an obstruction of urine flow because the head of the penis cannot rise above during erection, preventing semen from reaching the female according to normal physiology. This condition is generally hereditary and may result in male infertility issues.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation here is that the illness has taken hold over his soul, and now extend your left hand to grip the top of its tail firmly, then pierce the head of the creature at the throat location as if you were writing with a pen so that no part is left untouched; thus making it appear like the head on the tail end moves forward following your motion.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	In your blood circulation process, many times there are incidents that occur in it; and stop with the one who separates the blood, and treat the injury inside which will heal itself.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI - The Capital City and its Importance in History, Politics, and Culture.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Due to the infection, there may be redness and swelling around the foreskin and head of the glans, along with discoloration and stickiness of the foreskin at the base of the glans.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	The misplaced words are 'veguades', 'accideys' and 'carn lag'. A correct translation of the sentence would be: "These false accusations have put this clergyman in disgrace and prominence." In Basque, it could be: "Irakurriak hobetu eta errexibatu erabiltzen ditu ametsa bat zutabean eta eminenzako aukera da."
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	The first one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	"For non-malignant swellings, apply this gentle and absorbable ointment that covers the entire area; then let it rest on the subdued region as in an Egyptian treatment; and finally, use that which is healing to treat the skin with a transparent gel."
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the mole is malignant, of deep color, and its size changes rapidly, you should have it examined by your doctor for possible surgery or treatment.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	May be the foreskin of the head of the penis is not circumcised and one part of the foreskin is attached to the glans while the other part is free; hence, you must remove this flap that is attached at the commencanguage time before it becomes firmly adhered. Now, treat the free section: when you treat the flap covering the head of the penis, there is no guarantee that it will not tear off if carelessly handled.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	In the past days, there were occurrences of violence and attacks against black genitalia and skin color, which is why you should be careful with everything that may have been denigrated or could lead to corruption; moreover, apply a protective ointment on it just as when you use flour for making breadcrumbs: crush almonds, hazelnuts, and spices.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	A person is responsible for their own health and any other medical condition within that pertains to being healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	May's flow of blood is redirected through certain hours when she administers a luminous ritual following this pattern:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The cutting of the veins is twice performed, thus there is a flow of blood and then when it becomes clotted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the tip of the foreskin is corroded and destroyed completely within an hour, cover with a piece of lead that fits in such a way to prevent harmful urine from entering there.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the case of a fused prepuce and glans (and this fusion does not occur in all, only in those whose foreskin is scarred over it, and circumcision is not required; and when a fusion occurs due to phimosis or an abscess) it should be carefully separated with spatulas until the adhesion dissolves and the entire glans can protrude completely.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	It's difficult to discern those exquisite moments when you should withdraw the penis and foreskin; thus, this is where circumcision comes in—whereby the prepuce is carefully removed with precision due to its delicate nature, which may be easily perforated because of its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	A proper preparation involves separating between the foreskin and the head of the gland (or glans) delicately, which has already been softened in lukewarm water so that it does not stick to any other skin during circumcision.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	A proper care has been provided within the scope of established guidelaturi.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	The miraculous healing of children and the cure resulting from that which happens to those undergoing circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to continuity or other diseases: but with its effect on our operation and will, and the loss of it being primarily in children, it becomes necessary that we assign it to better operations and more easily lost health benefits.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	In my opinion, the ancients did not perform circumcision among some of them who were free because they didn't practice it according to their laws. It is only due to our acquired experience that I have observed most artisans and barbers use circumcision with a new razor or scissors; they also used lathering soap and oil for lubrication.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	The following text is in Catalan and refers to circumcision practices, describing various methods that are believed not to cause less harmful outcomes than those performed with a scalpel, razor, or blade, as these may lead to complications such as bleeding, skin detachment above the scrotum, double tunics on the penile foreskin, and a deeper retraction of the prepuce.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	The E-circumcision procedure performed for alphabets, which is digital and used by barbers, does not guarantee safety from the risk of injury to the tip of the male organ, as it greatly enters into the wound during the process.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation room, he swiftly performed surgery and compromised your procedure.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child's nature is brief and many behave this way so there's no need for intervention, which I have observed as well.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The vast work that has been done with the saw and chisel reveals the truth to me, for these instruments are of proportional ignorance, because the sharpness above is so much like the dullness below; and therefore, as you press your hand upon them in proportionate pressure at once, it makes a compression into the faithful figure containing the code of the entire snake's body, which does not cause an error throughout.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The method of the first operation is for you to be mostly with the child if it's one that I understand a little, not just in appearance but also spiritually; and let him stay within his boundaries until another day passes by. (This translation might refer to a spiritual practice or caregiving guidance rather than an arithmetic method.)
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	A prop of all those who bring joy throughout your entire sphere that is within the realm of possibility, in accordance with how you have received intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	E place the crib between your most favored pieces of furniture and not in a corner; hide the pins in your bed or under it so that the child cannot see them nor any other tools.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Take the herb and place it in your mouth then blow into the nostrils; pull out what comes out of each nostril, and remove any foreign matter that has been added to them due to snoring.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Bake the dough into two equal portions and roll each one out to about half an inch thickness. Then place them on a lightly floured surface with some space between them.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	The person takes a bone, elevates its sharp end slightly and pierces it into the wart. He then pours a small amount of liquid (presumably saliva) onto the wart. For the next few days, he layers poultices made from crushed hawthorn berries over the wart, changing them every other day. This treatment is supposed to help in curing the wart.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	La forme d'una forfex a mondificacio és una fònema còncava amb un puntuig o fullet al centre. Esta es la forma d'un círculo que ha estat perforat en el mitge, simbolitzant l'eixecutiva de les coses i el poder de decidir sobre ellas.
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some extramittent nails are not parallel and the others are parallel but they don't form a right angle; their lengths are equal to twice the length of two adjacent sides respectively.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The error in translation from Esperanto to English is that the original sentence does not make sense and appears jumbled. A correct translation of this statement could be: "Mays's mistake in worldization was too hastily leaving behind her inner essence, or a part of herself." However, it seems like there might have been an issue with translating from another language to Esperanto initially.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Please write down your hour and place it in front of the seal, ensuring that both copies are identical.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your left hand, the hours will come when you'll need to use your right arm and pierce it there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	Mays has had three days of fever, and now the sore from being bitten by an animal is swolamoled again. Shortly after you feel it, insert something to drain the abscess if possible, and gently clean that area which will help facilitate healing. Also, avoid any actions or substances according to your preparation state.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Look at the top of the pole; that's where we'll get water from now on. (Catalan)
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Then let that water which the rain has collected from the dusts, as we have mentioned in the treatise on dusts, be taken care of.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If the line is inscribed on the wall to measure and follows unusual paths, then do so now.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	"E makes cure that water which they have said within and is to be healthy."
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII: The National Capital's Secret Agenda
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Retained urine in the bladcuo
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladcu is caused by obstruction due to a stone or prolapse, or inflammation and similar conditions as previously mentioned under treatments for disorders in that section.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not passed out and you experience pain near a stone that is in the bladebladder neck, it seems likely that an unpleasant condition will affect your kidneys.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	A propinkeys lie on their back and extend their stomach from the lower side of their hips, while tightly clenching their throat as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	The urethral colic causes an expulsion of the stone from behind, which is why the urine flows smoothly.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If the water is not dissolved as instructed to alleviate the illness, then it shall be extracted with a silver needle instrument called a "siringua," of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and subtly shaped like a reed pipe; its length should be similar to that of an average palm leaf (about 30 cm) in shape, with a subtly pointed end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of urine collection in which you take the sample from the urethral orifice by good tying at its lateral margin; and inserting the edge of the catheter into the posterior wall, then slide it gently without causing any damage to the lining, and carefully insert the tip along with the balloon.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	The fisherman cast the net over the sea, then he tied the basket of his net and the pole with oil-soaked wool, and added olive leaves and water to it.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	The ring is placed at the glans with the band tilted upwards away from the head of the penis; and then the ring is pushed deeper into that area until it reaches the bladder base, so the discomfort should be reached on the wrong side, not as per this order but in the direction where the path becomes twisted.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Slowly and gradually extend the entire fleecu on the wool as the urine seces the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	In cases of urinary tract infections (UTIs), antibiot지 takes the role of a primary treatment, and proper hydration is crucial; thus, drink plenty of water and use comfortable language within your means to alleviate the discomfort caused by UTI symptoms.
Capitol .lix.	CapitalLIX is a popular news website that provides up-to-date information and coverage on various topics, including politics, economics, culture, sports, entertainment, technology, etc., with a focus on Luxembourg's capital city of Luxembourg City (French: Luxembourg). The platform offers articles in both French and German to cater to the multilingual population of the country.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	The quality of cleft in the clay and the corresponding musical instruments, which are tuned to water.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	In cases of vesicle or abscess bursting, blister coalescence, or skin contusion in that area, applying a warm compress and allowing fluid and medications to drain can provide relief. The instrument commonly referred to as clamp-clothes is used for this purpose. This method represents one way to treat such conditions:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	And if on the other side she is deaf, it's closed too.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place, three roads branch off: two from the same path, as often it happens.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the initial stage where it is cold and dark, in which there is water that gets compressed, and its second quantity that follows this compression corresponds to the force that pulls it from humidity, so it's pulled, and when it's expelled, as with oil, according to what happens during naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	To drain moisture from the bladder, insert the end of catheter into the moisture area, and pull out the water that is pushed towards one side, as the moisture is drawn in the cavity of the catheter.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	The inflammation of the prostate gland causes urinary symptoms such as difficulty starting and maintaining urination; it also contributes to increased urine flow rate due to swelling that presses against the urethra, which in turn leads to frequent urination.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the Cristero Subtle is such that the bladder (vesica) is cristernized and its shape is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	The feather was made of gold or silver, with the head resembling a small quill and further down, long hair flowing in curls.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Preheat the oven to your desired temperature and let it warm up completely before placing anything inside. Meanwhile, prepare the batter by mixing all required ingcuents in a bowl until you achieve a smooth consistency. Once done, pour the mixture into a greased baking dish ensuring an even distribution across the surface.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	A finger inadvertently enters the tip of the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	The text appears to be in Catalan, and it translates to: "Proceed with your treatment on the bladder due to urine retention within the painful condition that this moisture has reached the bladamo." However, there are some issues with grammar and clarity. Here's a corrected version:
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If the bladder is not present within your vision, wait until it'n a bit of darkness and pay attention to that circle; then pierce through its entire roundness; and insert a faithful rod into those tracks as you rotate; then add the circle in such way that it is added thereafter, so that when you pause in the water you wish for humidity, oil, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	To your right is the device and you should use it as follows to achieve similar results as when you emptied your bladaturgy (bladder). Express the air inside through the valve as moisture arrives at the bladatery.
Capitol .lx.	Title: Capitol LX
De extraccio de peyra.	Rock extraction.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	In the classification of stones and their treatments, we have differentiated between types of stone originating in kidney stones and those originating in the bladder. Additionally, we've described the characteristics of each type of stone.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	They have said the stone on which my surgery was to take place is broken and split.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone that is generated in the urinary bladaderelates to the one placed in the urinary bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	The story you've just read is an abbrevieated and condensed exposition of a larger tale, presented in a concise manner to capture the essence and main points succinctly.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	He said that the stone is mainly formed in the bladebladder and that its signs are such that the urine which comes out from the bladder appears similar to water in its subtlety, and it looks like sand; moreover, the bad humour causes swelling of his veins, and there are spots that appear, and he gets thirsty.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	Childbirth is the recovery period of children up to those who have reached XIV (14) years old; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Young people are migrating to the sea due to a lack of opportunities among those available.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	D of the one where the stone is larger and the coloration is slightly lighter; And if it is small, it contradicts that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Come, let's go towards the cure of that one who prepares meals and heals ailments, including the cristeros, as they expel all kinds of blockages located within their veins; these blockages sometimes prevent the flow of stone from the gallblader, causing possible inflammation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	The stone passes through the bladder and is expelled by his own weight; sometimes it moves down towards the urethral opening or jumps out on its own at certain intervals.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	The following is the translation of your text from Asturian (Astur-Leonese) into English:
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	A look for that and take the whole thing away with you.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you hear the stone in space, soon you'll dream of a sharp cut on it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If you are not tired of using your own remedy, now it is said that you should apply some oil to the affected area on the right side with a piece of cloth if the illness concerns a child or place that cloth in their behind if they are an adult. Then insert this into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	The stone bridge that you mentioned earlier is located near the old mill by the river.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	Slowly but surely, it descends towards the bladder's neck.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	The text appears to be in Catalan. A translation of the given sentence would be: "The property agreement you mentioned and excludes that from parcels outside the area where I have sectioned it." However, please note that without more context or a clearer sentence structure, this interpretation may vary.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	The priest says to the minister who presses the urn that is near his mother; and he tells another minister to extend her fingers toward the parts below, and for the other hand of him to rewind the cord which is above their fingers, in part from where the section takes place.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Apologies, my intrusion into your space is an unintended consequence of the form that this message takes. Please accept my sincere apologies if it caused any inconvenience.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	The stone is to be split along its axis that lies between the two corners; not in the middle of the length but before reaching the left side of the line. Let there be a longitudinal section across this point on your chosen rock, and let it form a transverse cut so that the resulting cross-section is as wide as possible without exceeding it according to the size of the stone you have chosen, for indeed, it must fit in the corner where the longitudinal section should be made.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	There are some stones that serve as an anchor and counterweight to help keep the boat steady in water; however, due to these rocks it becomes difficult for navigation.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	D'aquella aqüa eló se lluu león semblança a gran, és rotonda, i és fet d'ell lligerament eissamble.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	If it's the one with angles and margins, fit into the gap.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	The translation in English would be: "If you do not use a saw or an axe to cut into that, it means you are using tools on the matter at hand, the extreme end of which is as sharp as a lime and with which you grasp onto the stone; or if you interpose your subtle instrument with curved extremity."
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot obtain that item right away, wait a little while and try again; if the flow of blood appears, sever it with a small scalpel and apply some strong vinegar to the wound.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	The stone is still one if during mealtime you push it towards the bladder'perturb, and then slightly press it; and then gently feel to see if there are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is large, prolonged ignorance can be one of two main causes for it to lead to illness: either because it remains in place or because it gradually moves due to continuous urine drainage, since the location is not completely solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	Mayes administered an emetic within the hour before being expelled, or engineering a fracture of his limbs to extract that from him in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Once you have completed your operation, fill the bottle with aloe and dragon's blood extract, and strengthen it accordingly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	On that fiery drink we had last night and you know the red wine with ice-cold water, but only to prevent hangovers from occurranciing.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	A prophecy hangs over her shoulders, and she doesn't reveal the truth until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	The water has been muddled up; I've mixed in the medicinal herb and oil mixture, and also added the fine powder ointment and antibiotic cream that may heal it.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Mays suffers from a blistering rash with redness and itchiness, similar to if the blood were frozen in his bladastery (and this is known by discharge of blood-tainted urine), he inserts your remedy into the wound and extracts that blood. This causes inflammation and putrefaction of the bladders as well.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Warm water with some salt and no specific ingredient, the water that is appropriate for internal cleansing when it should be healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	A caregiver in the hours of total attention that you provide and manage the cases as well as adjusting the prescribed medications at the location.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	In case the stone is small and located in the bladder wall, and it has been moved there, then urination should be prevented. Until you reach a secure location where this procedure can be performed safely, you have previously warned that too many people passing by during this procedure may cause disturbance or embarrassment; therefore, I advise you to use an iron catheter with the following design:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	A sharp pointed tool attached to a handle or staff.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	In propinquity fell prey to the whims of chance and fate, she left behind her staff beneath the stone for fear that it might not return to its vessel.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	A shovel accidentally gets entangled in the rope, making it easier for the piercer to bring that stone closer.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	As you slowly turn the drill into that small stone with your hand and make one hole at a time, until that of the other side begins to enter; because soon the urine is released completely.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	In the proper form of Catalan, the sentence would be: "A prop del premís, aporti's alsa més sobre aquò que és romes de la pedra de partida defor d'aquell que és trinxat, i es forja-getat amb l'urina, i el malaltia es sanar".
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not to your liking for any reason that prevents you from using it, a few hours later the stone will leave its mark and another one appears beneath it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	A propensity for lying about the stone on that rock between two boundaries.
E aprop extratz aquela.	Aprop, here's that information for you. What would you like to know?
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	A prop of the ship's keel lies at anchor in the harbor, which is made to withstand rough weather.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	E is not necessary to remove the stone from its place in the bladder, but because it does not return to the vesicle; the other ligament above does so, for when the gall is detached from the wall of the bladwart, the cord returns to its place and reclaims the veil.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	PER AQUO NISI QUAN LAS IGLESIAS DESESUS ELEVEN LA CODNA AL MICELY O QUE TORNIES DEBERS EL TEU PREGÀRIA, Y COBRARA LA BIBASTEE JUSTAMENT COMÒ HEM DIT.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI: The Capital City
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Stone extraction from the women's bodies.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Women are rarely created by fire.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	May silently picks up one of those stones; at times the cure is difficult and it's forbidden to overly ambitious ones.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The one of them is the woman who became queens.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The second question you don't find a woman who can discover if she is pregnant or not, when she sees the doctor during marriage counseling sessions or among women having married men.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third one is quite aware that this article, mostly the operation was made by me.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth one that lies on the rocky section of the path for women is longer than the piece of rock, so you ask for a different route, and in this area there is danger.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	La fameuse May's necessity induit à une époque où les hommes sont obligés de prendre des mesures drastamoins pour assurer leur sécurité et celle d'une femme par exemple. Malheureusement, cela conduit parfois à des situations qui peuvent paraître atroces.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are deprived of that knowledge, during those times pay attention to a woman matron who appears in the manner of women, or a woman whose image is found on this statue in front of it. (Referring to Michelangelo's David)
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	In that present moment and command your horse to do everything you tell it, starting with the inquiry about the stone at the meal; this is why he should watch if the woman is a virgin, as she must place her hand in his mouth and offer him the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If you tear that off, leave your mark on it and then command him to write something above it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If Mays is not a witch, she commands the midwife to interfere in her patient's birth by placing her left hand on the stone and pressing gently while maintaineing good rapport.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If you observe that, the hours pass by swiftly until they reach the dreadful moment of urinating in your pants because of your need to maintain virtue before it arrivamo's time for relief.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Article I - Installation within the described area of land shall consist of placing and securing a stone in that location, ensnaring it firmly with rocks around it so that the same cannot be moved from its place without dislodging those surrounding stones.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	Cut off just a small section at the beginning; then carefully place the stone on that piece and see if it fits the length of which you know the stone was thrown.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	The stones of that kind are lumps: one of those is few and large, fierce and sharp, long and round, with roots.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	There are various types of water, depending on what you're referring to. Here is a list of different kinds and their meanings related to water:
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you wish to have blood flow, adjust the valve of trissadent glass within an hour so that it separates the blood, and then return to your work as soon as the stone is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	In the Lord's work, I pray for you to provide all the instruments mentioned in the stone extraction process, that you may be assisted by them in your operations.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you wish to cure an illness with bloodletting and know that the blood is expelled from a vein, then place your palm over the location and press down firmly on it; do not use heat or extract any stone, for otherwise the patient may suffer greatly.
E aprop cura la plagua.	A prop of the wave.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the blood's acidity is transferred to the kidneys, and the place becomes polluted, hours later you return to your usual activity before the stone has been expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	An acute hernia is when the protrusion of an organ or tissue through the wall that normally contains it occurs suddenly and may require immediate medical attention to prevent complications such as strangulation, which can cut off blood supply leading to tissue death. This condition necessitutes swift diagnosis and often surgical intervention to repair the hernia and restore normal anatomy before more serious issues arise.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Aguzo hernia is not just a buildup of moisture in the white fiber which is left after the removal of the germ cells containing the yolk, and it's called "aguzo" (Spanish).
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Some types of woolen cloth are in the very first stage of preparation when it has not yet become greasy or dirty with other fluids; and this is the coating between the white fleecks which we have mentioned, and it's not oil but tar.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is due to weakening caused by a congenital defect, which causes the contents to protrude through these openings, and some cases occur from trauma resulting in injury to the tissues.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This humidity has various shades; its color may fade to yellow or red, brown, become muddy black, watery white, and the water that predominates.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	In the case where it is possible to add water to this mixture: if we are talking about the white chiffon that we have mentioned, several hours later it will slightly decrease in length and appear to take on a leaf-like shape; meanebtwhile, the genetic material (humidity) from all directions becomes part of it.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the humidity is in the underarm area, the hours of sweating are usually less than that of other body parts; so it's estimated that there will be less odor as well.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the humidity is between grandfather's genes and the cyan white chip, hours ago left the sentiment.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	In order to determine the color of moisture in a rash within an intermembrane space where its shape is preceded by it and then as it manifests on the residue of the interstitprise, judge from this what has happened therein.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we arrived at the scene of his accident, it became clear that he needed to be taken to a hospital where they could command the malfunctioning ambulance, as this was possible, and times like these call for quick action.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	"Lay your back on the ground for just a moment and pause from your troubles."
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	A) Place your right hand under the left and instruct the minister to follow with his right, extending their index fingers towards each other at the joints of the genitals and at the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	The abbreviated process of pre-mRNA splicing involves the cleavage and splitting of the gene'hemes of the middle location along its length into proper pentamers.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	The line segment is made starting from the second rectangle in alignment with the line that should be drawn by the generations and extends until it reaches the white circle included within.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	E remove that, and observe, and take note so you don't record it; your removal should be done in parts until the entire thing is removed, while carefully listening to the sound of the removal according to what is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	A porous material allows water to pass through it due to its numerous tiny holes or spaces between the particles, allowing all the water to flow through completely.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	A proper incision separates between the two lips of the vulva and extends to both sides from the clitoral hood; do not touch the tissue that covers the genitalia, and make an incision in this manner as much as is feasible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	The lake holds all of its entirety within itself, mostly through its subtle depths, and if you don't carefully examine its mystery, it is not guaranteed that the water will return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Mays should extract the procezeys (prostheses) from outside of his ear at the time of your operation; later, when you have completed this section of the surgery, return to those and properly adjust the two lips of the genitals in suture so that they are just like the others as far as healing is concerned.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If the ear becomes infected with another illness, then cover it with bandages and remove the hearing device (hearing aid) through which the spring is located, and gently pull out the wax that has accumulated in the area as instructed earlier.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	When water is divided into two parts, the hours are equal to those of leisure; therefore allocate that part according to what you have done in the other half-time; and if it seems fair to you, do the work yourself.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And abstain from all flesh, and enter into the sanctuatur chambers submerged in oil or olive paste; and place another linen around any part of your body that you have immersed in wine and oil, and let this extend over two breadths; and then cover with folded cloths and pillows, so arranging them as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	The pattern of the pants should be made according to this design; the ends (waistband and leg openings) are sewn with wool yarn in colors as follows: the waistband shall consist of six bands, each a different color—three on one side and three on the other. There will also be two ties on either side for adjusting the fit, creating an overlapping design at the front. The leg openings shall have four sections (two per opening), with alternating colors matching those of the waistband bands adjacent to them. All stitches should be tight and uniform in size.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	In some cases of this hernia it is treated surgically by applying cauterization instead of a section. The procedure involves making delicate cuts with a cautery knife under the nipple, and igniting according to what we have previously described in which white tissue containing water is discovered; then proceed with further cauterizations as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	In the context of programming, an "ascii code" is a standardized numerical representation used to encode characters and symbols in digital devices such as computers and communication equipment. ASCII stands for American Standard Code for Information Interchange and was developed between 1eb9b and 1ebbd. It encodes 128 standard English letters (uppercase and lowercase), digits, punctuation marks, and control characters used to format text data in electronic devices.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	A prop is inserted through the tube, and it's ignited once all the moisture has been removed.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Extend the incision carefully, excoriate gently, and cauterize subtly using an ignited instrument; then proceed to make further incisions within your possibilities until all is removed; but take care that the heat does not touch you.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	This operation is considered safe and remote from blood loss, making it preferable to an open procedure.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If you experience any discomfort such as swelling during the extraction or incision time, or bleeding from the wound, please let me know what kind of discomfort you are feeling and how it is affectamet by the location. Then we will determine which type of treatment best suits your case based on these details.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	"Mays suffers from severe pain and does not expect the second operation because of its horrifying nature; now I am recommending a different approach through which you have shown to be effective, for what we've previously discussed regarding the meanings, it is certified that this hernia is aggravating."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Lahor's cove that you are to observe, lies upon an elevated cliff, close by it pierces the abscess at the lower part of its sandy beach, and pauses after penetrating according to the length of the object.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	S is the wide expanse through which all water flows.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	The fish rests on the edge of the rock and avoids that one, in order to swim calmly through the clear water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	A) "I pray that you may find peace within."
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	The opposition of the water intake is to the egress in that time you pierce it through there: and this is done only for the reason why the white panicle at the mouth of the spring causes inconvenience and prohibits the flow of water, when you put into the well a penalty or instrument by which the water is extracted from the droplets, whose form precedes; or adjust in the price of the well a small fine.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	In the flowing water returns and is gathered for months or a year later; then when it's collected, its hours are measured according to that measurement method, so that the illness may be passed over their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII: The Capitol Building - A Symbol of American Democracy
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	About Hiatal Hernias and Their Treatment
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	They say that in the section about this hernia, there is concern over possible harm to major organs; therefore, it seems to me that its removal would be salvific by far.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	Ah yes, I remember the operation and those persistent itches.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	I believe that the eruptions of gases in places where geniuses have composed and created are caused by various reasons: either due to an acute inflammaturgy being discharged into the geniuses' minds, or as a result of impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	E is the color of the abscess according to the color of the skin and it is not unbearable in pain, but it is a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	Foul lew is suffering from an abrasion on his skin, which has a dusky hue and does not seem to bother him much.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some wounds are caused by the friction of sails and rigging, or by inflammation due to those that have been so noticed in memory, or due to veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	The water that is produced by the breaking of arches is known for its dispersing effect on a boil when you apply it with bandages or compresses; and do not fear if it touches your skin.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	The one who has been wounded by an inflamed vein cannot be dispersed by any other cause but compression at the affected site.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	It might be possible that this particular species has been cut into sections and regarding the other pieces of meat; you should include the code number of the geneticists, and then place them on top of each other, removing everything up to the white line, and release the suspensory muscle of the vessels, tying them off and cutting away the suspenscuary portion more than necessary from all sections along with the tail pieces.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the fish hook is already attached to those bait balls, then you should carefully remove it and insert a new one there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	Whether it is adhesion within any case of cypher or between certain matters, at times concealed that you disclose entirely such adhesion and insert those in full roundness.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	May's birthplace is a coastal village where strong ties of community are formed due to its location. There, you can immerse yourself in the rich local culture and traditions that have been preserved over generations. The area offers scenic landscapes with breaththeming views of the sea, inviting visitors to enjoy the serene surroundings and connect with nature.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Once your operation is complete, immediately fill the woolen poultice with olive oil and wine; then apply it carefully to one side while allowing the other to heal.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV (64) is the Roman numeral representation for the number sixteen in our modern Arabic system of numbers, which we use today as part of the English language and other languages globeborn from Latin script. The word "capitol" typically refers to a building where a legislative body meets; however, without additional context, its relevance to Chapter LXIV is unclear. If you could provide more information or clarify your question further, I'd be happy to help!
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	The curacy of a hernia by Witt, also known as the Witt technique or tension-free repair method. This approach involves the use of synthetic mesh to reinforce the weakened area without placing excessive tension on the surrounding tissues, leading to reduced postoperative discomfort and lower recurrence rates compared to traditional suture methods.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A scrotal abscess involves an abscess wrapped in a covering that resembles a cyst of the testicles, and it causes painful exercise and walking difficulty on the affected side.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this illness, caution is required due to fear that has been previously mentioned.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	Emporium Cove, let'amo say in that second when they performed the first ones.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	In the event of pain or discomfort in your groin area, take care to keep yourself elevated and apply cold compresses periodically for relief. If there is swelling or inflammamo(n)t around the testicles, gently support them with a rolled-up towel underneath while lying down. To reduce any potential strain on your inner thighs, perform gentle stretching exercises that can help alleviate pressure.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	A prop-insides are plateaus located along the traverse section through the right of the veins within which the veins were discovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Upon the whole, I have extracted from archives only those details that are present in temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	In the event of a tie in that needle by two votes or more, and there is no provision for breaking such ties under local law, then the vote cast on the first date when ballots were received shall count and all others nullified.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	The effluents are located inside those chambers according to the diameter of the pipe, and outside that which is added from the excessive moisture and decayed conditions.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	A proper care prevents the outbreak of other diseableness in which you wish to be healed through those falling sperm cells that do not require either one or two germs because it is not harmful for this purpose.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	May's decision to remove all the veins could result in several consequences for his testicles:
Capitol .lxv.	Act V, Scene II - The Senate House in Rome
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The onset of this hernia occurs through a section that extends over the abdome's diaphragm from some muscles of the abdominal wall, causing some bowel loops to enter through that tear.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This break occurs due to either cracking or bending of these two materials for various reasons: impact, stress, noise, elevation from a severe cause, or appearance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of water flow, which extends throughout the pipe system, causes occasional leakages over a long period and not suddenly, leading to swelling inside the previous patchwork that holds four sections together.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The title of this manuscript is "A Treatamo do dores que vai nas pies" (Treatise on the Pains that Occur in the Feet). In this work, we find discussions about various foot ailments and their symptoms as understood during medieval times.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	In some cases, a small intestine hernia occurs when loops of the bowels get trapped in a fatty apron near the groin area and are called inguinal hernias.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some veins are affected by vascularitis, and some veins run through the flared bendings, where they get retained and cause great harm due to bad health; moreover, some veins result in terrible pain, mostly when they become twisted.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of these spice-related ailments, it is advised to use iron, as there's fear that one might avoid hunting in those areas due to apprehension.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The manner in which the operation of that disease commands evil to reappear within the boundaries of its conquest is by adhering to its return and elevating its influence over your mind among your thoughts, and increasing its power.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	To perform circumcision, clean the penis with an antiseptic solution and then make two incisions on both testicles using a scalpel or surgical scissors; proceed to cut along the incision through each testicle as per your desired length. After that, carefully stitch together the two lips of the slit following the pattern you intended during the procedure.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	The section will be based on the quantity that is available and it may be possible to take out of it some wood.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Here's the decoded message: "Cross out this phrase which I have left the code of the balls, in order that they be uncovered at once as soon as any party arrives."
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	In the blessed water of baptism, I entrust your testicles to God's care; in this holy water where a white circle marks the scrotum and is adjacent to the tail of the penis, e between the second circle, and absolve you from any adhesion that may be present behind the glans.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Parties to the agreement hereby agree to transfer ownership of the real estate properties in full, and accordingly extend this white letter on their left hands, raise their right hand upon the document, and instruct the minister to stamp it further until the transaction is fully completed.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	The circular reports say that there is no evidence of the enclosed object in the white cylinder.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you've found no cause for anger, then keep those feelings within yourself and let go of resentment.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	A suitable point to insert a needle is near the base of the penis, at the tip of which are two small tubes called the urethral meatus. Holding the shaft firmly, carefully insert four inches or so (four fathoms) along its length into one side of these tubes. Make sure to follow a cross-shaped pattern while doing this. Once you've done that, securely tape over the area in a figure resembling a cross; attach it firmamenr from two directions.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	A proper hygiene involves caring for the extremities of the fields and linking those firmly together to prevent any vessels from becoming irritated or damaged, as this will not allow them to transmit any harmful agents that could lead to an inflammamoble reaction.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	In another beef broth bath after the first soaking, remove any excess fat; and then take these two pieces of meat and leave as much as you need for the quantity mentioned in the recipe, removing completely the skin from the testicles, maintaining their round shape; cover them with lu warm.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	A proper portion from the body of each testicle shall be severed in a manner as described above, and such organ removed with care to ensure its sanctity and health.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Soak the wool in oil and leave it to dry on the beach; then spread out the fabric which you have shrunk (and some white strips are bleached, which you mentioned as a remedy for blood flow, because many times this causes them) and let the cloth fall through that by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the temperature is too low, ice formation starts to occur and water flow slows down within that area where it was previously mentioned.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	A proper care cures the one afflicted by the other disease until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Capital, LXVI
De hernia ventosa.	Wind hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, nobody knew who had been the one to undergo surgery on his heart.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The first physicians claimed that they had made such an incision in the hernia which I have described; the one being so close to the vessels above it, that they became facilitated by this proximity and then coagulated in their proper place within the environment of the abscess with the liquid causing this, into which the vessels fell.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	We shall fight the plague as instructed, so that it may be healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVI (67) - The Capital City and its Intrigues
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	The decomposition that occurs in the angiosperms.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some breaks have occurred in the strings, and indeed we've said, let's focus on this location.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	If a gene does not exist as the cause of any tissue to the gene; and if it did, there's little of it; and returns in all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the water continues to flow for an extended period of time, a crack forms in the cliff which will cause the rockslide into the valley; and as a result of the extension of the cliff, which we have already mentioned, excessive amounts of water causes it to soften, resulting in swelling at that particular point, thus causing the cliff to extend further.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The care of him was such that it is followed by the narration of his deeds as follows.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Some bruises are healed with iron according to this method: and if the illness spreads over its skin, press it between your fingers until you feel a crackling sensation while applying pressure along the length of three inches depending on the amount of swelling caused by hematomas.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	I'll enhance the security of the encryption algorithm by implementing an additional layer, such as using a more complex key generation method or adding more rounds of transformation to increase its resistance against attacks. Let me know if you need further assistance with this!
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	The patient should take the medication after meals and during rest in a quiet place, then wait for half an hour before standing up to avoid dizziness or fainting caused by low blood pressure.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Procedure to adjust the prominent locations on the end of a C-shaped fixture, aligning one with another through their seam.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Aply external compression to the end of the tube, and not within the entire cyclic process, nor extend the hours, or any other reason as you want me to know in the treatment of inguinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	Eupolymeia is the process that corrects deviations in bone fractures, and by inserting screws, it cleanses and restores the fracture within which there has been consolidation; however, if cement augmentation and not tension-controlled plating are used, there may be a risk of failure due to lack of stability.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cauterization is better in this case, as it is more conducive to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	In English, "Capitol" typically refers to the building where a legislative body meets. The most well-known example is the United States Capitol in Washington D.C., which houses the U.amoongst other important government institutions like the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	The relaxation of the scrotum muscles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The swelling of the scrotum in elderly men is relieved as the surrounding tissues are softened by age, and it is monitored carefully.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	And so it is necessary for the one who requests healing in accordance with his will, and thus completely focuses all attention on the gentle force applied over the natural skin, ensaturating lips to the seam of joining.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If the excess fat is too abundant at the beginning of the surgery, there may be three or four liposuctions performed and then closed with a suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	A) Appropriate dressings are used between the sutures, and appropriate care should be taken for other wounds to heal in order that they do not become infected.
Capitol .lxix.	Title: Chapter LXIX
De castracio.	From the castle.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	In our law, castration is excommunicated; however, in this book I remind you of it for certain reasons and there's no need to repeatedly mention it unless by two ways. The first way is that if the healer believes that a man needs surgical intervention when afflicted with an illness caused by castration, as medical knowledge dictates; the second pathway is because we often require castration of other animals for our protection and in the same manner as we do it to dogs, pigs, cattle or similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Castracium is formed in two ways: either by erosion or by cracking due to sedimentation processes.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In this place where water is drawn through the canal, it is required that we shall cut down the beast with its tail before those who have the power make them soft and limp and hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Apropriate prioritization of those within your family who have unresolved issues and require attention, without appearing intrusive or imposing yourself on them.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In Maysa Boriquén (or Castillo San Felipe del Morro), you can find the famous tourist attraction known as "Cueva Ventana" or Window Cave, which is located within El Yunque National Forest in Puerto Rico. This cave is formed by a geological fissure and excavation processes that have created an impressive natural opening with panoramamic views of the surrounding lush forest landscape.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Article III: Jurisdiction and Venue of Cases Involving Suspended Licenses
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	B) Those who live within these walls shall not be driven out.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	If the law does not address anyone's issue but only subtle ones that are over empty spaces.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	In this type of castration method, which is performed by hand, it's better to do so before adolescence as any issues with the testicles that cause the animal to behave aggressively would be avoided.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	A prop of the law shall be in place before it is amended.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX (70).
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	The Healing of Hermaphroditus (or the Curing of Hermaphroditeus in some translations) is a work attributed to ancient Greek writer Philostratus, although its actual authorship remains uncertain. This text tells the story of Hermaphroditus, who was originally male but transformed into an androgynous being after merging bodies with the nymph Salmacis. The tale explores themes of love, identity, and transformation through mythical narratives set in a richly detailed ancient world.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermafroditism in humans is characterebly divided into two categories: one where hermaphroditic features appear at puberty within the scrotum, between the testicles it resembles a female's labia majora with hair on top.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	Some veins of that blood flow run in the cord within the scrotum.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	The sperm of females is a species that resembles the seminal fluid from a woman to some extent, as it contains substances similar to those in human ejaculate and includes components like the female'amoeba (spermatozoa) and other elements that contribute to fertilization.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	Cobalt is composed of three species: two from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	"E is the remedy that you will find in those tightly-knit bonds within which one escapes from the burden of such employment, and the relief it brings to ease those other ailments."
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second specialty of male urology, which deals with the prostate and its secretions that go through the vas deferens and not curable or operable in Luke.
Capitol .xxi.	Capital, Inc., often symbolized by XXI in Roman numerals as it stands for the number 21, is a fictitious entity that may represent an innovative and forward-thinking company within its industry sector. With a focus on strategic growth and cutting-curosity, Capital, Inc.'s dedication to excellence has established them as a leader in their field.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	The lens and the eye become prominent due to certain conditions in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	"The lentigo fortissimo is a pigmented skin condition caused by natural factors, which can become distressing and deserves proper attention; in some cases it may be pronounced among women to such an extent that it spreads as widely as on men during copulation."
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	I request that you eliminate the redundancy of "the" before possessive pronouns such as "my," "your," or "his/her" in your writing.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	In the last instance of intervention, primarily through medical treatment, ensure there is no exacerbatation of blood flow.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	A prop of that area affected by the earthquakes shall be repaired as soon as possible.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Mays carn nascuda es la carn que n'és més que n'alls en el horribil del món en què entrar; fort lleu és eixit a les partides fora segons semblança de capellà (i per aquests, primerament anem a dir aquells afectats "malaltia cega"). Doncs coví que n'anem inscidents així com incidim lentement; cura-li aquella dins què es sia sana.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII
De curacio de alratica.	The cure of alcoholism.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	The woman's urethra is not perforated or slightly injured.
E es o natural o accidental.	"E is a natural or sharp note."
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	The accident occurred due to illness which had preceded, and that was done without proper or subtle deceitful intentions.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	In the presence of God, I declare that it is forbidden to kill a pregnant woman, or her limbs, or her highest point, or her lowest point; and strongly forbid strangling, hanging, and childbirth, as well as menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The understanding of that structure is made in regard to the boundary stone, if it appears marked, then it belongs to you; but if not, mark your corner according to what your deeds or documents say.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	May's lips are painted with subtle charm and allure, offering tender moments of joy and breaking the spell that surrounds us.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	P is the one who stops on top of the two lips, and he gently touches his tongue to indicate an intense kiss.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should lie on her back, with her legs extended and gently apart, allowing the thin object to be inserted just inside where she feels comfortable.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	The proposal includes the installation and maintenance of four lights in that area along with a pause button over it, to prevent any incident at the location until it is fully secured.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	The translated text from the made-up language seems to be: "May's syrup is thick and coarse; now you must add either almond milk or almond meal." It appears that this could be a recipe instruction in another language, but it's not clear what original language it may have been inspired by.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	Mayes is too lazy to fish, so during the hours he spends lying down, he imagines catching a large fish and biting into it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	These herbs that help stop the bleeding of wounds and stings, such as Achillea (yarrow) and Dragon's blood, as well as eggshells, are prepared in an oil base.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	He should administer an appropriate wide catheter to ensure the plaque is not excessively compacted.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	My tongue speaks those sweet words and spreads the light of your love.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	The proper cure is sought for the other healing process as well, in order that it may be restored.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Some cases in the birth of other animals also involve implantation as per this mechanism.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If you have swoleback pain and the cystic mass in the lower back is not causing any discomfort, then it should be removed using a suitable method.
Capitol .lxxiii.	In Chapter LXXIII of the United States Constitution, commonly referred to as "Capital", there are no specific provisions or clauses related to a capital city. However, it can be inferred that this chapter might discuss matters related to the federal government's operations and its location in Washington D.C., which is the de facto capital of the United States. The U.S. Constitution does not explicitly mention "capital" in any section or amendment. Most references to the seat of government are found elsewhere, such as Article I, Section 8 where Congress has the power to exercise exclusive legislation over a district (not exceeding ten miles square) that becomes the seat of the government. This is known to be Washington D.C., chosen in 1ebrary 1790 and officially established on December 1, 1800 as the nation's capital city.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	The healing of warts and the treatment for redness that affect women's genitals.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	In ancient times, people highly valued the small openings through which blood vessels run undernee that of those veins; and with such aged varicose veins being made as follows.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	In Latin, the text translates to: "Et in nomine Patris, et Filii, et Spiritus Sancti. Ego te benedico, mentes quae ad curationem praestantur, aquis non necessariis abscedere. Aquea specierum divisio et signorum ejusdem agitaretur. Itaque ea quae curacio suscipiunt et hae quae non suscipiunt."
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	I think that sometimes in life things happen beyond our control and we cannot change the feelings associated with them, at times those situations are not caused by ourselves.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those plants which are in the vicinity of the mother plant, to which they are grafted, are those that thrive.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	In the language of Latin, this sentence would be translated to: "Ecce quae tu metes feminae in maius frigida et ad pectus altum, atque armis acutis, eosdem insidias aquilam."
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	A fine powder is applied on those wounds of a severe bite from one of the venomous spiders, likewise using antiseptics and similar remedangs.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	He grabs his peas and puts them in the refrerizer for an hour, then he takes that same water out to drink.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of blood persists, those who fall in this battle shall be remembered for their bravery and past glories, as well as their strength and dignity.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Procedure for making apple and cinnamamoon doughnuts with honey glaze, adding a touch of warm water to make the paste.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	"If the sores are detached, they will heal on their own; if not, then attach them to both veins and apply scarification."
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Before planting lana, immerse it in either colander solution, arnagloza solution or guarraviere's mixture to make them sticky and then attach them to the desired location; before doing so ensure that the place is properly cleaned.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Maya's heart was filled with deep regret as she wondered if her decision to join that team would ultimately turn out well, considering what you previously mentioned in your last email.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The one inside who is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Title: "Capitol: CXXIV"
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Accidental intestinal perforation in a female patient.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	The various types of boils include skin abscesses, as well as cysts, blistering sores (ulcers), and inflamed wounds, along with other conditions such as eruptions, fistulas causing bleeding, pus-filled lesions, and furuncles.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	In the present Gospel of Luke (12:48), Jesus said: "From him who has been given much, much will be required; and from the one to whom they entrusted much, they will demand even more."
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	Here'n this treatise of wound-stitching is described the one you seek about types of stitches used for healing injuries and if you wish to know how to perform the operation of applying iron stitches, it lies within its content.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	In the case of an abscess that begins with pain upon palpation and swelling accompanied by fever, along with redness in the area and itching over the site, if you do not feel intense pain from a puncture but rather relief when soaking in warm water, continue to monitor for signs of improvement or worsening. It is important to maintain good hygiene around the affected area and consult a healthcare professional promptly for appropriate treatment and care.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	In the house of God our Lord, before the altar and all the people assembled to serve him in worship, let the woman present herself with an uncovered head, as a sign of her humility and purity; Let her kneel down on one knee, and rest the other foot upon the ground. Allow the veil over her face to fall away, revealing her countenance to all assembled, and let there be no barriers between her and God's people. As she stands before Him, united in prayer and supplication, may she find solace and strength through His divine grace.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	The midwife should follow the right and proper method in administering the instrument with which she performs the delivery of the offspring; the form of which will be determined by those causes that make it necessary.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	The court shall provide you with this instrument that you remain the offspring of the lady in question; and as long as it is inserted into her, it should not be more than the son (or semen) of the lady and no evil may occur.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	The harp is larger than the main person, hence you must place pillows on the texture of the main person so that it's forbidden to bring any instrument into the main person.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	The priest shall place the chalice on the altar of the table, above and to one side of it, so that the minister can easily have hold of the vessel and turn the paten inward so that its orifice faces towards the mother (the church).
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the sun sets and it gets dark, you can see the moon and stars; hours go by until you reach the time of your sleep at last.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the water is contaminated, avoid spending time at a beach with strong odors or oil slicks, and use sunscreen in areas where skin irritation might occur.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Eve pauses as she carefully removes the large wool blanket from over her grandmother and submerges it in water, where countless algae have built their home.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	B) Apply the ointment twice a day, as needed for pain relief within two weeks until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some washes involve washing the wool and silk fibers before they are cremated with water and honey, and then added to hot water in which natural dyes such as indigo or madder have been simmered for a long time, after which it returns to the vat.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the plague is contracted during early childhood, parents should take care to prevent its spread by following the curative measures we have mentioned in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Acts of Congress, Published by the United States Stat Book (1905-1907): Volume LXXV - Chapters 342 to 685, Inclusive. Contains laws passed during the Seventy-Fifth Session of Congress.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	How should midwives handle cases where the fetus is showing signs of distress and follows an abnormal presentation?
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the midwife knows in childbirth the signs and indications of a natural birth through her senses; when you see the woman straining to push out the afterpains and desires to smell the air, she is enveloped by it because at this point she feels the contractions over her. Quickly following are knowledge that these pains follow a natural pattern, and they are felt on top of her head, with the second stage being suspended or hanging from her navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Then let us speak of those signs, the hours when one's belly will become pregnant so that the embryo may descend lightly, and it shall be given to them a second sign, and they are cleansed from these excesses by good hygiene.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	The one who is not natural nor blameless, because when he drinks his vessel overturns and spills its contents upon his head, and the weights of it before him. Also, the mat on which it rests or thereabouts. He saw the head of his enemy, and the hands of his foe; he looked upon their bellies and turned them over on their backs with great force. Their figures appeared pitiful to him.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A wise and subtle midwife is required in all these cases to guard against errors and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	Indeed, the statue of David is considered a masterpiece and represents an ideal human figure in its proportions. It was created by Michelangelo Buonarroti, who sculpted it from marble between 1501 and 1504. The artwork captures the biblical hero King David at the moment before he fights Goliath, symbolizing human courage and strength in the face of adversity.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	Once upon a time there was a king who wanted to see his realm from above in its natural state; this sight was very difficult for him and often caused great distress, but occasionally he would capture it through the aid of a magic device, which involved mixing fennel seed with oil and vinegamoist.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	The small space between your teeth and the second molar causes that uncomfortable moisture you feel there. This typically happens when food particles or plaque accumulate in these areas, which are difficult to reach with regular brushing alone. To prevent this discomfort, make sure to floss daily and consider using an interdental cleaner or water flosser for thorough cleaning between your teeth.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	E presses the woman's abdomen until the baby is born.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If they don't want to be baptized, the woman should undergo a cleansing from the consumption of two substances - fenugreek seeds and fennel seeds.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And the Lord shall command the light and the air, that they be covered and make it sneeze in a certain condition; and in the mouth of them and their nose for an hour, such that no one could see through them at once.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If you tend to overeat at meals, hours later you may feel that you need to gradually reduce those extra calories eaten.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If May does not obey the interior command, she pauses and stands on one leg while lifeing up her legs, then gently brings the heel down onto the ground without falling during the process.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	"If the gears are not turned and the wheel is immobile, hours pass by as if they were carried away by the motion of the wheel or driven towards the woman's cloak from that place of equality, because it was there that their destiny had been set."
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The development of the embryo onto its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	As you lift the weights about your feet, taking care not to let them touch each other or the floor, and then gradually expanding the distance between them.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Mays' son shall enter upon the matters at hand when commanded by you; he shall express himself freely and behave as befits his station unless God forbids it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If there is no thunderstorm in the forecast that we have already reported, then your return will be to wait a little longer until such time naturally passes when it does happen according to weather predictions; because this event is expected hours later as per our earlier warning and developments.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	I forbid the use of any medicinal substances or treatments that have been mentioned before, including muslin compresses and dissolved gum, and strike it all into a mortar with good percussion, then apply lines of water using the female's womb conch. Apply to the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Beneath that heavy weight of water you hold at bay, until it can no longer be contained and your worries wash away.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	Whenever the games end, players often experience a sense of relief and take a short break to rest their minds before starting another one.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	The person in question should lie down and place a pillow under their knees to elevate the lower back slightly. They then need to gently massage just below their ribcage for one hour; during this time, they should breathe deeply through their mouth while slowly exhaling. After that, carefully remove your hand from that spot, and apply moderate pressure to the lower part of the abdomen. This will help relieve the bloating quickly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Narration of their dreams and memories.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	The woman shall be seated upon her husband's lap; and the children shall nestle against their mother's breasts with noiseless steps as they suckle at their nourishment.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Slowly cook the veal over low heat, and extract from there all the flavors that are left in its ear bones to prepare for the next dish portion.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the heat is not too intense, during these hours people will feel light and lazy, and gradually as it gets closer to noon they begin to move more actively.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	A prop is infringing on the rights of others and comparing small things bit by bit, while instructing the woman to express herself so that her feelings are heard.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The sediments of the late Pleistebefore period are found in one of its many layers.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	In the land of Lu, there is a special reduction technique for women; if you can't reduce that, then elevate the woman and make her go away.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If I cannot go there myself, hours will pass by while I ponder on its beauty and recall the events that occurred with great intensity, and so ardently entrust to you all those matters of which we are both aware due to our mutual conversations.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the child is born, after nine hours he will put on his swaddling clothes and study about the circumcision of Moses, and he should look like a natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to breastfeed him as soon as possible.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The seed of the plant is located in the center of its expanded leaves, which resemble two halves of a shell.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should have the care of the baby and gently rotate that little one by degrees until it is easier to deliver.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	In the countryside where they have recommended oil and vinegar, olives grow with aromatic flavor and rest during pleasant hours of sunshine.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	A witch commands the owl to fly slowly little by little until it reaches its destination and then she orders for it to land on that very spot where there's an oak tree, commanding it to lean towards the left; then the w지mand tells it to spread its wings. And thus she makes the owl sneeze under those conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Death of the fetus in preparation on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	How would you describe the process of applying a horrifying mask according to this method? Considering its impact on time, and moments where it clings tightly to your nail before being removed from moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	The vine is trained up the face of a south-facing slope; during harvest time, it inclines towards the sun, so that it'n not entangled and may thrive.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	In the fields between two pauses lies a mysterious cave; command the woman to bring some victuals with her when she enters, and let him venture out eagerly, if God so wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The phrase "Exitus geminorum, aut foetuum multorum" is a Latin saying that translamates to "The end of the twins or the birth of many others." In English, it suggests that some situations may have an unfortunate outcome (the deaths of two individuals) but can also lead to positive results (birth or creation of multiple new opportunities).
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	"I know that the two old goats were left behind, and a few new ones have come in their place now; however, this is strange to me as if it's unnatural, yet life continues."
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those, be they manifold or numerous, a second, and are separated by species; distinguish those among the language community in each of their respective umbilics, so that it occurs naturally as an evident evolution, and some varieties have evolved through non-laudable means just as is seen with natural selection.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	These difficult questions of childbirth have led us to the topic of artificial figures as we discussed earlier. Now, let'er cure these in a similar manner.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	The mother's subtle and tenacious water makes ease and cleverness possible; it brings about timeliness and wisdom according to its careful preparation for the nurturing of healthy growth.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of the process that occurs within the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Mays instructs the patient to apply this medicine as he commands in order to counteract the illness that causes skin lesions and swelling. He should then follow up with a bandage made of cotton fabric shaped like the leaves of myrtle.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	In the science of marriage, four factors greatly influence one's choice in a partner: appearance, personality, compatibility, and shared interests. Each individual places different levels of importance on these aspects when choosing a life companion. However, personal preferences may vary from person to person.
Capitol .lxxvi.	The citation "Capitol, lxxxiv" refers to a specific page in the book titled "The Capitol," written by Simon Sebag Montefiore. The Roman numeral 'lxxxiv' translates to the Arabic number '84,' indicating that this information or quote can be found on page 8ebonacci numbers are the sequence of numbers where each term is generated as a sum of its two immediate preceding terms, with the first two terms usually being 0 and 1. The Fibonacci sequence starts as follows:
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	The retrieval of the fetus after death.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	I do not prescribe the use of abortion to you in case we have discussed during the distribution of medication and it is not out of order, and you may decide on this matter if you consider that the woman is healthy and not at risk due to accidents which could cause her harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Lahora's Cove is a beautiful coastal area where the woman stands on the cliff edge with her head slightly leaning downwards and her arms raised high, as if in deep thought or contemplation of the sea below. The rugged landscape provides a dramatic backdrop to this serene moment, emphasizing both the power and fragility of nature.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The Minister held the duty of offering a portion or share that was tied to his office, for as long as he fulfilled this task, the benefit should not extend beyond its extraction from the subject matter.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	A proper way to moisturize the mother's mouth would be to use oils such as almond oil, and emulsions of flaxseeds and fenugreek seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	The woman approached her mother with the olive oil and honey mixture, and she helped ease labor for the mother during childbirth, then moved to where the umbilical cord remained after birth.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Then consider if the fat is ready to fall on its head, and now keep your fingers in the bowls of oil or on the neck, or mouth, or palate, or below the chin, or on the fleshy part of it, or on the ribs near the coasts, or behind the kidnecks.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	The translation of the given sentence into English is: "The deposit lies on the banks of the Lu River, near the Penteneel or in the meadows by the coast."
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	I have one wish and remove the curvature of it in that place which is between the said lines of the right side, and enter into my most convenient and easily fit them into any of those places we mentioned, until it reaches its destination point.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	In order to make two items of equal size and not extend beyond the required length, follow these steps:
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	His estate was considered the entire amount by all parties involved, as he wanted his inheritance distributed in accordance with the regulations of the local expropriation process.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Wash hands thoroughly with warm water that is at a comfortable temperature; if any part of the skin is retained, cover it gently with oil and apply this smoothly onto your palms before rubbing them together under running water.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the departure of the party is delayed, their hours shall be adjusted accordingly to ensure they stay within the designated location; and so it shall be done that throughout this entire period during which the party's departure has been postponamo.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	Mays is higher than the other one and cannot be reduced due to lack of flexibility; so often it's necessary to wrap around that, entering inside where everything is removed except for a part, then cut either at the junction with the seam or along its edge.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	In the first basket there are three apples, and in the second one there are two more.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the hilt of this sword is too thick or if it causes constriction in the movement, or if it's at the top of the water-filled part (hilt), then hours come when it gets entangled between the spread teeth and split the cap and extracts the water, or that breaks apart using an instrument called "alundat", which form will resemble other instruments in the hilt area.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	The apparent injury was as if by great virtue in nature: and the hours require that he incise that limb with an adequate knife, or take hold of it so carefully as we have instructed you; and apply pressure beyond the bones with the clamps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	The root of the plant is surrounded and protected by a cluster of leaves known as a crown; however, sometimes it gets exposed to moisture due to its contact with soil which has been drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	It's not too complicated or adheres to rules, sometimes you just need to move forward as soon as it's possibly safe in your opinion.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the discharge from your belly is purulent or watery, try to insert a finger into that area and drain some of the moisture present there.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	The translation from Asturian to English is as follows: "The spine overpowers the ribs; when it moves, it leans and directs them towards its mouth." However, this sentence seems unrelated to the original instruction about a medical examination of an osteopath. To ensure I understand your request correctly for an accurate translation within the given context, could you please clarify or provide more details?
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	In this passage from the French Arthurian legend "Lancelot," Mays orders Lancelot to strip and expose his belly and thighs, then lie on a table as she inserts an object into him that wraps around his body so he cannot escape while she performs her actions. This is likely referring to some form of medieval torture or ritual, possibly related to the Grail Quest in Arthurian legends. However, translating this text accurebecomes difficult due to its archaic language and lack of context. Here's an attempt:
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are not present and someone else is in charge, then first place your left hand on their shoulder; but if the mother's mouth is open, then you should place your right elbow to her forehead, and gently guide that towards the mouth, and try to insert one or two fingers as far as possible.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mother's mouth is affected by an abscess that threatens to harm the child, it should not be nursed immediately. Instead, ensure there are plenty of moist and fatty food sources provided for hydramoisture replacement.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	A applies creams and follows the patient with waters that soothe and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If you feel any pain on your side, please see a doctor as soon as possible to get stitches or other treatments we have discussed in the recent visit.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If water is not available, hours will pass in distress and despair, with no extraction.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	A coat of arms that does not show any reason for being in the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Once you have completed your research on the treatment of abscesses that can result from an infection, distribute this information through various channels to inform people about it and help them avoid complications related to the mother's condition.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	When one's blood circulation decreases due to prolonged periods in static water and the other remedy is not available, it is advisable to take warm baths or foot soaks to stimulate blood flow, perform gentle exercises like walking or yoga, wear compression stockings if necessary, stay hydrated by drinking plenty of fluids, maintain a healthy diet rich in vitamins and miner
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	In the village there lived a woman who was expecting twins in her womb; one child died while still inside her and another baby took its place.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that the apple has long been infected with rust; and it swells inside its skin, then begins to form brains.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	The patient has been under his care for long periods of time, and the illness is not resolved.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	I'm curious about some causes of strong attraction and the essence of them being a bone, as well as passing quickly through other days, and then becoming another bone again; this makes me too astonished, especially since there is not a bangle in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Well, you might consider that they were the bones of a deceased person.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then you shall remove the plague, and extract from it some bones; a woman present within its millennia-old ruins, approached in such a manner for long periods of time, reached by hand at last.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	You need not be afraid after the surgery; it's science and an aid in a field that allows the doctor to administer proper care more efficiently.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the juice.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Format for conveying the news of a death to someone' cua vida es troba afectada:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	In this version of Strunk and White's "Elements of Style," there are two great virtues on either end of two towers.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	This exquisite vintage wine boasts a more subtle and stricter character than its peers; it is crafted either from the finest grapevines or aged in sturdy oak barrelps.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	E is the width of each beam two fingers wide and its margin from which it protrudes one finger, and the length of each beam is one span and a little more; and at the joint place of two beams their joining places are located, whose length is greater than one palm and a bit less, and the width of which is two fingers or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	The two additional elements are placed intermediately in the mouth of the mother so that it is open at those times when you rotate the two prescribed pieces.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	French: Une autre manière un peu plus astucieuse et quelque peu évocatrice.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	"Faya the foot, made of iron or wood according to the shape of pliers."
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the edge of his two additional pieces, their length is as much as a handbreadth, and its width is twice that measurement.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And you want to cover the mother with those sheets hanging above her body, so that she remains undisturbed among all these objects.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	The master skilled in the art of using instruments shall assess your request according to the quantity you desire, with the value placed within the boundaries set by what is reasonable.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the illusion that they describe is known as a "visual" or "optical" illusion. These are images or patterns that deceive our visual perception and cause us to misinterpret what we see, often resulting in unexpected interpretations or distortions. Some common types include ambiguous figures (which can be seen in more than one way), impossible objects (like the famous Penrose triangle, which cannot exist in three-dimensional space as depicted) and motion illusaturas (images that seem to move when they don't).
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	En forma de imperativo, el verbo "emplear" se conjugaría para indicar que alguien ha sido empleado. Aquí está en diferentes tiempos y personas:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of friendship that contains the great captain
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	E is assembled as a dental forceps where the jaws meet at the extremity, and some variations are made long like this with forceps according to this design, so that it has teeth just like succeeding ones which are inserted and shaped accordingly.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	In Catalan, "pauca amistad" translates to "few friendships" in English. The term "pauca amistat" could refer to a limited or small circle of friends that someone may have within the context of their life or social interactions. It suggests not having an extensive network but rather a select few close relationships that are important and meaningful.
Forma de unci havent una spina:	A form with a spine. In Spanish, "forma" means shape or figure, and "con una espina" translates to "with a spinal." However, when referring to a book-like object that has a spine (the part holding the pages together), we would say:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of a pine cone with its two scales:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Mode of forceps in which the ends are rounded to allow for gripping without harming the baby's head: The Simpson Forceps. These obstetric instruments feature a design with rounded cups or blades that safely cradle the baby’s head during delivery, preventing any injury while facilitamoble vaiama de nosa familia.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Shape of a trapezoid having two equal-length sides, whose caps are parallel:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Two lathes are tools used for shaping and smoothing wood, metal, or other materials. They consist of a long handle called the spike or stave, with a sharp-edged blade known as the cutter at one end. The user swings the lathe in a controlled manner to remove material from the workpieune. Here's an English description:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	Those musical instruments are exercised, and when mixed with various spices that have been prepared by the artists, they become more intense in their performance and need to be consumed in larger quantities by people.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	In the presence of those tools that are already there, you must arrange them as the necessity for such is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Removal of the secondary spermatocytes.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	If the second tooth is retained by a child at the time of teething, one must command those who retain it on their own behalf under this condition, that they blow air through it and press with their mouth over its opening and against its nerves; if so done, then healing follows.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	Sip on it slowly, a few hours at a time, and pierce the fabric with a needle to create a small hole near where the cup joins the lid, then place the herbs in the mouth of the cup. Do so like chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, lavender, arabic incense, cinnamon bark, and clove for a calming and refreshing experience.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	These herbs or some of them are submerged in water during the tide and placed on the fire afterwards.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	A wrap the end of a straw around your mouth and place that inside which the liquid will go to the curvature of your mouth.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	"As the evening breeze started to blow and the second hand was let loose with velocity."
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Mays if this cure is not effective and he does not feel better, then you should command the midwife to immerse his left hand in sesame oil or olive pomace, and gently place it on his chest; when she finds the second pulse, take that little by little until May feels warmth. The mother will attach this to her breast as we have instructed, and once the second pulse is found, carefully remove it gradually so that the mother does not squeeze too hard.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Cove that the change be made easier and more efficient on both sides.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	A proportional adjustment in the amount of attraction, it will obey and avoid adhesion.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother's mouth is a cover-up, we have repeated the diagnosis and treatment with herbal remedangs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If Mays is not completely cured of all the causes we have recommended, she should keep watch so that she does not exert herself too much while recoveramoent takes place; rather, ensure that what has been prescribed to her be taken orally and directed towards the woman's condition, along with appropriate therapy and the four-part remedy. For this will cause her to perish within twelve days, dissolving and being completely cured in due time.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	Mays quan se poyreys is of great danger to the head and stomnch, and can lead to illness; therefore, it should be administered through aromatic fumigations or suitable remedies depending on the condition.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	The Ancient Alcus of Mayes is also a subterranean smoking process for nuts and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Method of instrument through which a woman is partially anesthetized and retains her menstrual flow and secondary secretions involves the use of a dilation and curettage (D&C) procedure. This medical process is usually performed under local or general anesthescuation to ensure the patient's comfort during the procedure, which includes cervical dilatation followed by scraping the endometrial lining using specialized instruments called curettes.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	The sky is blue or it's a bit cloudy.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	C is to be stopped at the root and the wide part over the fire, and the smoking process is to be stopped in the lower areas of the chimney.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	Then, drink that which you wish to be consumed; the smoke of this second one as well.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	The care of the child's bottom is not perforated.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	As a child, I had always been fascinated by the secrets and mysteries of nature's hidden corners, which were subtle yet powerful.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	The woman should go to the tailor and ask him to pierce that particular area there; if not, she may use a sterile needle at home but be sure it does not touch her earlobe.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	A potpourri of scents fills the air, and he applies that balm within which no sin remains.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	May is afraid of getting too tired, so she takes breaks during the treatment using a needle for several days, and stays near when her child wants to rest.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	We advise patients who have an abscess or boil on their buttocks to undergo incision and drainage; hence ensure that the healing process is promoted, and apply the aqueous solution we mentioned for cleansing and using aluminum powder.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	The treatment of the fistulas I left behind.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that develop in the lower abdominal wall are related to hernias or diverticula, which occur either at the edge of a surgical incision or within the space of one of its parts.
E es una fistula o motas.	F is a type of pipe or hose.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	The old wound is moist with white mold and subtle decay, some patches are infested with these piercing fungi.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those wounds are so well-known for their healing power that they often remain open until the right time for closure occurs; some even take advantage of a bad discharge and preferably get healed from those wounds caused by injuries.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	So of those fistulas which are located in the space penetrating into the bladebag and the urethral groove; and it is also of those penetrating within the joint between the vagina and the anus.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	The passage you've provided seems to be discussing a procedure related to the placement of an indwelling catheter, specifically in relation to conditions where it is penetrant (enters the rectum) and non-penetrant. However, there are some unclear elements in the text which might require correction or context for accurate translation:
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	In that moment of temptation, it seems as if hours pass by while you find yourself subtly drawn to the allure of something like metal or horsehair inserted into your ear canal.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel any itching or discharge of stool, blood, or wind gas, then as we have said, know that they are not penetrating; if you experience this, be aware and consult with your doctor.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladvee or near to the base of the ureter, the probable consequence is urine leakage from that area and the forbiddance of food until the place is properly healed through medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Mays is not permeant beyond the knee or into the bone causing intense pain in the circuit area; if it does, signal that he tends to get there again if not completely tightened and causes intense pain in the leg's circulation route; and that this remedy provides temporary relief only, and is not effective for treatment nor consolidated ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those cases of penetrating fistulas, there is no healing by themselves, and the healing requires the effort and diligence of skilled surgeons whom you should consult with.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In the land that is not permeable nor old, healthy and fertile, I hope according to what you will advise me, and as soon as I have arrived and tasted it.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	The disease known as Jaundice typically affects those with liver issues and results in elevated levels of bilirubn within the body; symptoms often include a yellowing of the skin, eyes, and mucous membranes due to increased plasma turbidity. To diagnose this condition, one should seek professional medical advice and conduct appropriate tests for accurate detection.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If someone is sick near your mouth, now cover what you're saying with your hand.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you sit in your chair and feel as if something is trying to enter through it, another liquid that you feel between your skin and the surface, be certain that this sensation is penetrating; and therefore do not dwell on it, for it does not promote health, just as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, many birds that are healthy in their own home nests get sick outside of them.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	E, of the medicine for which he hopes to find relief, you should lightly cauterize subtilly according to the extent of the fistula, as has been described; and insert that ignited into the fustula until it reaches around the rim; then iterate thrice with a needle or three times entering those pieces that have just adjusted, which appear like feathers of a goose.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Aponeurotic desmitis is a condition involving the inflammamoin of aponeuroses - the strong sheets or layers of tissue that connect muscles to each other and to bones. These sheets become swollen, which may cause pain and limit movement. The treatment often involves rest, ice packs, compression bandages, elevation, medications for pain relief (anti-inflammatory drugs), and in some cases, physical therapy or surgery if the condition does not improve with initial treatments.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If a stone gets stuck in the colon and is surrounded by flesh or fatty tissue, causing an obstruction, it should be removed surgically to allow normal bowel movement again. The procedure typically involves making an incision near the blockage site, carefully separating the surrounding tissues from the fistula (abnormal connection between two body parts), and removing the stone through the created opening. This restores the natural pathway for waste elimination.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	The traditional clogs, with their hollowed wooden soles fastened to the handle of an axe, were not assembled from reeds or grass stems for any specific reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	Mays be the flux of blood that occurs between you and your operation site when you undergo those surgernies, how often shall it occur and with what level of urgency do certain instruments require cauterization using heat or acute medicine; indeed, a well-adjusted application of heated instruments is to be applied, as well as the extraction of any exsanguinating fluids.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	A proper care should be taken when wrapping those bands bound by edges or loops of thread within that place where the band gets attached, and over time this will protect the wound from a hard skin forming as they grow and strengthen.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	Certain medications have a stabilizing and healing effect, as well as preventing recurrence; when the appropriate time has passed, you are cured and do not fear relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If you have a rectal or anal fistula that extends into the wall of your anus and is long enough to reach the surface of your skin, it may protrude through the opening of your buttocks and cause discomfort.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	If you both have been tempted by infidelity at some point, and it has almost happened between you two, it's essential to open up a discussion about trust and hope for the future rather than operating in secrecy or with guilt. Communication is key here; being honest with each cuñado may help repair any damage done and strengthen your relationship moving forward.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The main reason for cauterizing in one of three manners is as follows: (1) to cauterize it according to what we have previously mentioned; (2) to achieve its healing by which you can interfere with the ailment, and not cause any harm so that it does not go outside the line contained within the leg, and occurs over the disease-related wound of the patient's will; or (3) to lengthen it gently and clean out anything you have extracted from within, as mentioned before, by trying or using another sharp instrument, and then purify any fistulous tissues that are in the extraction inside where you can pierce them. Finally, strive for the restoration of all parts cauterized, if the disgusting pus does not solidify, openly rupture the external fistula on the lower part of the leg and let it heal more quickly by removing the disease-related wound.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	In some cases, the fistula can be closed by following this method: when you insert the needle into the fistula, and it is at the junction of the urethra with the skin around the surface of the penis near the base, hours before attempting to perforate the distal end (the tip), using a preparation syringe similar to this shape:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	He entered that faithful envelope of your fields or surroundings, and the prophecy tries to enter into the womb in which lies the secret of love.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Mays carefully pushes the point of a bone into your buttock crease, gently inserting it to such an extent that you feel as though the tip is entering your body; then slowly withdraw the tip and align both ends together, intertwining them for one or two days. As soon as you sense the bone penetrating deeper into your flesh, proceed with caution by sliding the inserted end so that only those parts of skin are pierced where the two extremities meet and connect.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Article I: The State shall take appropriate measures to prevent and combat traffick cuanto sea posible, within its legal framework and international obligations.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, it will become penetrating in any manner you treat it, unless there is something at the site that prevents it from entering your hand while sewing; and then do as follows - if possible without harming it further, place a small tube within to allow for drainage until healing occurs.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatum spinum, through which the fistula is made open, has an acute curvature on one side and a non-acute angle on the other, so that it does not fit inappropriately as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Amendment of the lawsuit in cases where fraud runs in the proceedings.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	There are two main methods for waxing your eyebrows: using hard or soft wax similar to candle waxes, and those that have the consistency of warm honey which then sets like beeswax.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	Of those small and big ones, and that his blood runs from those seasons and it's one, and most of them, and outside the buttocks, and in the extremities of its limbs.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But the others that were left had very little moisture, of which water with a hint of yellow or just a drop of blood continued to flow; and it was according to the color of the liquid.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	The translation of the provided text from Old Catalan to modern English is as follows: "The cure for that which is within the evil soul is that you command the malice to be extingled and expressed within it, so that the sparks appear in your presence."
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	And so you shall not lift up your hands or wield those that I have placed upon thy hand, and into the depths you shall plunge yours as well.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	May you take needles that have not been exposed to the humidity of those wool and its softening, then rub them with a cloth or cotton or lamb's wool, and coat them with your tallow before inserting them into these points. Powder some fine powders over the insertion sites so that they are prepared for cauterization; or cauterize as explained in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	A is responsible for those who are under its care and must ensure they receive proper healing.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the dog's anal glands do not naturally express themselves, they may experience discomfort and irritation in the area that requires attention. Therefore, it is important to cleanse them with water from their bowl or any other source of water whenever necessary for proper expression.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	Mays' remedies for hemorrhoids include the following methods to allecuimate pain and promote healing:
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	"The one who carries out this surgery should use a needle and thread to suture the wound following these instructions: take a spool of thread that is coated with an appropriate substance, insert it through the eye of the needle, and carefully pierce the swollen areas on both sides of the wound. Then, while maintaining parallel alignment with the wound's length, bring together the two outer edges using the stitches made by the thread. Securely tie off the thread after looping it through the eye of the needle and carefully remove the needle."
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	In the first place, let there be wine for all at once and not just for some of them; that the surplus may flow from those pitchers. (Matthew 14:15-16)
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	In the valley below, two roses were quietly blooming on a vibrant green lawn; and one gently rested upon the other'n petals as if whispering to them.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	A prophecy is contained within this box; and how it heals, either with ointment or another remedy by which one becomes healthy.
De curacio de fistulas.	The treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Mouths of cracks resulting from cracking or natural wearing.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	E. In cases of severe antiquated wounds and on the surface of that medicine, apply with care those remedanciums so that you rub those areas or use your ointment within which are made humid fatty substances and have been stored for a long period; this prohibits them from becoming consolidated. Additionally, make sure to cauterize those wounds in order to prevent any further inflammation.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The Holy Mass, as the first and most vital form of worship, is to be celebrated with great zeal, surpassing all other prayers that may seek healing and forgiveness; for it's through this sacred rite that we are cleansed from our sins.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The cure of Alzheimer's disease is still a mystery.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	It is known that alabaster, in fact, is not white but rather a soft gray color, resembling the hue of ivory. The stone appears this way throughout its entire body and more specifically on portions closer to the base where veins are present. This detail provides relief for those who may have concerns about the material's appearance.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then indeed he shall be cast into the waters of the pool and kept on the forceps or under an arm-lock, and then pulled out by that means.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If you plunge, then you should follow what is mentioned in the same chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Mayer's nevus is a small, slightly raised, round skin lesion with visible veins in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The essence of your love is to extend and immerse yourself in that which you cherish within your heart.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If it burns, apply water immediately as we have instructed; you should either use a flame or an acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	The statements you provided are in Catalan, and they translate to: "The reversed and non-reversed ones were affected by the same instrument I play." In response to your statement, here's a possible continuation or reply that maintains an academic tone regarding eradicating methods, perhaps referring to pest control strategies as 'instruments':
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Mays' ant formica is a small, furry bump on the surface of his skin, and when he scratches it vigoraturally, it seems like ants are biting him, and it spreads around the area.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The cure for lungworms is to administer a sheep or goat feather pipe and make it strong, then place that over the mouse nest in which you want to apply the treatment. Rotate your arm around the tube inside with the remedy placed within the circuit of the mouse nest. Position this over the chest area of the animal and eradicate lungworms from its lungs by using this method.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	Si I vols aprendre a fer una canela de arame o d'acer segons un modelo especícu, aquí tens quelques passos bàsiics que podres seguir en catalá. (If you want to learn how to make an iron or steel curling iron according to this model, here are some basic steps you can follow in Catalan).
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The stitching on the underside of the sleeve is subtle, soundless (as it's not pierced), wrapped in such a way that one might overlook its removal and unraveling.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	If the ant is cauterized as soon as it appears in the cautery of Aethyl, at the capital of Cauteria.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The instruments that I manage are to give Christmas.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some cream puffs are made from Argentan or latte fondue or malleate; and some cream puffs are made with those instruments small and large according to those which you administer, so that the one who is administered in the care of little children is small; and of those whose bottoms are fluffy or soggy, the cream puffs for those are petite.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The phrase "La forma de Cristero grand i pauc" appears to be in Catalan, a Romance language spoken by around 4 million people primarily in Spain. When translated into English, it means "The form of the Cristero large and few." However, this sentence doesn't seem to make much sense in either language or context; perhaps there is some confusion with terminology or an error in translation. If you can provide more information about where you found this phrase or its intended meaning, I could assist further!
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the syringe needle is too long to be attached to the bag, so its length does not match as shown in this diagram; therefore, adjust the tube such that it aligns just like it's depicted here.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	In the lower extremity of aforesaioned organ, which is inserted into the anus and is deaf (i.e., not sharp), there lies a small stone like a lion, subtly placed; in one side of its skin, there are two pits, and on the other side, there's another pit, with its size corresponding to the thickness of the skin based on the roughness and slightly larger than that.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	Let S be the bag in which the bladder of an animal or sheep's wool is stored, and its size should be a handful.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	The hole is drilled for motion purposes and then turned around; the space between the holes must be as wide as the largest drill bit used.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	A practitioners should administer the treatment at a distance far from the patient's body, and wrap those parts properly. Then place the bag on top of it, and when placed there, press gently between two fingers with firm pressure. Apply this to the affected area every time as instructed: The quality of applying depends on whether you warm up the medicine in the bag according to the tolerance level of the ailment; ensure that it is neither too cold nor too hot.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	The sickness lays its head upon the person's back, and raises their shoulders as if they were lifeless or carrying a load; then they apply an ointment of oil or almond paste or fenugreek mixture to the afflicted area. Next, they insert that into the rectum with ease, and the minister squeezes out enough material twice forcefully for it to be completely evacuated in the patient's bowel. Finally, the sickness is removed from the rectum.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine does not cause any discomfort, take as much as you need; and if it makes you sleep for an entire night, then there is no worry about waking up during REM (Rapid Eye Movement) sleep.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	In cases of severe abdominal pain and vomiting, apply the cauterizing stick only after the person has been healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If a child has hemorrhoids or boils on their buttocks, the treatments could include subtle creams and ointments, among other methods for children whose conditions require such care. It's essential to consult with a pediatrician before starting any treatment to ensure it is safe and appropriate for the child's age and specific condition.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Treatment of the Plague.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	In the diagnosis of waterborn illnesses that are free from charge, I hereby describe the treatment for those using herbal remedies and medicines according to the prescription.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	I believe you are saying that the plagues vary according to when they occur and depending on the circumstances in which they take place.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	The reasons why moles appear are due to so intense a shock from stones or incision of space or cotter, impact from a thrown object, hammer blows, or something similar resulting in such causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	And the wounds that are on my body so appear as a scar above the head, or neck, or breast, or abdomen, or thighs, and similar marks to those of limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	In his famous work, the "Canon of Medicine," Avicenna (Ibn Sena) provided recommendations for several diseases and outlined rational thought processes and guidelines concerning other ailments as well. His comprehensive medical encyclopedia has had a significant impact on both Eastern and Western medicine.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	In the beginning of Chapter One, we shall examine the basic principles, while in the beginning of Chapter Three, the recollection of complex formulas will arise during the discussion of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	When encountering a simple head injury that is not a fracture, consider the following: if it's just bumps or bruises and there's no severe pain, observe for any signs of infection such as redness or swelling. If these symptoms are present or if you have concerns about potential complications, seek medical attention immediately. Extraction of blood (bloodletting) may be considered depending on the quantity and type of bleeding, particularly if it is minimal. However, always consult with a healthcare professional before proceeding with any treatment.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	F is the removal of false witnesses from the contracting party; and observe diseases of repletion, dysentery, and indigestion due to heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	May's dietary restriction excludes any kind of meat or alcohol; portions should be smaller in comparison to the main course and not close to it.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	Pause on the beach if your skin comes into contact with sea anemones or jellyfish tentacles that have caused a burning sensation or in water where there are irritant substances.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	May be certain that the oil patch on the sea is still there, after some time has passed since I last mentioned it to you, if my blood hasn't changed and the air has not affected the dust that I previously advised you about in small detail.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	The air has indeed changed since then; the days of silence among those involved have passed as healing begins to take place.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	The rain is either small or insignificant in terms of pressure and appearance, and if the lips are not fitted with pliers, then at times adjust those ones using a stitching method as I will recommend for that type of stitching.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	The plague bacillus is discovered in the body and not held by it as a heavy burden, but rather as a small suspender, thus embedding itself within the plague and restoring flesh near the bone, commanding the disease to be cured with nourishing foods in which vitality grows: seeds and grains like themselves, while being composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If your toenails become overly thick and do not adhere to the sole, you should clip them off completely until they reach healthy proportnace again, and then keep up with regular maintenance.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	In these cases of bleeding, determine if it's an artery or vein from which blood is flowing and not separated by medicines; if you find the uncut one, then incise that spot with a spatula or lancet; and if necessary to prevent further blood loss as advised, cauterize within until bleeding ceases.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these pests are small and insignaturate, then the cause of their presence is negligible; hence you sprinkle this powder over those areas, for when consolidated by that air they will change those places.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	This is the recipe for Dragon's Blood Poultice:
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	The strict prescription for that without using pillows and lying down requires this to be done in such a way so it is not strained, because it's not supported by the medicine within which healing occurs.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	A drop of water makes its own way through alone, when it is not among rocks and sand of gold in sight.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	The storm has ceased over the great plains where it is necessary that its pause continues on those areas and they are narrowed down, along with their floods having just been drained, which haven't seen any changes in the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air is altered, mostly during summer time, this prevents those wounds from healing properly. Instead, apply to them what we mentioned earlier - rest upon the high branches (high places), or place a poultice of wheat flour and water with honey on it that provides relief; similarly for other treatments once they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	Maya has a small leg fracture and is in pain; hours ago she had it examined at the hospital.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	You should seek immediate medical attention for skull fractures that are potentially life-threatening.
De las plaguas del col.	From the lashes of the poppy plant.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	The plague outbreak in the village was not different in terms of medication from when it occurred at the top, but there is a difference in severity.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	The branch of the nerve is being cut or artery, which one it's a nerve and not in its usual place, so avoid inflammation caused by that sharp fluid; just as you know how to apply vinegar and similar substances on wounds instead of causing damage to the nerves.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	The nerve does not pause over any cause of total fear, because the substance of the nerves is sensitive and the continuation of it reaches the brain, which is the most vital part of all body parts.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	The water that is used for medicinal purposes should be as clean and pure as possible; thus, it is washed with cool water twice, sometimes adding a few drops of rose oil or non-rose oil during the second rinse, and then rubbing down according to this method along with herbal poultices.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	The rain is heavy, and the hours bring healing like surgery or seals her lips, and appropriately cures that painful wound within which has been healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	The rain'n fall is either deep or floods in the low section pastureland; hours later it penetrates there and reaches May's overgrown spot.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	In the case of a cut on the leg where an artery is involved and blood flow occurs, it should be separated or tied off if necessary to stop bleeding, or cauterized if needed depending on the situation at hand.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	May be advised to extract all the pus from the gland or completely, and save the veins of the neck, later you adjust the edges of the flap over the groin area and do not touch that; then pull it towards its natural position, and place it firmly with sutures for several days. Later treat it with ointments which promote healing and stimulate tissue growth to ensure proper recovery.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague should happen in your city, you may keep it for as long as necessary; and if there are fragments of bodies, take all those that belong to them outside. And whatever is not properly buried, let it be removed before the plague subsides, and separated from lu so it can decompose and its remains be scattered.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	The recent ash from the volcanic eruption has coated everything in a fine layer of dust, as recommended by the authorities.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If Mays is on the beach and suffers from a fishing hook injury, she will be healed by applying hot water to the affected area, after which it will come back in her hair with oil applied to her scalp.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From the blows of an axe or similar weapon made between the shoulders and chest, or to the head, neck, stomach or ribs.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of the sea or a bell's sound, and how many times you feel its depth, then consider also if from the storm there are winds blowing when this illness takes hold; at that time be aware that the storm can be deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If you are in a low place and the flood is recent with your blood flow being weakened, take breaks during the first hour afterward, and avoid anything that may retain the blood deep within or return to your heart causing illness; instead, rest for some time on an attractive louncuement, but remove those two veils from your eyes at daybreak.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the ointment is not at your dispospert, take a break in the orifice of the rain puddle near it so that you can suck up some moisture; and let the illness sleep on the puddle to make its fluid run off from there.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	After three days or more from the onset of plague symptoms and without worsening into severe spasms, convulsions, strangulation pains, or other good treatments should be tried; then attend to that which has been cured by this point if it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If May's healing period is justified and it has always been allowed, take note of the hours that have already passed since a fistula was made; then cure her accordingly by your means.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	The bruise is either due to a scratch or a cut; it's simple on the surface of stone or wood, cures with that warm water mentioned before by stitching if it' cuisine, or with powder if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	Mays held a great value in the gold, yet he did not have enough strength to extract those pieces, hours then took hold of the machine and tried to separate those parts, if they were separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If the tides are not separate, within two hours the waves will break and the extraction of ore is abandoned.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	The other types of accidents affecting the limbs, where there is a swelling in cure, are the water-induced swellings that we have mentioned before.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From the plowings of the belly,
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort in the stomach can be intense, mild, or intermittent.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	There are several large veins or nerves in the brain stem that cause a significant interruption and increase the complexity of its seams, making them more potent and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is easier to make in another way, and the reduction of its influence proves even more difficult, unless one interferes with their affairs shortly afterwards; for it soon becomes concealed and thickened, making external involvement hard.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best method to reduce bulk is migration; since in that case it's not difficult as reducing volume in those two species mentioned earlier.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	The four types of abdominal wound sutures are as follows, but the techniques used for these sutures also apply to other types of surgical incisions on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	In anatomical terms, the suture that primarily connects other bones is known as the coronal or frontal suture, which unites the frontal and parietal bones of the skull. However, it only articulates with itself in the sagittal suture by joining adjacent parietal bones.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	Here is the revised version of your text in English, with corrections and improved clarity:
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	When the storm is small and there's a certain cause for it in the atmosphere, making it difficult to reduce that disturbance, at times this happens through two methods: either due to the weakness of the disruption as we have said earlier, or when the bubble returns to expansion because of the cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	So let's see how this translates to modern Italian from Old Occitan (also known as Provençal):
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	In some cases, I have found herbs that possess astringency, and they are better than water alone for the resolution of inflammamation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Thus let the ailment be resolved, your body shall hydrate with clean water which is warm and sweet, for through it one easily assimilaturess the nourishment that brings about health benefits.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	Mays expresses his regret for entering this therapy and hopes that it will only be temporary. Soon the disruption will be divided by a small tool with which he inserted screws, causing them to expand.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first cure of copper is better when it's owned that it hasn't been dried out and isn't exposed to the need or deprivation of drying.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	The instrument takes the shape of a lyre.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The first slice of lu tart is acute, while the second one is not acute; and the edge (extremity) is subtle, and it is not due to a thinness (subtleness), but rather slightly obtuse by a bit.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	The rain has been intensified and rivers are overflowing; therefore the damage is extensive according to its nature, in its own place, if possible on land, as this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	Mays quand la disruption est ample, elle se trouve dans la partie basse du ventre; parfois cela provoque douleur au dos et pause les cambes postérieures qui sont plus haut qu'elle; si c'est dans la partie haute du ventre, alors tu peux avoir mal au cou et pauser le menton plus haut que d'habitude.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	If the disruption occurs in one of the two parts of the body, pause your understanding and consideration temporarily so that the affected area in which the problem is present becomes fully aware as compared to the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	I want you to manage the large lakes and small lacks.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In the small plague, pause water that is part of your preparation; and ensure the minister (priest) between your most trusted ones holds it all throughout his mouth, while he reveals the secret seal to another due to some reason or other.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suturing technique: one that takes the needle and makes a knot according to the width of the wound; and as close as possible to the edge of the torn tissue. Thread it once (or more, but do not pass through both ends of the loop), while avoiding piercing from both extremities of the suture line, including the two opposing edges where the sutured tissues meet, until you have inserted the needle at that point on the opposite side; by this means you have made four passes.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	In the field of mechanical engineering, when dealing with threaded fasteners and bolts in a circuit involving a screw or bolt, it's important to consider the following factors for proper tightening and assembly:
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The fine needles subtly pierce the skin, while the thicker ones somewhat cause discomfort in the fold; and therefore it is advisamo to opt for finer needles that balance between subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	In the cove where the needle is placed at both ends of the cord, it's done so that the flesh isn't severed excessively and that the stitch appears neatly aligned with its closure.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	In cases of non-progressive wounds along the suture line, it is not necessary to restrict mobilization for consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	A proper technique in knitting is crucial for ensuring that the edges of your needles do not lead to ill effects while you sleep, and it also involves placing hooks across the purl stitches expanded throughout both parts, which secure the ends of the needles; then place those sheaths inside such a way that you know the plague has been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of sutures with needles are suitable for small wounds, up to the point where you use a single or double needle in the suture.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Mays' second suture is similar to yours; it involves administering the four extremities of the body - both arms and legs - in one go, with a needle that is wrapped subtly yet firmly.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	How much will the needle have penetrated these four extremities if you start from that portion where it is inserted, so that the injected fluid rises to the uppermer part and so that the suture line follows a second suture of fabric which encloses the wound?
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	There is a pause between each stitch of the entire piece of work.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	Here's what the suture says, my dear friends.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	In a certain region, there was an accident involving a man whose intestines were affected. The incident resulted in the disruption of the majority of one palm (inch), and it occurred around two lengths of the small intestine. Additionally, the mesentery, which attaches to this organ, was also damaged. Consequently, I repaired the damage that had been present for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The storm was fully settled within the span of fifteen days or so, and crops that were damaged were restored and healed; it continued to rain heavily for some months afterward, but eventually returned to its normal conditions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	E was the only one who had not become sick; and by a miracle found that he knew of an oil, which was in a place where no ointment nor medicine could be obtained, but I applied it to his wounded back for three days straight, along with constant bathing in cold water from the mountain spring, which made him well.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	According to the description of Paulus, there are two types of own surgical sutures.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	B starts by threading the needle through one end of the string and inserting it into the opposite hole at the other end.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	Then the needle is inserted into the ear canal and, following its length and direction of the entire body, the tip of the instrument used (usually an otoscope) is placed in the outer opening; then the needle from one side is made to penetrate into the other side at the opposite end.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	The E don cum tu will make the needle pass through that slit; hours you shall let the needle pass through another veil at the edge of the hat's departure from the forehead to the departing temple; and place the extreme end of the hook on this latch, then insert the needle into the other extremity of the departing temple to the forehead.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	The given text seems to be in Galician or Portuguese, and it's quite difficult to understand due to its complex structure and uncommon word usage. Translating this into English requires some educated guesses about the intended meaning. Here is an attempt at a translation with a focus on maintaineing as much of the original intent and context:
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	B begins to move towards that side and turns around so the needle of the compass penetrates, and then moves back up the arm on that same side, while turning outwards the extremity which is at the other end, touching the needle with it; and moving away from there, the needle of the compass returns to its original position.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Water flows from one valley to another, and water from the first valley enters a second valley within which you will measure all of its flow according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this stitching method is that you sew the skin with a catgut suture, which involves making cuts on one side of the tendon's end, and then taking another fold to complete it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second variety of suturing technique proper is called "Gualia," and it involves the use of silk threads. This method consists of cutting that particular segment where you want to administer medication, then adding any necessary substances to the appropriate part according to its nature. Then, apply one end of another thread (like a needle) at one extremity and the other end near the mirrored point at the second extremity, complejting as instructed beforehand.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You place the needle at your eye level on the horizon, pointing to where you want to go from here, and then make it cross that point inland within that hourglass shape; and as you rotate the dial, let the needle re-cross those two points of the hourglass.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	A roving eyes encounter those creatures, and may they penetrate whichever ones from the initial group enter the other area on either end of the view or elsewhere in the opposing direction.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This type of stitching is better than the common loose stitch, and it's a technique I remember discussing before.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Galileo
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	The Maize Leaves Remedy, Suture of the Stomach Rectified by Two Needles: When you interfere in these matters with any individual, begin as an intruder using a needle to pierce where it is needed, and allow that penetration to enter the other side along the sutures corresponding to those who previously punctured their chests.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	In the human abdomamen, the suture of liver is more difficult than those in other abdomen locations.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The judgment of the medicinal properties of a cactus is considered representative of other cacti.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The main cause for when you succeed in obtaining the recent plague at his sanctification before that altered air strikes it, and reduces its bulk and cooks it thoroughly, then leaves it to rest on a warm carmine cloth.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	AI, the air has not changed the plague; pauses occur over that castle's foundations which are present within your domain and make stone hard while weaving threads of fields, and they become compacted and watched; and with such care as in the healing of other plagues contained where it is cured.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If Mays does not have the medicines at hand, wait until it is about to get worse, then start dressing the wound, applying ointment, and change that twice a day, as you are taught, while ensnuring healing, without resorting to other medicine when the sores are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague may spread to the main members, now cover your eyes with a wet cloth of quality or rubber and stop it on the circuit among the wires that are between the antennas and discharges.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If someone feels a pain or rotting in their bones, because of the many times it has been so lately, that man becomes a stiff black viper to you; mostly if the swelling reaches the bone and exits as an intense piercing into its core.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	The sap from that which is in the thick bark is much healthier than that which comes from the fine barks.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	E is the difficult healing of the organ called "gigantism", which does not receive relief from plaster that covers all of it; and this is due to the large multitude of veins present within it, as well as its immense size in those areas, and the complexity of that structure, along with its proximity to nerve tissues.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	The raw material of the sea is fabric, and you obtain it freshly; then soften it according to your integrity by reducing the sheets while manipulating them.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	Mays si ai passat a l'espació i ja he fet verda o negra, aquell moment on tu estrangis aquesta amiga sobre el lloc que es denigra de ti, per tant que vagui fluxos de sangre, quar en la tela son veines i arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	A prop-inside the water body that lies opposite is another ridge, and there are two extremities of the hanging part from where the flood started to recede so you can build a dam on its side in order to divert the flow of the river.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembering the disasters that happened in the village of Budel.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	The transplant of the appendix in small children is sometimes possible to restore it to its original location at home, as we see with the child who had been hit by a stone and was suffering from pain on the left side of the stomach; the problem was an old and formed fistula. This condition can be treated through dietary changes and lifestyle modifications.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	As per your request, the following is an English translation of the original text:
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	You must seek to obtain the location that has already been confirmed, avoid travel during bad weather and accidents on your journey; also avoid any poorly maintained or dangerous bridges and roads, and exercise caution while bathing and drinking in natural bodies of water. Always be careful when crossing streams and engage in physical activity as appropriate for your health condition.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	They performed various experiments to determine how many flies land on the plate in a given time, and it is small enough that you can be bound according to this method: and so you take big yellow jackets; then you carefully position the two lips of the fly trap over the mouthparts of the insects as they open up. As such, when they settle onto these parts, snap them shut with your hands, since they adhere and do not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	After the first rainfall, ants begin to forage again and do not stop creating new colonies as they multiply in number according to the amount of available food.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	"He who reduces that which is excessive and removes the unnecessary from his home shall not encounter any harm or disaster."
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is possible that the bud scales of certain fishes, which resemble needles, can be used in a similar manner to those of animals. You should take the tips of these fine scales and remove them from their flesh. Once cleaned, wrap each tip with the scale itself, then thread it onto sharp needles. Finally, sew together the dissected parts using this method.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	In this knot-tying technique of sewing, it is not just a matter of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	The sea is vast and wide, mostly if it's in one of the subtle straits, as hours are not rough but rather subtle, and it's not a healthy place to stay for long.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	The treatment of an ulcer and a fistula involves several steps, which can vary depending on the underlying cause and severity of the conditions. Here is a general overview of the treatment process for both:nulcers (peptic) and fistulas:
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	The entire body and skin affected by old sores or ulcers that do not heal quickly and stay open all the time in any limb, is universally called a fistula and we call it venous disease.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	According to the truth, remorse is an internal sensation, hard and white as chalk, without pain yet accompanied by numbness just like grief's heaviness; therefore not called a 'pang', that is, sorrow.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	H es in Alcu's Homes Humid, where you can find a brace; and often the humidity is abscinded within some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some forms of this moisture are greasy, and there's little of it, and it's thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	In the division of diseases and their treatments, the abscesses that are not healed by natural means nor are they a simple wound but rather due to one or more causes such as: among these one is either due to insufficient treatment; or because of intentional harm caused by someone; or between the ulcer and the lips there is hard flesh preventing the growth of healthy tissue; or it's due to foreign objects within it; or the matter that fills it up is of poor quality; or the medication used for its cure is not suitable; or if there is corruption in the region, which may lead to pestilence; or by the nature of this area around Saragossa, where digestion and healing from abscesses are difficult and delayed due to their natural properties.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Ja, vejam todas as causas, seus sintomas e os remédios correspondentes para a curação das doenças na classificação médica.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	I assume you're asking about the complications related to a fistula, which was created due to surgery on your arm.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	Fistulae that affect all limbs of the body include those that reach large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the pelvis, or the blad cuff, or to any of the ribs, or to one of the spinal vertebrae, or to any such composition as is found in bone and flesh; and among these are those that have a proximity to the principal member, likewise.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Then let it be said that according to this measure these fistulas are among the diseases of difficult healing and not curable by cure, as well as they involve great labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	There are no fissures of such depth that one cannot reach the locations mentioned and have faith in their healing power; moreover, you should try to achieve knowledge of them by attempting either reading or ironing, and if the fistula follows a straight path, pursue it as well.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	When dealing with a tortuous vein, May should first attempt to insert the fine needle gently; as lead tends to have the lightness of its body elevated and bent by its tortuosum nature.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	"The presence of severe symptoms in an arteriovenous (AV) shunt may not necessarily indicate that there is something seriously wrong with the treatment. However, if you are concerned about your AV fistula or its effects on health outcomes, it's essential to consult with a medical professional for appropriate advice and guidance."
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	In the Crestina dialect of Romanian spoken in Oltenia, a region in southwest Romania, one might say: "Căsătoria Cristeriza le ureche pentru sos urechi, că humiditatea prin care trimițăs acea vizește de-așadar mai mult decât altele și curge de la lor."
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	A more refined and methodical approach to ascertain if you have a distant or inappropriate fistula is by examining the following signs: multiple openings are present, it's located on an unusual area of your body, and there may be symptoms such as persistent pain, discomfort, and inflammation. Additionally, consider the possibility that this condition could have been caused by previous surgeries or injuries. Consult with a healthcare professional for proper diagnosis and treatment.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	E cum tu aves estat sobre totas aquelles causes, lahora's va a la curacio segon confiança: i és que tu consideres si l'hora es fistula apparent o en lloc salíssima o llunyana de junctura, nerviu, arteria o vena, o d'un dels locs les quals io tei i dic.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	The Lahor's dry cyst that is spoken of in the nativity lore, and its water which lies within this filtration along with corrupted flesh, as well as fluid arising from the orifice of the body, or excretions and appearances; heal those afflicted by it.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	The abscess is of great depth and length; then drain it as much as possible into the opening that leads to your throat if feasible, and apply remedeby wrapping with acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula which you have understood by means of a ferrule.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	In the field of medicine, it is believed that certain herbal remed cuppies can cure all water that has been contaminated with acute poisoning within a specific period of time during the onset of the fistula infection.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	A prop restores that which generates healthy flesh within, so it may be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If the wound is not healed in time, you should consider cauterizing it as soon as we've mentioned before.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	The cause of the fistula is due to an artery and you should obtain a certificate confirming this; then inquire about whether it has healed according to your previous report, unless any vascular or nerve complications occur that might affect a major limb as previously mentioned.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	Mays si the flesh is your sincerest discovery and it is in no way corrupt or black, then at this time you shall enter that place where corruption has taken hold; and with utmost care approach that area within which it should be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not pure and cleanse yourself accordingly; therefore you realize that you have not yet achieved the complete eradication of corruption; hence you diligently and carefully work on cleansing and purifying it once again in the most thorough way, thereby restoring its original strength.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	If it is true, then I am; if not, may you know that this corruption exists in the deepest part of the body, which has not yet achieved it, and therefore do not be disheartened about that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the affected bone is small or it's within your capability to do so, now you may gently pull it out using fine forceps that are appropriate for this task.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If indeed you wish to extract all of them without any reason weakening your strength, then go ahead with the extraction.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	In case of any wetness causing discomfort, and without fear or mistake, at that moment digs into those wounds or flesh if here, and liberates the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Mays si te a tu nun est preparat per oses del teu hore, les hores pausa sobre l'aigua que espolsa l'aigua aquella, e deixe aquesta entrar que aquell aigua és al medi ambient de aquells ossos de carn i de llament, i guardeix l'aigua on no sigui consolidada ni estigui constrinxida la secció en què tens inscidiat durant teva obresa.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you fear, stop on that submerged spot above thrice covered in oil, or the submernge in ancient Egyptian oil, or among other oils of green color; when they shall burn those garments and bones will be separated by fire, and from these attachments it is exhumed.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	May's is very much like the flesh of Christ or Caiaphas or such similar figures, and whenever its image becomes corrupted it solely affects its face, so that nowadn't that blackness and corruption befall it entirely behind which lies the truth. However, by preserving its purity, peace is restored to it.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Mays si aquo qu'es corrumpyt és una gran partida, i la corrupció ja ha conseguit la medula del os; allò ahora es causa necessària de clausurar aquell i tot inscident entre el lloc on es parvinguda la corrupció, i allò en cas d'acollir aquell entremes de fet que estigui consolidat.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Here's an example of how you could rephrase the text in Occitan, retaining its meaning while adaptamoble to modern usage and including examples relevant to your work:
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A man of around thirty years old experienced pain in his knee, and from the bad part that moved away from the body to where the material reached the knee, there is an issue with extensive abscesses, and it's not caused by any external factors.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Thus the treatment duration is extended for those with errors on the skull within which the apostema occurred, and accumulation of waste materials; the heating period should be slow, during which a boil pipe is inserted into the abscess cavity so that all pus can drain out.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	Therefore, the poor man had many problems with his hands for two years and couldn't focus at all in those jobs until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	I saw the shade of dark and those materials that flowed from it through great crevices; already everything belonging to that man was all stuffed up, and its hue had turned into a yellowish tint.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	So then you entered one of those chambers and reached the doorway.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	I embark on an exploration of the mysteries and secrets, in order to uncover those that may emerge from all corners of the world.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	In this horrific incident within which I discovered one of the bones and disassembled it, only to find that the corpse was decomposed, moldy, and tainted; by then, part of the coffin in which it had been placed had also rotted away.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	Indeed, my dear friend! The water that I discovered and prepared is crystal clear. It's as if every drop sparkles with purity. Let me tell you about the fascin cuestiones de la historia y cultura que se esconden en cada gota.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	In the year of our Lord, it is not in my heart but that corruption which has been severed and restrained; I have already dealt with it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	The phrase "E aprop pausegui la restauració de la plaga amb l'ús d'una teràpia consolidantor pel llarg termini, i no es consolidad" translates to "The restoration of the disease using a consolidative therapy over long periods, and it is not consolidated."
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	In the late 15th century, Europe was primarily focused on exploration and discovering new lands, leading to continuous growth and development throughout the continent. Portuguese sailors were at the forefront of these endeavours, embarking on voyages that would change the course of history.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	I am sorry for the appearance of that corruption; therefore, I have been instructed to perform its cure and restoration, but it has not yet been restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	Therefore, you learn about the other remedy and do not give up trying to involve it little by little. Carry on restoring it until you restore it entirely; then extract its essence for yourself, and properly restore that which has been restored somewhat with medicine, and it becomes consolidated strongly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	The sun is not required in the operation of light and shade sections nor for the frequency of the louvers' movement or the scarcity of the tolerance of light and fear of its death, as it has an excessive evaporation during a malfunctioning syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	So be it, in good health and entire well-being, may nothing harden your heart; and may the disposition of you be made well within your body, and may virtue return to you; and may you converse with your dispositions without adversity or harm on any account.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	Mays if you have taken the measure of that bone and know its length according to this manner: then take a piece of thread or yarn, and stretch it along the extremity of that bone. Then pass another thread slightly thicker than the first one through both threads. Wrap this thickened end around the place where you want to cut the bone, ensuring the meat is pulled away from that part. This will help guide your saw so that it doesn't drag on the flesh and allows for a clean cut at the designated location of the bone.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	During the pause, a fork and spoon are left on the table; when you reach for food, it is not forbidden to cut up the rotten meat.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	The cove that the grass has grown over little by little, because it is in the cavity of the bone erosion and does not appear at first sight to the toucher, but soon another hole appears nearby.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	When the bones have rotted and do not stand out, one part of the continuous continues with another, and the decay is either in a certain location or throughout the portion of flesh; then it becomes clear that all parts are decomposed completely; thus, the saw cut from the first part where there is decay will continue into the second part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	F is a small fence according to the rules of corruption as we have mentioned.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	Corruption is at the junction; it gnaws at that junction and cuts off the line from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	If one is dealing with continuous intersections of two hours, it's not in their reason but in their mind to overcome the temptation of corruption.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	Whether corruption is in the heart of man or woman makes it difficult to determine; however, one should try to ascertain how it manifests within oneself and then address that issue by following any method possible, making sure it does not cause harm or discomfort to others.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	E sapientes quae scissores et serrae ad incidendum ossa secundum situationem ossium, itemque praeparatio eorum, item gravitatem, subtilitatem, magnitudinem, minutam, durem, raritate; ut cives expectabunt te quae omni spei operationis instrumentum ad hoc opera aptum.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	The act referred to in this document signifies your extensive knowledge and experience regarding the instrument you've described; how great your study is, long-lasting, and comprehensive of these methods, and as a witness to methods for treating illnesses, which at times you have employed what is suitable for alleviating all symptoms.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	Indeed, at the end of this chapter, you will find information about which instruments are categorized as percussion and stringed ones that may cause interference or disruption with other musical devices. These include but are not limited to drum sets, cymbangs (cymbals), tambors (timpani), xylofons, marimbas, vibrafons, bongos, congas, and various string instruments like violins, cellos, basses, guitars, harps, etc. The extent of the disruption caused will depend on factors such as volume levels, proximity to other devices, frequency overlap, and more.
Forma de serra:	Serrated form or saw-toothed form refers to a pattern that resembles the sharp, jagged edge of a saw blade. This term can be used in various context cuestiones, such as describing landforms (e.g., mountains with steep, serrated ridges), architectural details (such as roofs or gables with a zigzag pattern), and even certain types of leaves or shells that exhibit this characteristic jagged edge.
Forma de autra serra:	Another term for "serra" in Spanish is "sierra." In Portuguese, it can be translated as "serrote" or "serração." These words refer to a mountain range with jagged peaks and ridges, similar to the definition of a serra.
Forma de autra serra:	Alternative wording for "forma de otra manera":
Forma de autra serra gran:	Another way to express "gran serra" in English would be "large mountain range." Here, "gran" translates to "large" or "big," and "serra" refers to a chain of mountains or a mountain range.
Forma de ray:	Shape of a ray: A ray in geometry is a part of a line that begins at a particular point (called the endpoint) and extends infinitely in one direction. It can be represented with an arrowhead on one end, showing its infinite continuation. In diagrams, it's often denoted by two points; the first representing the starting point or endpoint, and the second indicating the direction of the ray.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the vertex of this ray follow the form of a star-shaped spike, and the points at its end are arranged according to the pattern of the alphabet's letters.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	In Spanish: No se trata tanto de una concordancia como de un caso en el cual las cabezas de los sustantivos (que no están bien acoplados) chocan con frecuencia cuando se corrompen, o sea la boca es muy ancha.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	La forma majeur de l'altre :
Forma de razori menor:	Menor forma del rasero (Razor's Edge): La forma reducida o simplificada de una teoría, concepto u opinión que se presenta en un nivel básico o fundamental. En este contexto, el término 'razor' se refiere a la "Navaja de Occam", una regla epistemológica que sugiere que las explicaciones más simples y directas son preferibles frente a las complejas cuando ambas pueden dar cuenta del mismo fenómeno. En esencia, busca reducir el "rasero" o campo de posibilcuiones para llegar a la forma más sencilla posible.
Forma de razori lat:	Vizualizacija njezinog polja je prilika da se diže na godina. Sređena bijela zora otvara svetlobu i duhovni pregled kroz obzorne poreze, a početak dana napuni svojim bogatom životnim čarobnjakom mladinje koji se vodi u nju.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The following is an alternate form of the Serrated Edge: It consists of a large and mighty iron arch with sharp teeth, and the blade end sharpened to a fine point like a dagger.
Forma de lu:	Mode of lighting:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	La forma con una curva cóncava es aquella que se dobla hacia adentro, como el interior de un tazón o una copa. En términamoen geométrico, si se traza una recta a través del segmento central de la figura y esta línea corta al menos tres veces más área en su parte externa que en la interna, entonces se considera que tiene concavidad.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Una forma más sutil de expresar el mismo concepto podría ser: "Explorando alternativas con gracia". Esto implica que se está considerando otra opción, pero lo hace de manera elegante y cuidadosa.
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Alternative ways to express the idea of "extreme curvature":
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Miniature scraping technique attempt:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Mode of insertion into which the forces act on the bones.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Una forma alternativa para la frase en rumano "Forma de inscisori autră minor" sería: "Un mod de a apara cu o lamina mai mică". En español, esto se traduciría como: "Una forma de cortar con una hoja más pequeña".
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of an other scissors; this image resembles a star, and the tip is like a saw, and it appears in various places according to bone ratiangs:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of the root that corresponds to the ratio of those bones which are pierced:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The leaf's tip is pointed and sharply tapered.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	The forests of iron in India are likewise subject to deforesting due to reasons such as grazing, logging and mining activities.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	The extreme sport of bone locking involves securing skeletal remains using intricate locks and mechanisms, often requiring complex puzzle-solving skills to open them. This niche hobby combines elements of cryptography, mechanical engineering, and anatomical knowledge for a thrilling challenge.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The swelling of the limbs may be due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic one; if you have treated that disorder with medicines and the treatment does not relieve it, or sometimes the disorder extends to the member which cannot be reached by any means, then at this time you should insist that this member enters into contact with the swelling so that the ailment can dissipate, thereby avoiding death or harm that is greater damage to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The name of the plant to which this event occurs is Belladonna, also known as Deadly Nightshade or Atropa belladonna. It'n a member of the Solanaceae family and grows in temperate regions across Europe, North Africa, and Western Asia. Its berries are dark purple or black when ripe.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	If it were the case that the cause of certain poisonous afflictions is similar to those caused by a scorpion sting, seafood allergy, or sunburn, we would handle them similarly.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If you crack or bruise the extremity of this finger, insert it for several hours and do not give space to infection so that it gets inside your hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If you are granted access to the flame of knowledge, then dedicate your hours to its warmth, and do not provide space for corruption that may ignite in the flame's hearth.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	The clock strikes again, hours slip through his arms inside the cage at the junction.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If one passes the time overlooking corruption and evil acts, then misfortune will befall them; administering another course of action in that regard is a matter of virtue's quantity.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	In appearance say as much as the disease affects the said limb; then cut into it within one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	As he falls on the slope of the hill, his hours are spent entirely at its foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	May's swims into the dolphin, hours later you descend to the meeting point of the river.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If the sin has reached its completion on earth, then at that time it is not punishment but release, and absolution of the evil unto death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method for cutting or tying the limb is as follows, whichever you choose. You should have a ligature at the part where you want to cut or tie it, and make another ligature above this location; extend the first ligature towards the ends, and extend the second ligature on its side; then separate the flesh between two ligatures so that all the flesh is exposed within a span of skin that should be opened entirely. Then proceed with cutting or tying as desired.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	Article IV - The parties agree not to disclose any confidential information received from the other party during their dealings and ensure that such information shall remain strictly private. Moreover, each party commits to indemnify the other for any actual damages or injuries caused by breach of this confidentiality clause.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Mayes decides to stop the bleeding when wounds occur, applying pressure and bandaging them immediately, or pausing as needed for some powders that restrict blood flow; then promptly return to your medication once it's completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The member who is guilty of theft shall be subject to appropriate punishment, and until he/she is deemed rehabilitated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	Once upon a time, there was an unfortunate event that occurred to a man while he was at his place; the incident you are referring to happened due to a burn on his arm caused by accidental exposure to fire during a controlled burn process.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	From that very moment of its birth, the entity was tainted with a deep-seated corruption that permeated every aspect of its being.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Then that man prepared himself so that you would not feel the pain of its cure going to the limb because of the intensity of the great pain and irritation it had caused him, and he inserted that staff into the joint, and it was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For many years, I was afflicted by that horrible temptation in the words of this holy book.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	Therefore, I shall be released from this burden and reflect on the excess of water in my body caused by taking too many medications; it does not affect anything else but instead leads to going to another place within myself where that matter ceases to exist.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	The wind blows over the sea of light and I do not wish to cause harm with its excessive abundance; moreover, I fear the ignorance of those who have lost sight of goodness, for the evil has become too entrenched.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	The man who was cursed by me has returned to his homeland and brought back news that the entire house has been prepared and healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	In this narrative, I have not been prompted to focus on any particular aspect of the disease or its implications but rather to provide an overview based on what is known about this condition and its meaning as it has been described herein. Accordingly, my aim will be to present a comprehensive account that addresses various dimensions related to this illness while remaining faithful to existing knowledge and interpretations.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Treatment of constipation and the quality of bowel cleansing with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess forms in the cartilaginous members and in the space of the abscess it is prolonged beyond which a collection of pus occurs, and then breaks open and perforates; as it becomes void of its contents so that it seems to have disappeared, and the skin above it is so subtly thinned out, such that there has been no further corruption or imprinting in bone, nerves or ligaments. It is called a sinus, and not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is extended before infection reaches any member, those are called abscesses and not fistulas.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment of the wound is that it should be thoroughly cleansed this way in order to prevent such decay and especially when it becomes delicate and is done with gauze, making sure it does not stick to the place due to its decomposition.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the congestion remains and does not turn into an infection, and if the pain persists, then at this point you should consider using a suppository enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	E is such that in regards to the sinus, and if it lasts long, and the head pain that results from this is intense, an Egyptian medicine should be used as a remedy; which consists of oil, vineglete honey, zynar extract mixed in equal parts. These ingredients are placed into a vessel and heated over a fire until the mixture turns to mush.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Adopt the water from the liquid that is necessary and dissolve your medicine in it; then irrigate the affected area with it, and stimulate the orifice there, and leave the medicine inside for a period of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	A) Take some of that cream and apply it to the affected area, avoiding sensitive areas such as near your eyes or mouth; let it remain for several days until the infection is cleared and the skin has healed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Some patients are prescribed an enema with warm water and ash when it is not appropriate to take this medication orally; you should take the ashes of vine, mix them with water, and then insert that mixture into your rectum using a suitable applicator, making sure to administer several doses at intervals throughout the day.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	The sickness has no tolerance for Egyptian medicine or ash water; at this time, the patient should be given water and honey mixed with cumin seeds three times a day, along with clay enemas containing water and hebrew mixture of honey. Honey possesses healing properties and cleansing effects, while the wine helps in adherence to the veins; especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness in the blood vessels.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And thou must drink some water and then apply the salt to the sore area, causing it to become better over time; use a cleanser on that region when it is ready, and in the meantamo partake of water which makes thy flesh firm again.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	The substance E is used as a solvent for the oils of final distillation and also serves to dilute that oil or various medicinal preparations containing properties such as those mentioned in this chapter on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the anus is too narrow to receive the enema cannula, slowly and gradually widen it with a small iron rod, then pause every now and then when wrapped in Egyptian oil or Basilisk unguent that has been warmed up.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the incision is wide, you should also stitch your lip together and reduce the amount used in the bowel irrigation.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	The holes through which the blood flows from the upper parts to the lower parts are elevated at the points of departure; therefore, during dry periods, that is in the lowest places where the blood runs close together beneath, when the blood congeals on the bottom of veins, it will be generated.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible for you to dry the wound within the environment of your home, please prepare yourself that we will perforate (puncture) the affected area so as to be prepared for a course regarding its treatment and ensure there are no foreign objects lodged in your arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	In the context of medical prescriptions, "E" refers to a generic drug that is equivalent or therapectively interchangeable with another medication (referred to as "d'altra banda"). When considering consolidating these medications under certain circumstances, one must weigh several factors:
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The surgical drape shall be of such large quantity that it facilitates communication for the entire area; and appropriately, the forceps are inserted into the right orifice of the sinus, creating a slightly wide opening just enough to fit through the orifice of the sinus. Then extend another layer of gauze from its sides according to the amount of openness, and place it above that for a position far from the orifice of the sinus so as not to obstruct the drainage of the fluid overnight by one day.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	The one who stands above the abyss of the gulf, keeps watch at all times with only that torch which is lit in the hand on the bridge.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	PER QUE SAPIAS SE AQUÀS QUÉ CORR DE L'EL BRAÇ ES MOT O POVÀL, O ES DIGEST, O ES NO-DIGEST?
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	Now carefully examine the site of that wound; if in it you feel pain or swelling present, and whether there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	When your medication is prolonged in this manner and you notice that the material applied on the orifice of the vein remains stuck, or forms an adhesion, remove it after one to three days, and when removing the patch, change it for a new one and reapply the ointer.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Mays beware of the subtle spread of space viruses, for it may take time to detect their adherence; healthy measures must be taken to prevent them from multiplying, especially in individuals who are prone to generating carcinogens or those in whom such a development is counterproductamo.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinus is not adequately irrigated and remains blocked, you should understand that this cavity does not adhere; and if its adherence is delayed and the cause is prolonged, adjust to exsiccation of medicines in due time, and if these medicines are humid in substance and nature, dry them as with an excellent decoction when it becomes superfluidity from zymotic addition.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The herb called vervain is the last one to be harvired; take of its finest leaves and dissolve them in rose oil, then rub it on your skin before going outside, and apply that as needed.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And so you shall perform the action as follows, when the mixture is ready and properly thickened, and use of lu; or if you take myrrh and aloes resin, and essence, and sprinkle it all over the honey which has been poured into the pot, then pour water over it and stir that within your palm; then pour that same mixture onto the previously thickened heather, and sprinkle on top of that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Some watercress leaves and celestial lilies (and the celesthem lily) and wheat flour and centaurium, adjusting these simple ingredients or combining them, grind those together and sift through a strainer; then polish with honey which has been thickened.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the swelling is prolonged and it does not heal with this treatment, you should know that the corruption lies in the inner part of the limb, and already makes inquietude in the bones or other hard members; then treat the abscess as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	The curative effects of the scratching and rubbing on nails, adding a finger digitally, and cutting a section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaritium is an abscess which was left by the removal of the wax from the said finger or toe, and it greatly affects the other digits as well; when prolonged and its treatment is neglected, it may be a cauterizing blister (caut escaldadura) or corns (callosities), which cause the destruction of the nail bed. It also severely damages that entire part internally and spreads to the bone causing an unpleasant odor; eventually leading to the extremity'nail becoming discolored, turning it a dark hue.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	So when you have the ointment that we mentioned in the division and do not let your carelessness cause delay, at once insert it thoroughly to expel all excess removed from the bladder, then carefully cauterize the wound with this ointeon as a seal is beneficial therein.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is your own and the gland is healthy, then take extracts from the gland and start to slightly prick that part of flesh with it while exerting some pressure; afterwards, push deeper into the flesh and cut it easily, using corrosive medicines within which are completely purified. Take care during this process not to harm any vessels in the area.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	The corruption has already begun in the bone, now cover it up and extract that part of the bone, for there is never a time when it isn't contaminated.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	When the rot and corruption begin to appear in its being, often you can see it growing within one of the seeds according to its memory, and while still unripe.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	Mays if the nail becomes bruised or injured, and there is intense pain in that area, at first you should consult with a doctor who will numb the affected area by performing a local anesthetic injection. Then the nail can be trimmed back using sharp, straight cutters. Be careful not to let the cutting reach into the skin below the nail edge; if this happens it could worsen the pain and cause excessive tissue growth in that location afterward. Apply a warm water compress to soothe the area afterwards.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May's adjusted text: It is said that this creature lives among the ruins of many human dwellings; it is quite fat and covered in flesh entirely, or at least its bones are well-preserved, or there may be some remnaturals remaining.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	In the realm of silence lies a hidden doorway; it is the birthplace of you in worlds beyond these words.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The one that is born in a palace will not necessarily be bad; and the one who is born in humble origins can become great.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	Among those who are not carnivores, the section is negligible and it's up to you whether or not to include that in your diet plan.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	The healing process is difficult for those who are born in the midst of conflict; therefore, beware lest you become a casualty as well.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In Mays on which is nat in that place thou shalt bring the nuts thereof and lay them at thy meal to eat the flesh of thy lamb, inscribing round within its bones with one of those shears appropriate for such purpose, and carefully without causing harm.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	"Mays shall subsist as it has been set forth between the respective parties through inheritance at birth or by acquisition of property, or in case of accident such as fire or combustion of fuel, therefore ensuring that any transfer is returned to its original state."
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	The space between the layers of lead shielding in nuclear reactors is crucial to prevent leakage and ensure safety; this separation involves a thin layer of solder that becomes solid according to design specifications.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	If it seems that the recovery occurs in closed cases, as soon as you start to dry out that healing process according to its preparation and suits the nature of the case.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	In the realm of wonders, they are varcas (I imagine "varcas" is intended to be a term that would signify something like "marvels" or "wonders").
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	These vices are so thick and curly veins that swell with superfluous melancholy; which come to the limbs of the body, and their greatest occurrence in the chambangs, especially in those who wander, work or carry loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	"Administer the purge of black fever (plague) with some intervals between applications and apply wine-colored blood to the patient's superficial veins."
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Mays' method of collecting their black sap involves two ways: the first is that it flows naturally from the tree without any intervention and the second way is by raising the vein and extracting all of it manually.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	This section of the oil is second according to this method: start by hooking the fish with a water-filled bag tail so that when the fat globule is fully dissolved, it will fatten from the bag; then strengthen the bag's tie at the highest point of the bait, and wring out one or two or three times using ample pressure, then raise black blood into your palm with the thumb of the finger on the lower part of the bag until you have extracted the desired amount.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	A is here, and commands you to avoid the plague-blackened victuals.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	It is recommended to seek medical attention for snake bites when the veins are swolculed and blood flow stops due to pain.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Mays's recipe for curing his lumbago is as follows: If you catch the illness early on and immediately immerse it in hot water and wrap the affected area with wet towels so that they become warm, allowing the veins to swell and fill up; or if he has exercised vigorently without having a bath beforehand, immerse the limb until it is sufficiently warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Aprop unless the code is in the right of the vein section at the end or in the lower part of its base, or in the bottom part of its tail.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	The dark night of the soul is an experience within spirituality where one feels abandoned by God and goes through intense emotional suffering. It can be seen as a necessary process to purify oneself, leading eventually to a deeper understanding of love and faith.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	Therefore, let's explore the essence of that white thing which has a string.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	To bring forth the radiant light that resides within you and lift it up to your chin, and then suspend that mighty lion's roar.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	The provided text seems to be in Galician or Portuguese language (not Spanish). It translates roughly to: "The following section is related to another section about that section for three times, and removes the header from the part of the vein outside which appeared." However, this doesn't make complete sense. Could you provide more context?
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	E is the priest who raises his right hand towards the altar and places it on the paten holding the bread. He then raises his left hand towards heaven as he elevates the host above the first section of the partition, and raises his left hand over that which lies within the second partition so that it may be hidden from view.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	I choose water above that which is higher or lower than all the sections, within which it flows entirely; and at times, it diverts this one.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you don't follow my advice and extract the essence of the situation, introduce a double-edged sword and lift it above that, then insert its sharp edge into it and rotate your mind completely within which is cast - this could lead to more complications rather than solutions.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	E watch over it so that it's not damaged; if it breaks, try to fix it as best you can and then use the remedy for your own ailment because of that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Cum the entire soul is removed from that place, hours of rest upon this shore where a lake lies submerged in mist and scent - both rotten and not rotteby yet unspoiled-and healing within it all.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vine is contorted with twists in it and does not follow the straight line as we have said, then you must cut above all that part of the twistiness and its surrounding areas, including a foot length up from where it has occurred.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Look and pay attention that you do not injure the vein and that you do not harm it, because it will be difficult for you to raise it again; use your discretion in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	La forma de la inscripción por la cual se ha agotado el agua.
Forma de unci orp:	A form of union in Spanish would be "una forma de unión". In this context, 'union' can refer to a merger between two entities, like companies or political groups. It could also mean the act of joining together for mutual benefit or support. This term is widely used in different contexts and it shares similar connotations as in English.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not too large or as sharp like a needle nor is it of acute extremity in such a way that it could injure the vein; and it has great flexibility, for if it were subtle, it would puncture the vein because of its subtlenebut let it be in excessive thickness as mentioned before.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Blood draw from the leg vein (also known as venipuncture).
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is formed in the banks where they are as thick as at Al-Aqsa on the land of Arabs and in the lands of India that lie low and dry with scarce vegetation.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	The Flemish language, also known as Vlaams or Nederlands (Dutch), is a West Germanic language spoken primarily in Belgium and the Netherlands. It has its roots in the dialects of the Low Countries and developed over centuries through various historical influences. Here'amoor 't als andere plaatsen op het kustvakantie ontstaan.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The gesture of love is like a poison that creeps into the ear, bringing snakes and worme, scorpions and worms that spawn between the ears and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Sign of the onset of his illness is in this vein that causes inflammaturious flare-ups; and near to it, the place becomes blistered; and from there begins the vein to issue forth from the area of that vesicatory rash which resembles plantar eruption.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some quarts are formed in the first year, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and further eight and nine; moreover it should be verified that a woman has aborted after six months, and another one all through, the cause of which was made by measurement from glorious learned men.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	There are many reasons why people travel abroad, whether it's for leisamoore or business purposes; they usually carry their belongings in suitcases and bags made of plastic and nylon.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it is left untreated, the hours will lead to a spreading of light and encomppsulates the surrounding area; do not let this one enter the realm of reason that may take you outside oneself, for if you allow that one in, it becomes opposite and enters within the body causing abscesses, sores, and painful ulcerations.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	The water from the spring is drawn continuously and in small amounts; it should be discharged outside through the lowest drain without leaving any residue inside.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	The translation of the given text from Catalan to English is as follows: "E of this vein I sit in hollows, homes that are along its length of five palms and thirty, it has reached me until one of twenty palms." However, please note that this sentence does not seem grammatically correct or coheramoose.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If the wound is deep and large, and blood flow is significant during its treatment, the physician should apply the cauterizing iron to stop the bleeding, after which all pus that is in the affected tissue must be evacuated completely, administering putrefaction-reducing medicines for several days. Additionally, proper care should also be taken for the healing of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	There are some veins that have multiple branches; mostly when they appear on the elbow or in the hand, and they come to end at small openings, which are also known as punctures of these branches.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	So let us therefore continue as we have discussed in the division and reach the point that is mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	The section concerning worms generated beneath the skin is referred to as bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is known in no land as bovine tuberculsis due to four main reasons and it tends to affect the cattle, which can be quite rare but occurs between the spinal cord and the muscle, causing the entire limb to swell up and fall off. It also displays a sense of detachment from its own limbs one by one as it breaks down the vertebrae and pushes them out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of light is caused by the decomposition of certain bodily fluids, resulting in such incidents as worms and snakes and earthworms and tapeworms in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	E is feared for its evilness when it approaches the body and reaches the head; it lurks around the ears and destrops them, causing intense pain and destruction to the organ, thus leaving behind numerous damages.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Then in order to heal and extract that, it cannot be done unless you must follow the procedure and appear before them with an open heart, and therefore you should bear whatever is above you and below you closely and tightly, and press firmly over it until extracted.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	E is pre-owned in the flesh and does not own any possessions; therefore, your break time will be a quiet hour spent within that place where you live, and the main reason for being afraid is corruption of his love which ruins the place just as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you happen to get a fever at the head's edge, hours pass as in strong agony with strict rigidity, and gradually over it; seek that the illness be treated by purging of its own body through medicines expelling bad humors, and watch out for foodstuffs causing putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the perspective of overcoming grief, it is crucial to acknowledge and accept the loss while also finding support from loved ones or professionals. Engaging in self-care activities, expressing emotions through journaling or art, seeking solace in faith or spirituality if applicable, and gradually adapting to life without the lost one can all contribute to healing. It is essential to understand that grief is a personal journey with its own pace; thus, patience is key during this process.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called in our land the "Holy Fire," and it causes pain in various limbs, with body parts seemingly changing from one to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	Firstly, thank you for your recommendation! I appreciate the thoughtful advice and will certainly consider it as I make my decision. It's always helpful to hear from others who have experience or knowledge in the matter at hand. Thank you again for taking the time to share with me; it is greatly appreciated.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	A woman who was ill in a village called me to herself; upon examining her arm, I noticed a small bruise on the radial vein of the arm and told her that she would recover within an hour. However, as time passed by, it seemed like the bruise spread even further, moving around as if alive, with a glow similar to fresh silver when flowing from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then I continued to the place of that pain and saw it in the muscle, sticking there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	In this passage, the text seems to be in Catalan language (a Romance language spoken primarily in Catalonia, Spain). Here's the translation into English:
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	A man approached me, seemingly surprised by the total change in his appearance since I last saw him; and he was very much amazed at the exchange of heat and the speed of movement from one part to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	I had seen the same thing before in my dreams according to that manner; however, I have also witnessed many cases where severe pain is transferred from limb to limeby "dream body" analogy or through some sort of empathetic connection between individuals within a shared experience.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	The boy doesn't know about this as much as the woman does.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	No, I am not water but rather a representation of it; for the woman depicted was from a village and had exposed limbs with veins visible, conveying through this image the sensation of windsweptness.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that you do not reappear under this reverse healing in those who are delightful and fond of human pleasures tempted by close acquaintances.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	The person you are treating is experiencuyendo dolor and we have told them so. Hours later, it will not be apparent to you how much they have suffered; then strengthen over that wound and leave it entirely closed, and cover the area with a barrier against wind chill. Then cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you don't touch your oaks, then I will cure that pain in the course and that water which blows away winds, as well as those foul-smelling pitches and pitches of Serapis with similar appearances.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of sags.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sagittarius constellations are diversified according to the species, and according to the body parts in which they appear, as their variety is that of those having large points, small ones, concave or hollow, and dull; and of those having three corners, and those belonging to those who have tongues.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	This text appears to be in Old Occitan or Provençal language (also known as Old Provencal), a Romance language spoken mainly in the Provence region of France during medieval times. The excerpt seems to describe some medical observations and recommendations, possibly related to leprosy.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	The marks of the serpent are found in its claws and tail, and it passes over the bones to settle on the cerebellum; because of its powerful venom, one suffers from double vision, dizziness, vertigo, numbness in the limbs, tongue inflammatur, hunger for blood, severe speech impediment and loss of voice, as well as frequent vomiting caused by colic. Additionally, a large white humidity plague is found at its place, resembling snow on flesh and glistening like aquatic bodies.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	So then if you're referring to these signs, refrain from the cure and extraction of the abscess unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Mays' les signs of the sagetta when cats in the chest, so that she is near the left nipple, and feels like it's hard there, but not due to any pain; and quite heavy appears the movement of the sagetta, similar to the pulse movement, and dark black veins flowing, with clamminess of extremities, sweating profusely, and syncope; so know that death is approaching.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The symptoms when the chest has a dull pain and coughs up bloody froth from the pleura, and veins that are prone to thrombosis, and the color of the illness changes, and breathes out great spirit, and demands deep air inhalation.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	The squat is located on the floor, and the pain arises close to small bones, and he suffers great strong pain and has a lot of heavy breathing; not all the members of his muscles are moved.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the key gets stuck in the stomach, hours later it will be expelled as undigested food residue.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the sack is located in the abdomen and it has become lodged therein, there are no openings from the placenta, or the membrane, or the tissue which is torn apart, and there is no hope for healing by extraction of the sab.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the bladder is filled with stones and expels little or no urine, and there's an obstruction to flow from either side, accompanied by severe pain, then it may be a fatal condition after some hours.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other parts such as the face, neck, head, shoulders, wings and the auxiliary winglets of the back, spine discs of the backbone, tail, comb, wattles, and their appearance resembling those body parts are allowed to be eaten according to major regulations, provided that the gamebird does not bleed veins or arterees nor is it venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	The recommendation I give to you about what I've seen in these cases refers to the measures taken regarding the treatment of this disease.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason for this is that in an adult, the lacrimal duct drains into the nasal cavity and you can extract it to the other side by leaving behind the gray matter of its ear, and it heals without any harm coming to it.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	The extract features another saga of the Giant buried in his grave, leaving behind closed eyelids; and the saga was already hidden and could not be seen anymore except for a tiny fragment attached to its foot, which was one of the sharp blades of the Turks, like a lion with no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Senate was at the courthouse, and suddenly it suffered a serious car accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	In my dreams, I saw a man named Crastus who had fallen into the pitfall. His legs were trapped in two iron shackles and he was sinking deeper into it with each struggle. Above him hung an Arabian carpet, one adorned with golden threads that reflected his desper
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	I once came across a man who had swallowed something that got stuck in his stomach, and he thought it might have caused his death. After passing thirty days without showing any signs of illness or discomfort, I decided to address the matter with him. Upon examining the object, I carefully extracted it from within him, resulting in a complete recovery, as no further incidents occurred.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	A man had a sack in his hand and placed the bag over him, and then he lit a fire for seven days, until the saturated sack turned to ash within his clothing.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	A woman was seen putting something in her belly, and the pregnancy became established within it, without being changed by the woman's body processes, and the woman did not suffer from any harm to her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I also saw another house where the wall had cracked in its face and was leaning towards the beach; it didn't seem to cause any damage yet but appeared similar.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	The segment of the house belonging to the king's heir who was captured in his own place had hidden all the treasure and left directly for the journey with only a small amount, leaving the rest concealed.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	The person named Eli was appointed as the curator of the castle's estate within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then you did not notice the plague at the edge of the cloth; and then you inquired about that which attracted you subtly, but it was not there; rather, your ear still felt a sting from before, and so I suspected that this prick came from the edge of the cloth.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	E amplastregui the place where I was sitting seemed to have an attractive and digestible quality; it made me feel like I should move closer to that spot, as it gradually overtook my attention.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	The E does not occur in the significant accident that the hedgehog has reached that place; I shall continue to observe it for several days and no accidents happen. In the meantam, its health improves as well after spending some time with the snout of the nose feeling like itself again and telling me about this.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And so you pause to think about the acute medicinal corrosive disease within two days after contact with oak trees and I have tried it myself, and succeeded in touching the tip of the sieve subtly, which sticks to the wood.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	In the prognosis for this disease with that remedy within which I become visibly aware of the symptoms on the leg, and pass to my time by water for space of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	A brief account of the exaccuarated flood amplified, which might possibly interfere with my affairs here, and remain as it is, without hindering any settlements, hours have passed since I became subtly and ingeniously involved in those devices of engineering, within which one day I embarked on those engineering marvels of dams construction using cranes, according to the form that will come about at the end of this capital project, from which I extracted it. Moreover, I restored the aforementioned flood.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Ealus Metges ruled that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and I am restoring it as well as consolidating the bridge, and healing was delayed due to a full illness, and there were no issues in any case.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	In regards to the extraction of some examples from aforementametioned content concerning this article and its definitions, which were not previously mentioned because the sections of this document and those definitions may not be understood or comprehended through reading alone, I present the following illustrations:
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The wise experts do not know much about the matter; and they believe that what is present now will be different from what was absent before; and they predict a new operation involving a novel instrument as a result of external causes affecting the work in question.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, you are saying that sagittas (arrows) do not belong to the members in which they are fixed but according to two methods: by attraction of the place where inserted; or by opposition from the other party.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	From that which is dressed in the clothes of a man and enters into a local church, or that which proceeds from a human body and is thrown and taken out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If the animals are not slaughtered at sunset on the day stated in the notice, which specifies a period of up to seven days during which no meat shall be consumed from them before they have been properly drained and taken out of their environment, then they may be.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	If you resembled this agreement and obeyed its terms, the debt would be postponed for several months and renewed each day until fully paid off.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it does not adhere to your agreement regarding certain days, the hours that you record in the circuit of the court shall be considered valid only during that time of day when the location is enlarged by the court, and not beyond this limit.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the arrowhead becomes lodged in one of the skull bones and has proceeded into one of the brain chambebers where I mention those accidents have occurred, then refrain from extracting the arrowhead and leave it inside for approximately seven days; because if the arrowhead moves, death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the gash is not caused by an external injury and does not penetrate deeply into the bone but only superfaturly, causing harm for a few days without resulting from any of these accidents, then you should think about closing the wound and sealing it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Mays is not fit and does not obey you to leave the circuit of the area so often as we have reported, and accordingly during the time that he remains there until he recovers.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Mays' rope is caught on the boat'cuo, and it's also catching his emotions; now you may ask which one he wants to try more, and if he feels that way, then throw that feeling into whichever stirs are suitable for attracting her.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If it is not possible for you to cross due to the obstruction of the bridge and its length, here there are neither nerves nor veins; in such cases, you may pass over the widened section that allows for the extraction of a pile.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If you desire to hold onto the precious pearls of wisdom, you must endure great hardship and strain all your efforts; devise ways if not able directly to overcome the temptation of desires within those chambers that bind you.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When extracting the sage, wherever you may be using the application of your own hand forceps in every case where it is observed; and use subtlety afterwards to ensure that the sage is not torn and is made with a difficult approach both from above and during extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you are unable to do so within your hour, please try again for up to five days until the pending cases in the court reach their conclusion. After this period, provide the information requested.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	It grieves me to see you in such pain and discomfort; therefore, I will now prescribe what we have discussed for your treatment at the hospital.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	He watches your involuntary movements of vein or nerve, or muscle twitching, and provides gentle support in any possible way to relieve the tension; and help you attain ease, tranquility, slowness, and steadiness as much as I can.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Thus, to make a counterweight for the mallet as shown in the figure below, which you should follow diligaturily, it is essential that the casing of the counterweight be made according to these specifications:
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	"Mays is not an option here, but I can help guide you towards potential solutions based on the figures provided."
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	In case the pieces are captured by your opponent or if you have already moved any piece outside of the game, or if you make an illegal move out of respect for another piece that is higher in rank and more valuable than yours according to the rules; then you lose as a consequence. The loss shall be proportional to the value of the pieces taken; and you must retaliate accordingly.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	When anger grips you, your teeth clench; then the jaw tightens in response to that pressure on the bone, and it intensifies as if trying to push against it, expanding outward from there.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	S-so, let's have those few days and then we will approach that within the flames.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the log of the anchor is in that hole, you must pull it out now.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May you cut the branch and wish to administer an injection; then gently approach her (the animal), if she is mute, softly encourage her as you move towards the concavity of her body and carefully insert the needle at a slight angle.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If May's net is concave, then the hours you exert to pull that object through that net will be greater when the net is stretched out by it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the vessel is contaminated, you must clean it thoroughly before use; if possible at all, and make sure that the water used for washing is suitable.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	The strainer is near where you touch that area; it's possible to apply slight pressure over the point in question. Now and then, increase slightly this pressure, and beware of excessive force or nerve points. If necessary for relief, massage gently around the area until healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form by which the needles are grasped:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The wings of the eagle are bent downwards as it makes its turn when capturing prey in order to ensure not letting them go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	"All those spices are large and small, plenty and few, according to the size of the rope's length and its relative shortness, as well as the width of the sea, and the current flow."
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of the impending gloom haunted this tip in such a way as if it were driven out from within the soul, and urged by that silent force.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Title: Strategies for Overcoming Hearing Impairment Challenges
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Yes, Ray can indeed be accelerated into the interior of a concave shape and pushed by that force towards its focus. In optics, this is how lenses work to converge or diverge light rays depending on their shape (convex or concave), allowing them to focus at certain points known as focal points.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	The phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The phlebotomy veins that are typically used for drawing blood include the median cubital vein, cephalic vein, and basilic vein. These veins in the antecubital fossa (the front of the elbow) or wrist area provide a good site for venipuncture due to their size, accessibility, and lower likelihood of causing discomfort or complications during blood draw. In the verses of Psalm 103, which is chapter xvi. in Latin (cap.) And thou shalt take the pulsing veins of which are near to the temples, namely: those herbs that grow in both temples; and you shall take two tear vessels from two springs called Aspicentia (possibly referring to a sacred spring or place); and the prepared vein on the forehead; and the vein at the end of the nose; and you shall take guiding threads attached to the neck; and those veins that are under the lips above, as well as below; also, these are known as Algelic vessels. And then there will be two other veins from beneath the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	I have blood vessels that were just cannulated in the arms, my veins. In this region there is a cephalic vein known as the "vein of the head," and it's a wild type; the local people call it “the cap vein,” which is deaf and migratory, consisting of a branch from the basilica (basilica vein) and another from the cephalic. They refer to this as “vein of all the body.” The basilica vein rests on the domestic thorn bushes and is called "citellar," while locals call it "the abdominal vein." The arm's funnel, which lies over the fireplace and where phlebotomy occurs, appears as a swelling above the pout. Salvatella is the vein that lies between the ear lobe (auricle) and the smaller part of the ear called the helix; it has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	E is the vein of the hazel tree and has three branches; one of those originates from the curve of a wild hazel, while the second springs from beneath the trunk of a domestic hazel; and the sciatic nerve arises from underneath the root of a wild hazel, with other similar veins present.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The blood of the veins that runs into the ears is an ancient remedy and migratory, heals and cures old headaches and ulcers.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of that grain is such as I recommend to you: it should be just below the level of bitternatury and its roots beneath the skull in the region where both veins branch widely with good friability; close-fitting, tighten its collar around with a band so that their two ears appear from its perimeter at places slightly receding from the head; you must hold it as your own, and if you feel the pulse of those in your hand, here is my sign.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	He takes the knife handle in his hand and inserts it so that the sharp end of the blade goes into the canal through which the blood vessel will be drawn out with a syringe.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	The elevator raises the cable and attaches it to the underside parts, then clamps onto the cable with precision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	S is the length of the incision and the amount of blood loss or around that area; also, say if there's any soreness afterwards as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Certainnly, here is the translation you requested: "Ensure strong support for your injured leg until it's healed."
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	In the beginning, there was a strong desire among those to liberate them and their children from slavery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The ancient and malignous venous thrombosis, chronic otitis media, and the following symptoms are associated with emigrant veins from the temple to the forehead, including acute exacnusions of excessive fluids and headaches.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The quality of that flower-cutter is as I reported to you, the evil force moves in it when two veins appear by a visible sign and their pulse follows yours after your words are uttered; henceforge thou art tried.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Take your needle and insert it into the vein just below where you've indicated on your arm, then gently advance the needle beneath, and raise the vein upwards; pierce that in the same manner as you did with the other two veins; let blood flow according to the required amount.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Remove the bandage from the wound and rest your voice for an hour, then apply pressure on that spot with a clean cloth to stop any excessive bleeding, and let it heal inwardly until it is fully recovered.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	He prayed for the souls who have passed away and those who are still suffering, seeking their peace of mind during the meal.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Hence, the juice of aloe vera from the vein in front applies to the treatment of ancient head diseases as well as migration and suppuration accompanied by foul-smelling sores.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the flebotomy procedure depends on what I recommend to you. It's because there is a strong pain in your arm which appears as a vein that shows through with an elastic band placed over it; and then, taking the instrument called "fossor," this is its form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	The point stands out most prominently at the top of the vein, and strikes it with either hand movement or another tool in the manner of the latter; then leave the blood to flow according to the desired quantity; afterwards release the puncture site of pain and strengthen that area which is healing.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	In some cases, it is possible to use a scalpel instead of a fine needle incision, although the concern with the fine needle incision is that its pointed end may be too sharp compared to other fine needles, and preferably, the needle should have a flat end. The scalpel would follow the transverse line as bone is close and strong there; it might easily cut through where the fine needle incision is delicate.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The May rose essential oil is beneficial for the two veins and also as tears of two hollows due to its antiseptic properties in wounds and burns, and it helps with facial skin diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bloodletting is such that the strong illness weakens him with one bandage, and then you perform the procedure on those parts, standing by his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	E should be made in accordance with the transversely long sections a few millimeters deep, so that at the site where it is not to cause pain; and if the incision is subtle, then the end of it is slightly torn.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Apropos of running with the assent that is necessary, pause upon those spots and strengthen them for one night, and untie them thereafter.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May's leech therapy for the nasal vein is believed to be effective against acute fever and severe cough, as well as facial illnesses, migraeban, and ailments that arise in the face, especially when they are old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the acupuncture point in question is that strong pain resides in your head and presses on your nose on your left side, so take the fine needle long enough to reach into that area at the base of the nasal tip according to exact vertical alignment, because the vein does not appear here and because blood starts flowamo immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Last night, I gradually used up my small first aid kit and made the blood flow according to my needs. And at dawn, that person was healed considerably.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The oil of the jujube fruit, used as an ingredient for fleabane tincture, can contribute to alleviating joint pain, diarrhee, leprosy, infections, skin ulcers and other corrosive diseases similar to ergot poisoning.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the bee sting is such that each illness leaves its own mark on the wounded part, and the craftsmen stand by to observe the signs of sickness, with the malady hovering above a pewter bowl.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	The vein gradually forms along with the leaf blades, and it extends in length according to the amount of sap or water needed at any given time, resembling another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	The proper spelling of the text in Occitan would be: "En aprop deslia les liames et strénha las dos venes am estrictura migiera per so que·l malaut no sia prefocat, e laissa entro al mati quar la plaga es sanaa."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The juice of the algeciras vein botany causes small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, gum deterioration, bad ulcerations and fissures, as well as bad ulcers on the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	In the quality of that region where those veins are found, which lie in front of you, and strengthen your neck with a band, then turn around their lips and look at the two veins from which one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; they demonstrate each one by its darkness, so more there are numerous small black veins. Then gently pierce through them as though it were a slight pricking.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	Mays doubts which one of those is correct, and you don't know which of them is the right answer or the most evident one among them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	The blood vessels appear less prominent on the lips below.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Usually, May scrapes off the remaining veins on the inner surface of his lips.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Mays's two veins that run below the tongue tend to bulge towards the forehead, located in front of the earlobe, and are associated with conditions such as tonsillitis, uvular inflammation, and various oral ailments.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The condition of those leaves is that it follows the illness among your people before sunrebrise, and raises its tongue upward, and looks back at its tongue, from one vein of it flows blood and from another vein flows blood, and the color of each leaf turns to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then take your brushes and paint everywhere; but be careful not to cover up this face with that painting over there, which covers the previous artwork on those walls.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are usually like those in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods; they either put amber-colored or olive oil with subtleness declining; or they use surgical knives for cutting, and call it leeching, which is this form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	The correctness of the sphincter depends on its section and those of specific, subtle types according to the width of the veins and according to their narrowing.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	"A form of spraying for cherry trees" or more commonly known as "Cherry tree pesticide application."
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The veins become increasingly prominent as they branch out into smaller vessels and tend to open the concave ones that are filled with thicker blood. This is also true for those containing clotted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the form of spraying for an olive orchard:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	A fine needle aspiration (FNA) is of smaller diameter and more subtle extremity, and it pertains to the biopsy of fine vessels that contain a subtle citrus juice.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The blood flow of the sublingual vein is one of three vessels which drain the blood from diseases that lie in the head and neck area, as well as those originating from the abdebdomains of the chest.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	The doctor convenes with the phlebotomist regarding the venipuncture to be performed on that patient, who has a fear of needles and may experience an arterial puncture if not done correctly. Hence, it is necessary for them not to use a sharp phlebotomy device before ensuring proper technique and safety measures are in place.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica is not visible for obvious reasons, you may leave it and move on to another one or seek any similar ones nearby; or if possible, photograph there at the end of the arm where that particular basilcua is located. Then continue as we have instructed.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to perform a venipuncture on the inner elbow, first identify the vein by feeling it within the boundaries of your arm that you know are close to the wrist area where the veins are located. Then, place a tourniquet above this location and ask them to relax their hand. Proceed with palpating for pulsations at the wrist until they cease or become irregular due to venous congestion as we have instructed; then insert the needle while maintaining steady pressure. And ensure you do not cause a hematoma by hitting too close to the artery's location, which is usually about 1-2 centimeters from the puncture site.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	You turn back and confront the challenge; inflation occurs where you've felt it before – in the economy. So flee from that inflation of prices, for now is the time to act wisely.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	In the flebotomy chamber as delicately as with a child's vein, the blood is gentle and subtle; sometimes it makes you feel wise of its arterial essence; at times your heart aches and pauses over that distant space; then you draw near to touch it, and if the blood separates, many times it has separated, so long you strengthen your arm and release it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	He guards the health of his flock, and is overly concerned about their wellbeing; he stays with them for several days until they have recovered.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the blood vessel is not severed and you have to make an incision at the site, if it appears to be in your way; when the limb's extremity is contracted, then cut off its blood supply; or take scrapings from a previous wound, and sprinkle that, and strain that over the place of the strictured vein with liver pills taken on the following day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the blood is separated from its source, it becomes lost; and if not, then the hours cure that person with regard to whom we remember the place where the dust-separated ashes flowed of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The extraction of the sea cucumber is difficult in many locations due to the small size of the beach and the possibility of arm entanglement.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The venous puncture is performed slightly below the upper border of the shoulder blade and above the lower border of the scapula; this is because it's composed of branches from the basilic vein and cephalic vein, as we have mentioned earlier.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	In the process of bloodletting that is done above one's fear threshold, when it touches the nerve, then adjustment during the lancet puncture will numb the nerves; thus causing stupor and making recovery difficult, sometimes not at all for certain individuals. This nerve movement may be felt in sensations; if hidden from most people, being subtle and unseen, it is wise to pause before bloodletting on areas close to major arteries, and avoid the nerves during your strengthening phase.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If a vein is between two nerves, then its length lies within the range of lengths for such veins in that specific area.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The juvenile fluid of the superficial cephalic vein is believed to carry blood from the head and transmit it to various diseases in men.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	In this particular case, if you want the lymph nodes to be near the olives' field or near the myrtle trees', since it is the closest to all veins and not too close to any artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	Mays, however, ensures that you have the phlebotomy carried out in such a way that it does not puncture only the surface of the vein but seeks deeper layers and avoids using latex gloves if possible during the initial needle prick on the site selected for phlebotomy.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, even though the home is insulated with soundproof materials, if there's a leak in the first wall where it was bombarded (by noise), that area won't be completely soundproof anymore.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of livestock veterinary care in that region and the number of incidents related to its major disease, which you should consider for its improvement.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of them is that you should know about phlebotomy which is not administered for treatment but rather in the context of health preservation and hope of healing, and it is made on one of the veins located inside, namely: cephalic, femoral, or basilica; and that the procedure be done at the beginning of spring (or as a matter of fact any time of year), preferably before breakfast in spring/autumn and close to mealtime during winter when signs of replenishment appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	"Patient E has undergone a phlebotomy, and after the third hour from this morning, they will need to have their first blood draw."
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May's fumigation that is administered, due to convenience and necessity at any time during the day or night.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	Article 4 - Children under the age of thirteen (13) years old and women who are pregnant shall not be circumcised before completing four months, and men shall not be circumcised unless they have reached sixteen (16) years of age. The elderly must not be circumcised if they have passed sixty (60) years of age.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	An E-cupped vacuum device can be used in various ways to modify its suction before the venipuncture occurs. In those cases where there is a tenacious clotting factor, it may serve as an external compression method to prevent blood vessels from overfilling during the extraction of veins, resulting in less painful procedures and avoiding involvement with major limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	E should not undergo surgical bleeding procedures (bloodletting) aimed at healing and curing diseases or purging of humors, nor for avoidance of illness or imbalance during the time it was considered effective, nor bodily harm caused by dropsy, but rather such surgeries should be feared due to gastrointestinal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, and increased urination/defecation and sleep disturbans as well as any physical activity or wakefulness. Also anything that diminishes virtue, either in body (corporeal) or animal form.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	An apple a day is worth more than a glass of water before the sun sets if the sand is thick, along with food and drinks, and also including medicine when it's feasible to have water.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Article I - No permission granted herein shall be deemed to prevent or exempt from any sanction otherwise imposed for the commission of any offense whatsoever, whether expressly mentioned or not.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	At the break of dawn on the riverbank, just as we've said, it was three o'clock in the morning.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	He foretells that on the day of the Great Judgment, all creatures shall witness those events which occur in utmost distress, anger, fear, and all bodily misfortunes such as toil, excessive pain, and deceitful appearances.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	A is the tendency of humans to have various reasons for being present in certain places, often related to their affinity or attraction towards particular scents and fragrances as well as rhythms and similar patterns. These preferences depend on the degree of possibility according to each individual's inclinamo.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the flowchart below to determine if a person needs circumcision or not based on whether they are already circumcuted (have undergone the procedure) or not.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Take off your shirt and show the medical professional your three scars from past surgerprise procedures; then, tie the rope around yourself with those scars as anchors.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	E is the tightening, where the restriction is not excessive, or the restriction is a superfluity; it forbids flows of sanctions and hence the hours are mitigated, easing the burden of penaltangs considerably.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Upon application of the tightening band, one who is to be blepharoplasted must have his/her eyelids stretched between two supports so that veins are dilated and visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	The phlebotomist applies a small amount of antiseptic cream to the arm where they will perform venipuncture. Then, the technician gently palpates (feels) near the site of the vein from which blood was drawn earlier, ensuring it's slightly retracted and has good turgor. The needle is then inserted approximately 2-3 cm away from that vein to avoid causing any discomfort due to overlapping vessels. At this new site, the phlebotomist must feel for a healthy, plump, non-tortuous vein using their fingertips (not just sight). If successful, venipuncture is performed without injuring the vein; if not, it may cause pain or damage.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, let the flood controller be stopped and remain vigilant in all of these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	A brief pause on the use of flebotomy needles if the vein is hardened during a season, wait for another wave after this location is vacant; or proceed with caution if the place is not inflamed, if the site isn't infected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the wound is infected or if illness breaks out, leave it to rest for a day or two and don't disturb the scab as much as possible because you may remove the protective layer too soon, nor go swimming.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Person A supports abortion, while person B is against it.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the opening is small and narrows gradually, and you fear it may not have enough sealant for the amount you want, then try again with a slightly larger nozzle in that direction and adjust the pressure a bit; work quickly before the place becomes blocked up, as most people'hemen tend to have too little caulk.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Once upon a time there was a bee that had fallen into a well. The hours did not pass by without anyone coming to its aid; for no one saw any reason to save such an insignpectible creature. And yet, it kept on hanging onto the edge of the wall, hoping someone would rescue it from this deep pit and grant it another chance at life.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	E is better in this place than old and that others smelled.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	An embolization involves injecting an embolic agent into the entire vascamotor system to block off veins in order to prevent blood flow and cause tumoral alphadoc acidification when it accumulates near that area, since blood is subtle and circulatory.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If an abscess is created during a bloodletting at the location of the procedure, several complications may occur, especially in those who are not bleeding but have visible bruising or if there is little vein visibility. In such cases, the pain and swelling will persist for some hours. To alleebate this, apply a damp sponge soaked in warm water and salt to the area for about an hour; it should dissolve.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	A) The vein's blood flows in the direction opposite to that of another vein, and
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If there are any stains of black or green coloration on the stone, do not use water; if you wish to clean it, pause and consider using a solution containing dissolved aloe or myrrh, or a solution containing extracts of peppermint or chamomile.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	The misused syringes caused abscesses and swellings; the basilic vein should be catheterized for treatment.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Then pause your hands upon that, and if you have the urge to apply pressure on it, then this elevation is evil and wicked; therefore, be careful not to press on that area for the cause we've mentioned because sooner or later blood will flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	An external application of water to create an adhesive surface allows the site to be sustained and protected as it heals from another wound or injury.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	Article that determines the amount of damages to be paid to each individual according to their merit and based on how severely they are affected by the harm, as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the ink is black, then wait a while and let it dry on its own before handling; similarly if you see that it's thick, wait a little longer to allow for more thinning out; likewise if it's acidic, use gloves or other protection due to its corrosive nature.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	In the village where there is a need for blood extraction due to illness and weak health, the phlebotomy of the vein is intensified both superficially and deeply.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	In the case where a contract is voided or cancelled by either party, each party shall make efforts to recover any excess amounts paid in installments and ensure that all funds are promptly returned.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best practice for administering a venipuncture in vein section is to perform a transverse cut rather than puncturing it.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This circumcision method is free from blood flow and nerve injury risks, and it's more favorable and safer than the procedure according to lengthwise and widthwise standards.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	A fever is commonly accompanied by sore throat, and you should take care to consume some hot porridge or an infusion made of chamomile or simple honey before the bleeding procedure; then apply a small piece of clean cloth soaked in warm milk for three or four minutes.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If you are allergic to certain substances or have any specific health concerns, hours before the phlebotomy procedure for infusions of essential oil mixtaturi with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or aromatic oils with a pleasant smell, consult your doctor.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	The Corsican liqueur acquavit is characterized by its distinctive sourness and the need for flebotomy as it causes a sharp pain in the vein due to blood movement; therefore, one should drink this water of life with carnivorous appetizers so that its subtle fragrance can be appreciated. It has an almond-like aromatic quality which makes up most of its essence.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	E uses other causes mentioned in the division in Chapter of Syncope by Emptying.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	The healing process involves the skin forming new tissue and gradually restoring its structure, which includes the layer from which the bleeding originated. Hemostasis is responsible for stopping the blood flow, while the vitality of the site helps remove small amounts of blood over time; this occurs according to the amount present in continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If Mays' arm were to fall off, and he lost his blood twice, along with his strength, then after that he would have been operated on seven or nine times in the first few surgeramoons.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	May the one who throws cause harm to their opponent's target by hitting it with the projectile from afar, and that such action should take place on the following day or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	In the given scenario, if a person has been stabbed and suffers from excessive bleeding and fever, it is crucial to have them transferred to a hospital as soon as possible. To prevent shocks or sudden drops in blood pressure due to significant loss of blood (hemorrhage), you should preserve all the conditions for first aid until professional help arriveby:
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	E do not attempt to unclothe your arm and evacuate the wound second time; now that the orifices of the vein are closed, it becomes quite difficult for blood flow, which you press under such vehemently extending skin, as this is too much.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	The hart lies on the altar and secondarily; it takes water at the sharpness of the lancet that has coagulated blood in the vein'annointment hole; or pause over theriac alfarache, or sagzenea, and squeeze gently to get out the blood.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is thrombosed, wait until the thrombus has settled before touching it.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If you are urinating and it involuntarily occurs on the seat or on the other side of a veil/curtain, that is not an excuse; your aim should always be at the toilet bowl or in another sink.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The "wine vessel" vein called funis Juncodii is usually ligated in the region of the femoral or inguinal area when it is not tortuous or compressed, as it consists mainly of these.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the phlebotomy is such that when illness enters its full onset, then within the vein it becomes apparent and visibly swoleborne during phlebotomy.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	In accordance with the above-stated guidelam, it is strictly prohibited to fly over that area which falls under flight restriction zone; and according to the transverse small pathway (not along the latitude or longitude).
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Let S be a wide opening and let your precision be the quality with which you make that incision at the joint of those small bones.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If you have a bleeding wound, avoid the flow of blood into the water and do not allow it to run in the water until your need is satisfied.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in those summer days, your hours would be exempt from the journey to and from work by waterway, and moreover, your body's circulation with cold water during winter times would be more pleasant.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins because there are no adjacent pulseable veins or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The botfly infestation of the ovis sacci is related to diseases of the liver in English.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the livestock's bloodletting is such that you should tie off the vein (of either your left or right arm) and then make it visible in a bowl of water, ensnaring it so its vessel is inflated; then at this moment, perform a transverse incision across. And if it bleeds for too long, do not let it go on like that.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	In fact, it's not just about the fear of losing your health insurance; there are also deep-seated concerns that leave you feeling bare and vulnerable.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	In the vein's tail section, blood flows rapidly, allowing for proper drainage of blood cells; however, if you don't rotate it in the tail part, the blood will coagulate at the venous orifice and is forbidden to flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	The blood is drawn according to the amount of need, work hours pause on the vein and salt and oil, so that it is not solidified quickly; and similarly ensure you do everything in total calmness.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The milk of the flowerbotanical extract from that of my left hand is said to be effective for melasina diseases.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	He behaves in the same manner during the interview as he did in the previous one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The juice of the vein called phlebotomy is used for illnesses such as those mentioned in the past, just like those of fever and menstruation, as well as retention of blood and wounds, ulcerations from bruises and old sores, and their resemblances to disepertures.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the fleam injection is that the malady enters his vein with water behind and pierces into that friction within which appear the veins; it lies at the joint of the leg in a band, and from there branch out onto the face of the leg most.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, apply the poultice with a clean cloth on your wound and cover it with gauze bandage; this is better and more sanitary.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	The plantar nerves on the face of the foot are those that have been cut off from those located above the face of the foot; and pause your phlebotomy at which you perform phlebotomy across, as if you were to make an incision through them.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	E is the plural form of "flebotomy."
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	In English, this sentence would be translated as follows: "May's method prevents blood clotting; during the procedure, you will have to place your hand under running cold water and allow the blood to flow in that area until it is completely expelled."
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the bee-gardener errs in his first venture and leaves only a few of them at their place, four times as many will grow; do not fear the cunning fox but rather watch out for the wires just as we have instructed.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Create an imitation of the essence from the other's alignment.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	I will provide the translation for you: "E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum haviem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilhem de la partida silvestra." translates to "From the sciatic vein, we have also told that you must turn back towards the forest path."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The whisper of the flybotomy's buzz is but when it comes to cut so deep.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the flebotomy procedure is that the illness enters during bathing, eating, and while strenuous exertion causes the chest pain to descend below the level of the breast by four fingers along a long, thin band that does not appear unless seen through water.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Then when you come to the fork in the road, take the one less traveled by, for that will make all the difference.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	The elbow is formed where the humerus meets the radius and ulna; it's located at the point in the forearm just below the shoulder on the side of the elbow, with prominences corresponding to the head of the humerum, radius, and ulna.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	The magician looks at your veins and makes the blood run in the amount you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	The restriction and pause on the site of phlebotomy incisions should be tightened as they are somewhat unhealthy.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Wind power and its usage benefits.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	The people of Ventouze are known for their wheat, corn, or vineyards.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	In the first method of bloodletting, a vein is scratched and blood is drawn out, while in the second method, a windpipe is scratched and air is drawn out.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This sudden gust of wind that is causing the scorching heat depends on two factors, whether it's dry or humid.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	In the fourteen locations that have been administrated with scarring and extraction of teeth are as follows: one in which the incised notches are located at the crown, the latter part being from the top; the middle location is halfway down the neck on either side of the collarbone; notches behind the jaw below the mouth; notches on two spatulas (possibly dental instruments); notches on an alohostar tool, positioned at the base of a bowl; notches on two files (or bones used as tools); and notches on two awls or sharp implements.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	The windpipe is not squeezed by large veins but by tiny capillaries within the tissue, just like it's compressed during a bronchoscopy; nor does one expect that squeezing will be done with heat or hot air in any illness caused by reflux whereby the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	La necessità di Mayse induce a uno spostamento temporanee per malattia o continuamente; l'assistenza deve essere fornita in ogni momento durante i pasti del mese e alla fine della giornata, oltre che al luogo abitualmente frequentato da lui/lei e ad altri momenti.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason why some people suffer from frequent nosebleeds and hair loss is due to the influence of Mars in their astrological charts, specifically when it transits through certain houses like the first, second, seventh or tenth house related to self-expression, life path, challenges or relationships. This can also affect other areas such as emotional outbursts and darkening of eyes; those with Mars in their chart's fourth, eighth or eleventh house may experience receding hairline, increased stress, and fatigue; and for individuals whose Mars is located in the sixth or ninth house, they might have a weakened immune system, frequent nosebleeds, and other physical symptoms.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Then whenever possible in any of those cases and especially if it is in the third or fourteenth day of the month, the service should be performed preferably within two to three hours after dawn.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The swirling wind of the cyclone hits your back, giving you weight in your head and at that point where it is embedded deep into the roots; but what if this pressure were to be completely eliminated from the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This cold one is at the foot of the head doctor's office.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	A is not good to take that which belongs to another or in which there is diarrhea, for it may cause great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	The water that flows from the spring does not come from those old vessels; it emerges at the head where you keep your illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	The wind that blows over what is above her has caused her to be forgotten; and I pray you command the fan not to stop its motion for long on either side so as to avoid future forgetfulcuess.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Mays ventozacio de alkehel is in the place of phlebotomy for the blue vein and basilica: moreover, it provides relief from asthma, chest constriction, splitting of the ribcage bones, coughing, and swelling.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	The wind-swept heather on a small hilltop, if it is left undisturbed for some time, causes weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	Inhalant abuse can lead to accidents and brain damage, along with migraebrina, and other pains in the jaw region and teeth; it's a common practice for nose-flaring in the church of Basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	I command the vacuum to not apply too much pressure so that it doesn't puncture your vein and ensure blood flow is maintained.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The swirling movement of the lips leaves traces of alcohol in the mouth, as well as signs of gum corruption, and appearances of various diseases that are present therein; they stand ready for a lip botox treatment if necessary.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The windy environment that is created over the two spoons' handles while whipping, which is done to introduce air and increase volume.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	The ventricle of the two separated parts within the eyes is related to the phlebotomy of three veins, namely the superior, basilica and cephalic ones; that which transports blood from all these veins includes both coarse as well as fine vessels connecting them.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	The fan must not be activated during the procedure in order to ensure that the area is free of flesh and remains with only nerves and vessels.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	F is an antiseptic cream that helps heal cuts and provides relief from sores, as well as prevents the accumulation of pus in wounds.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	Set the fan to a high speed and ensure it is from an even distance. Make sure there are no obstructions in its path for better airflow, and that all blades are sharply cut for efficient operation.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	The Mays of Cambados are ancient festivals held in the town of Cambados, Galicia (Spain), usually taking place from May to June. During this period, various traditional activities and celebrations occur as part of the rituals honoring nature's fertility and cycles. These include:
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	A high level of stress can lead to irregular heartbeats in some people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	The door from the hall leads to the room where two beds are located, which is adjacent to the doors of three rooms.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the position for the vents is that you should move it slightly and gradually at first, and not prolong the movement of the vents; instead, pause them deliberately and return them quickly, so that the humors come to their place with ease when they approach.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	The sea does not cease to flow, and the cycle continues until it sees the blood already turning reddening and swelling, along with the appearance of the pain in the veins.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Two hours ago you uploaded and iterated the draft slightly, and now I'll take into consideration the feedback received on its content.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	The house that has dry and rare cracks, cover it with a new layer of plaster so you do not peel off, otherwise the place will become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	The fan speeds up the air circulation and generates a bit of coolness, making it easier to stay comfortable.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the sand is too coarse, hours of sieving are required to obtain fine particles; in the first stage of sieving, the route of subtlety and the moisture of the air are exposed.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second part, he moves to the acquired perspective from the extraction of the large sample.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the sanctions are effective, hours spent on diplomatic efforts in the third week will ensure success in the end.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	At last, when we aim to extract the sap just a bit or very little, our minimal injury is enough.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we want to extract a drop of blood, perform the incision carefully; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we should wait a while before performing the incision again.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term of scarpment refers solecuently to the depth or steepness of a cliff.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If it's a thick and tough brown cord, narrow with stiff loops, such that the bark of the knots is softened, loosened and easily resolved; if in summer, like almond oil or violated oil or oil from apple seeds, or pomegranate sage oil; and if in winter, at times like carrot oil or lavender oil, or camomile oil, or saffron.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the superfluity is great, let it be of frankincense, myrrh or oil from amaranth, or balm-yarrow, or cedars-oil; in accordance with their appearance.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	Article 5 - Wind Turbines and Noise Restrictions
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	From the place where I get moisture, I wash my windows with vinegar and water of mint and sumac or similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	A of that which the surplus is thickened, wash their windows in an antiquated manner or with water from the fountain called Sansuc (which has greater medicinal value), or with cider made from aniseed, or with chamomile tea.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	The wind-vane must be kept in front of the furnace; ensure that it is managed at a distance from the furnace for an hour or two, and that it rests with the wind vane.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done to prevent sandflies from biting before the onset of wind?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	In my opinion, during the meal, if someone is talking about using a vacuum cleaner or performing phlebotomy causing anger and irritation, it's best to address such issues calmly and politely. It would be more appropriate to discuss topics that bring coolness, like minty refreshments, acidic appetizers (such as endive), fresh lettuce, sunflower seeds, julep, or any other pleasant subjects.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	The feast was adorned with various delicacies such as roasted meats of birds and game animals, spiced dishes, and an assortment of fruits and vegetables.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	This text is in Occitan language and it talks about an herb (E) which produces a bitter juice that needs to be boiled down with honey, or barley water, along with sumac; also advising the person who possesses this herb to use moderation in drinking and eating. This herb should avoid being consumed by certain animals like poultry, rabbits, etc.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	On the day of circumcision and vasectomy, let the blessing outweigh the feast.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	In some cases, it may be adviseste to apply certain topical herbs like Arnica alpharac, or musk medications such as Muscada, or Alcelita just before cooling or right after a fleamassage or rubdown; so that the main limbs are comforted and the wound is gently treated; and one should not take measures resulting in scarring.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	During the thirty days following circumcision, do not perform any other surgery on the scrotum or testicles; also avoid surgercuuring over the malignant gout and podagra areas, as well as those of the shoulders and elbows. Also, refrain from operating in areas where you feel pain: these body parts should be left undisturbed after circumcision.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	E is not a remedy for those things but an attraction of the blood from members, just as with a warm compress on nipples in cases of blood flow from veins; and use it so that viscous phlegm becomes dissolved heat within the member, as if with a warm compress over the belly and navel; for this rarifies the limb and scratches its redness and alleviates pain, thus resolving viscamo phlegm.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	The rocks are often affected by rockfalls during heavy rains or snowmelt, due to the strong attraction of gravity and complete removal of loose soil from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	It seems that there might be a misunderstanding as the text provided is in Catalan, not French. However, I can provide you with an English translation of this Catalan sentence for your understanding:
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	Here are these windows that you only use with honey sometimes; and occasionally they're used with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some poultices are fully saturated with water and used in the treatment of measles.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The water is essential for the bottle to be full and have a lot of gas, it's either pure water or water in which there are scattered herbs suitable for the desired effect.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The shape of the funnel should be determined according to the size of the opening; with both diameters being equal as per our design. Let the quantity (volume) of the substance passed through it be one pint, and let its depth in length at any given point on the circuit be proportional to the amount passing through a small hole relative to the overall volume that goes through it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	The sun sets behind the mountains and across the clear lake, its golden light casting long shadows on the lush green grass below. A gentle breeze rustles through the trees as birds chirp their farewell to another day. In this serene moment, take a seat under a tall oak tree with your feet propped up against the trunk and close your eyes, letting yourself drift away in quiet contemplation.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	The sea is as wide as the left side of the crossroad where we are standing or from here to the forge; it's surrounded by a lit bonfire around us.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	This windy great master of that which we have mentioned before; and the little kindness of that lady, according to her illnesses and the state of he who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The valves of the veins, except those in young and large-sized creatures.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of this lantern is such that the flame extends from a modest firewood placed carefully in front of a few wax candles, and it pauses there on the crossbeam of the transverse beam at the center of the lantern, so that the fire may be ignited without burning out the lower parts.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	A prop applied to the limbs of pain, and the word spoken within the truck we have mentioned is exposed only when there are breezes, so that it does not blow away the utterance and cause steam to rise from that truck; soon the breeze disperses.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	According to the process of making empanadas in a microwave oven following its method, and repeating that if necessary until you achieve the desired results.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	A jar that is used in the treatment of polio, without water passing across or through it, but filled with water and resting solely on a limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the form of wind: The stronger this breeze becomes, the better it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	In English, the Roman numeral "XCIVII" translates to the number 97. The Romans used letters from their alphabet to represent numbers. Here is how it breaks down: X = 10, C = 100, IV = 4 (since I before V or X subtracts one), and II equals 2. So when you add them all together (X + C - IV + II), the total is 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leeches are not administered in joints or on body parts where it is impossible to attach suckers due to their small size, just as they would be placed on the skin and mucous membranes such as lips, gums, and similar areas; or on a denuded area of skin, as previously mentioned.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	In the quality of using those that you have found bloodsuckers located in the waters downstream from pollution sources.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Patients should drink plenty of fluids during the day and night to avoid dehydration, without causing any swelling in their abdangs. They should also evacuate waste regularly through defecation and urination; and they should apply heat to the affected area where it turns red; and rest on raised legs.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	C sums are fun and handy in many cases.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	It is possible to have a windy location in the summer; it may even be desirable for some activities like sailing or kite flying.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	When the sun sets in La Horra, people love to relax and enjoy their time by the water; they often swim and express happiness.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the leech bite is prolonged near the cement of the bloodsucker, and it oozes, then for an hour place a cloth in cold water, and wrap that over where the bleeding occurs.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the blood vessels are multiplied and the hours polished on the glass vitriol trissat (a type of mineral water), or poured onto their stagnant causes with a certain appearance; then be left undisturbed in that state until they break off, or placed upon the ground where fava beans have been crushed, and allowed to remain there until they adhere to the location, at which point the blood vessels will break off.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	In some cases, if necessary, leeches may need to be rotated or replaced during the process of blood-feeding. When is this possible?
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If leeches are not allowed to be suspended, one should clean the wound and apply an antiseptic before inserting a needle at the site; then bandage it up tightly so as to stop any bleeding immediately.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	He wants to cook some cabbages; sprinkle a bit of oil, salt or ashes over them and then sauté them quickly.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Chapter Three: The Art of Restoration
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is essential in the art of medicine; and it involves the restoration of bone fractures and accidental dislocations.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh children, I tell you of this ancient capital where wise magistrates and common folk reside alike, as well as those who have never glanced at the pages of old volumes nor read a word from the scriptures of antiquity.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason, it has been made that this system of scholars in our land was privatized; and I will not forget about it for a moment at any time by any means. And I have not employed it later on, but rather through the reading of ancient books and studying their understanding within which one can extract the science from those works.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	The application of scientific research and studies throughout the entire length of one's life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	In this treatise, I describe the subject of my current chapter in which I have delved into using all that science has to offer on the matter; moreover, I present it to you, so that others may occupy themselves with its elongation and expansion thereof; likewise, it shows at the end what happens upon its declaration. Furthermore, this results in various forms of transformation depending on how we administer them within these treatises as is done by virtue of their declarations, much like I did in two preceding chaputes.
Capitol primier.	First Capital.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summae and collections from the essence of broken bones, whose introduction is necessary before we begin recounting the members of craftsmen and various others.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	In the beginning of this chapter, we will discuss the main themps (themes) and ideas presented in these verses. The focus is on you and those who are ready to learn or already know about this noble art; that is, understanding the truth behind these words.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	When an accident occurs involving a bone fracture or dislocation, twisted or displaired joint, it is advisable to seek immediate medical attention by undergoing a surgery or cast application, depending on the severity of the injury and if there are no contraindications. Additionally, one must consider factors such as weakened immune system due to age or pre-existing conditions, extreme cold or heat weather, which may affect the healing process and overall recovery time.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Regarding herbs and seeds; avoid consuming meats of poultry and rabbits as well as fatty meats and dishes that are rich in foods which may lead to blood clots, including those with a high risk of causing appendicitis or unwanted discharge from any bodily member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Many years later, he returned to his original regiment which he usually called home.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	So the broken bone starts to be healed when the pain caused by consuming nutritious foods rich in protein and fat has diminished; just as these foods, such as bread made from wheat with water, butter, cheese, meat, fish, innards of cows, blood, peas, fresh ones, meats that are similar to those, the healing process involves a greater coagulation of fractures.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	The dry bones that once belonged to humans and were in the forest clearing or to the elderly and weakened, cannot be restored and solidified according to their nature due to the aridity of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	Bones are consolidated and continue according to their nature for the drying of those members, and they continue and solidify as do the bones of small infants.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature provides and nurtures the broken threads of every aspect without any visible reason that leads to excess which adheres and strengthens within us, where we form firmness and endurance, just as fire does at mealtime, for no cause prohibits it from carrying out its own functions.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason, it is necessary that you abstain from foods of ill-health, such as those which are heavy and greasy, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Different types of fractures according to the affected limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	The ways of breaking bones are diverse according to the variety of members, for a shinbone fracture is different from a skull fracture; and a fracture of the hand bone is different from that of the back; likewise, all other body parts vary in their fractures.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	I remember the entirety of all types of bone fractures, described in their separate sections within its own capitalized chapter distinguished from others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of fractures in the tibia and fibula.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The various types of bone fractures in different anatomies; one is the arc-shaped fracture that occurs due to falling on stars; and some instances are fractures along the length of the bone: and so are fractures of saturation, fragmentation, and displacement, both resulting and non-resulting as it is prepared for writing in penalties. And there is a splintered disruption at the top, and a small crack fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The total essence is captured through the design and ambiance of each restaurant, as it reminiscuces its unique character in its locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The sentence you've provided appears to be in Catalan language and translates roughly as follows: "E per a agua es congusta fractura del os: tortuositat d’ull, e de l’eminència i apprecció d’ell al sentit, i sobri dels ulls quan compreimes aquella amb la teva mamà."
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	It does not seem that there is any obvious twisted appearance nor do I have evidence of your involvement when you touch the bone with slight agitation and discomfort without great pain; it's unlikely to be a fracture at this stage.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Yes, it is possible that the narrowing or small crack may be due to the compression of all your tissues as well as medications you remember from that period when such an event occurred. Moreover, this subtle stricture should be closely monitored.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	In cases where the patient has an arched and non-divided bridge that does not fit well in place, resulting from improper treatment of all parts of their dental structure, then one must begin to rectify at your earliest convenience any teeth that may develop caries or other diseases.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If the eye suppurates (produces pus), keep it closed for two or three days until the suppuration ceases, and then reopen it according to whichever method you prefer between using ointments and bandages.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	The restoration and alignment of the tooth is considered less severe if it occurs in a case where no significant damage occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	E, strengthening the ties that follow upon her recollection.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	In case of a severed limb (either arm or leg), it is necessary to extend the injured part as far as possible, if it's your own body part; or hold onto your mother's hand if the wounded member is small; or use two pieces of cloth or one long piece.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	E is your position where you pause the limb according to its natural figure, while the extended parts of the limb remain stretched out, now it's time for you to make those additions return to their original place and in accordance with each manner that can be found there.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And may you look after each other according to your strength, so that no ill comes upon the weakening or injury of either; and strive with all your power to apply yourself to one another as friends in the best ways possible.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	At that time, it is appropriate for you to touch your mother's breast, and if there is any different cause present, adjust to that and equalize according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Evisceration and extensive stretching or compression can also cause hematomas due to the pressure exerted by surgical retractors, as well as contractions in the limb similar to what has been observed during procedures involving retraction techniques.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	In addition to the previously mentioned principles of proper alignment and balanced operation, as well as rest and tranquility; I advise against excessive rotation of that body part during your vigilant hours and sleep time, along with its motion and agitation, and beware of any discomfort it may cause. Also, always maintain a stable position to ensure the absence of pain when changing positions or if an injury occurs; wait until you can comfortably move the limb in another position that does not cause pain before adjusting. Furthermore, make sure that the limb's posture is straight and evenly distributed during recovery to prevent any misalignment.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the strictness in the limbs is that I recommend to you; for you should know that the severed members are diverse in their smallness and greatness, and also in form, as those mentioned above.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	The ones that are small as the arm and the palm and seem like those, at times I wish to wrap them in a soft, fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	May it be as you say, that such a large bucket or barrel is wrapped in tough and durable material so that the fastening of this member creates an unyielding grip from all sides without allowing any leakage through.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	A proper technique to apply ice on an area of injury involves stopping all activity nearby, pausing for adequate time at room temperature, and then placing the ice pack over the location of that fracture using three or four layers of cloth as a barrier between the skin and the cold source. Additionally, strengthen your grip with a small piece of padding on top of the layer to avoid direct contact with the ice.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	A higher authority oversees the place of departure and urges you not to focus solenly on your own interest in relation to the site of the break.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	A small bandage is wrapped around the area of the fracture and gradually softens the tightness, allowing you to move more freely from that location over time.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	A person wraps a bandage around another, and then covers that with an additional layer of fabric making sure the original wrap is encased within; and your work will be on securing this wrapping and moistening it according to what was said about the first wrap.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	The time interval between the contractions of the abdomen (belly) in Leon or Draper's method, which is equal to the tortuousness of the fracture, if in it there is tortuousness; and otherwise, no pauses at all.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	In the event of a puncture on another tube, replace it with these ready-made reinforced patches as soon as possible, provided that there is no inflammation or abscess in the location; leave that for one to two days if you have an inflammamo/abscess at the same spot. Apply pressure onto the punctured tube.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The leaves of the canna lily plant are slender and gracefully formed, either made from wood or bamboo-like stalks; they're also from palm branches. Each leaf is broad in its own way according to this shape and figure: long, wide ovals with pointed tips, arranged alternately along the stalk, each blade connected by a sheath at the base of the leaf stem or petiole, forming an arching pattern as it extends from the plant.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	In Empero Cove, it is advised that the cast placed on this fracture should be thick and heavy, smaller than other casts; its length according to the size of the limb in magnitude and smallness. Wrap it tightly around the bones or else use another band as per your initial restriction; then wrap it evenly and neatly according to how we've described the restriction, so that it is placed on the fracture site properly, and more towards where the fracture extends in length, making the restriction tighter.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The threads should have a certain thickness and subtlety, and they must be flexible; if the threads are too thick, just as I have seen in the operation of alveoli preventing blood flow from capillaries, it is a significant error when there is an unequal pressure.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	"A subtle essence should not be considered suitable if it cannot adhere to those who require rigorous standards and does not keep a consistent focus on what you desire, as well as maintaining clear vision amidst the distractions."
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the illness is of the same kind as those affecting the extremities near the strictures in his joints, then he should take a break from activities such as running or lifting heavy objects during which these might aggravate any injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some fractures are at the plate, and accidents or injuries occur in the knee, leading to a permanent memory of that moment in the capital as it is quite significant.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	On the first day after surgery, patients are often prescribed crutches to avoid straining and stressing the repaired member; this prevents the limb from bearing weight too soon, typically around one or seven days later, depending on the patient's risk of developing an infection.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the method of castles that ancient people used for healing fractures, dislocations and twists, which they considered to be effective remedries.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	In the midst of a bustling restaurant setting, there's an appetizing display of fried crumb-crusted treats predominantly favored by women and children, which are neither too hot nor too greasy, but rather reminiscent of powdered sugar sprinkled over wheat flour. They embody the core essence that emerges from the grinding movement within the mill's walls.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	He does not compose in such a way as he writes his letters, but rather creates with that book of hues, and stops the composition from being neither thick nor subtle; and he applies it to that.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	Thus, it appears that the extremity comes from there; at certain times you must wrap around that piece of lead whose weight is one dram. Enter to two drams and no more than that, and hang that led on a hook attached to the beam.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Here's the translation of your text from Occitan to English:
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	The people of Totsan trek through the mountainous terrain, equipped with their climbing gear and winter attire. They are on a mission to reach a high-altitude lake or an alpine meadow. Carrying cribriform sacks and comfy footwear for both water and snow, they plan to spend time exploring the natural beauty around them under their administration's guidance.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manieyra experiences joint pain and separations of bones, as well as accidental injuries such as cracks and fractures in those areas. The affected part can either be stitched with a suture or immersed in warm oil for relief, and it may also rest on soft support to ease the discomfort.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this liniment mixture there is no healing property for cauterized and expelled pain, it's not suitable for restoration.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another remedy to relieve pain from a sprain is using poultices made of dandelion root and wild poppy seeds; crush them together to create a paste. Apply the poultice to the affected area for relief.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	In case of a bone fracture and how to treat it according to current medical guidelnace: ingredients needed for rice pudding include almond milk, camomile flowers, violet petals, wheat flour, and sugar. Please note that this recipe is unrelated to the treatment of a bone fracture. The pain in their toes and the discomfort in their feet during a walk is not due to any member being scratched or injured.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	When May gets sunburned, he applies aloe vera gel or cool water to soothe the skin.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Autra manieyra de emplastra es fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: receta d'azeita d'oliva e de semenza de li, e d'especiai, mèl i llavorers, majorana, flors de violer, camamilla, totz ana partida i engual; tots sian trissats i cofits amb aigua de saule o am aigua dursa o am vi, tot aquò segon la qualitat del membre i le repos dins el color de llur.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Mays Ypocras does not contain any artificial ingredients or additutes in the beverage that has been extracted from the leaves, but is solely made of honey and olive oil; it also states that it should mix between thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	It is observed that there are bruises on the severed member while preparing for its restoration and due to reasons where it lacks warmth so as with myrrh, oils and similar substances from those causes which have been recommended earlier.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	To create a poultice for alleviating pain and inflammation, follow this recipe using comfrey leaves or bird's nests, althea (also known as plantain), salt, cloth strips, and bandages. Here are the steps to prepare it:
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	In accordance with the degree to which you may twist or stretch your ligament, it is advisatur that if there is no pain or pricking sensation and your bone isn't broken, then for several days do not move excessively or strain yourself.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you experience intense pain or swelling in that area, come to see a doctor as soon as possible and apply cold packs during the hours following the injury.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a piece of woolen fabric and sea sponge soaked in warm water, then immerse that into the bath where you experience itching and pain. Once there, let the member remain inside until the burning sensation ceases and the pain is reduced; afterward, rest for an hour without moving the affected limb. Finally, place a soft woolen cloth soaked in warm olive oil over it throughout the night to prevent inflammation from returning, thus relieving the discomfort of the limb.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	He who speaks in subtlety and weaves a small web within the initial constraint shall find solace therein that is serene.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	"And as for the pains, sorrows, inflammebies and all other injuries that have been removed from you completely, along with the need for plasters or bandages, now it is done in such a way as you had at first when you started."
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If you do not decide any of the reasons mentioned above, I shall wait for you at that place three days or four days later. The following is the translated text from Old Occitan to Modern English:
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	In Ephesians Chapter 5 verses 12-33, Paul provides guidance on relationships within the church community. He emphasizes love and respect for one another as Christ loved us and gave Himself up for us. Here is a summary of key points in verse order with explanations:
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you come across a fracture with swelling and pain but not too severe to prevent movement, know that the injury is still in its initial phase; then insert an ice pack around it during all waking hours for three days; gently remove any constriction after this operation, and allow nutrients to reach the area so that healing can begin.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	When the owner of a piece of land that borders on another's land does not restore it at once after an injury occurs and waits until deterioration sets in, according to common law rules, this is considered wrongdoing; and if they were entitled, he enlarges his own lands at the expense of others.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	In fact, I have never visited any of those places myself, so it's more reasonable that I won't be able to give firsthand information about the water there.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Capitol second: In the event of a head injury.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of bone fractures are diverse, and their causes are different, none being caused by a blow from a spade, as the percussion hits all the bones within the body, which is left behind after the impact just like in wood splitting; or the spade penetrates part of the bone, cutting through the flesh without passing beyond its outer edge; this type of froidure is called an avulsion.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The nature of this plague from these two fractures is whether it's severe or minor, and if the fracture is dislocation or subluxation; its cause is due to either impact with heavy blows or falling upon stones, and similarly shaped.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This is whether this fracture or pertains to the panicle that has already approached the lip which is behind the bone; it is on the surface of this two fractures and the swelling from these types of fractures is large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	Capillary fracture is a type of crack that occurs in the bone due to its fineness and slightness; for this reason, it's often referred to as hairline or hair fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	E is a type of bone fracture that occurs from the impact or percussion of a stone, which causes an indentation on the surface layer of the bone and then extends into various parts of the diaphysis (shaft) of the bone. It resembles how compression fractures occur in vertebreal bodies when they are subjected to a forceful impact that results in their extension into adjacent portions of the shaft.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	The majority of blood vessels in the human body are similar to those found in children's ears.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	These kinds of crisscross fractures, they are also called steps as well as separated stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	"May you always find refuge in the abundance of water at its rightful place."
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	In the past, all these types of fractures were detected and investigated through X-rays, as well as for examining cases of suspected or apparent corrupted tissue.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A special kind of bruise is known as ecchymosis that appears over the skin, it spreads outward, and tends to turn a dark color when there's been an injury such as a bone fracture.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	The Mayo Clinic approach to treating fractures considers the consequences of illness and the hours if you experience any accidents that may signify something serious, such as vomiting due to cholera, confusion, loss of consciousness, convulsions, high fever, diarrhee, and thirst. This treatment also extends to conditions similar to those mentioned during major risk factors, and is not treated with just one method.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	Fate an error, your hopes for health may begin the cure now.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason why it is allowed to come before your exam if you are sick at the beginning of winter when there are certain times that you have studied in the weeks preceding December 14th, according to all conditions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is during the summer days, take shelter from midday heat or excessive sun exposure starting seven days after using the ointment; by this time, the ointment should be completely absorbed into your skin and any possible reactions you might have experienced will have subsided.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the basal skull fracture extends to cover the brain, and it is fragmented and torn, then you should take measures to stabilize the small and damaged fragments, according to my recommendations.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	R2: You are aware that your breed is prone to this infectious disease, and you uncover about the bones according to usual practice and methodology as much as possible according to the nature of the plague, and be truthful about the disease.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	So it's decided you must detect the flow of blood or an abscess drainage, now stop by his water supply and ensure he has enough beds with infused gauze and aromatic oil, and make sure to let him rest until the abscess is settled; and be careful for any bleeding. Begin attending around the wound area and during dressing changes.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	There are two methods of operation for water.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	A maniordi, tu incidirás los dos trozos con estrecha separación y esta será su forma: E apropíncate otro cortador para este, ligeramente más ancho que el anterior; y esta será la forma de hacerlo.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	A prop manager has more licenses than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	The document seems to be in Occitan language (a Romance language spoken in southern France). Here is the translation into English:
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	He uses his skillful technique in drumming on the scissors to avoid cutting his fingers and ears that way.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is strong and hard, you should be able to drill holes in the front of the circuit that you manage with scissors or pliers (which are not shallow).
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	E cannot be named solevee but those who do not stop at the term of the skull's thickness in that area where it is appropriate to place him; because the prow is a rounded extremity or edge on top of that which is left above his head, resembling an edge or small circle, and prevents being submerged or passing through the bone's thickest part.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	E is convenient that you grasps of these three chalices a great number of which it should be appropriate to the nature of each one, so that they are within your presence in all parts of the brain, with the extreme point of each being acute, its length and shortness corresponding to the extent and brevity of each part.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the way of three types of teravels (trepanning): The quality of penetrating in a broken skull involves stopping the teravel on the bone and turning it around until you know that the bone has been pierced; then proceed to move the teravel to another location, and pause so that there is enough space for the width or diameter of the drill.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	"A prophecy inside the waters that lies between each of these stones is as follows: to attain levitation abilities and remove any obstacles in your path, including bones or other reasons for hindrance with tools crafted from water."
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	B) Take utmost care that the scissors do not cut any cause of injury.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	So you shall have circled the perforated bone, and thereafter separated from it without breaking continuity, so that it may be extracted; as to ensure its resemblance to an incision made by a scalpel, but with it being thinner and more subtle than other incisions.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If you have any cramps or sprains, the heat of this oil will ease your discomfort; and with it, we apply compresses and ointments which we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is the surgical approach, distant from fear and lengthy, which dissected Gualia and the Lauzeck with great expertise; this is its principle: it's necessary for you to identify where in the location there is a severe and obvious fracture, within that once you have identified such a breakage, gently approach the tip of the cutting instrument whose form is slow but joyful.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The lenticular fracture is like a lion's bite and does not involve any underlying cause, whereas the acute fracture consists of two long lengths forward; thus sometimes occurranno. That the lenticular fracture be adjusted to the cribriform face where it coincides with the aggressive side in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	A prophecies about the scissors of a small wound that holds all the bones and makes them rotate so easily, and you are sure there is no panic in any accidental occurrence, and if the medicine14 was the most common among all people and the most ignorant of theirs; indeed, they were sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Lahoras is Romania's only cause annexed to the OS disease in certain locations of the spine, which results from a lens-shaped abscess that causes extreme pain and suffering. If treated promptly, it can relieve these symptoms and alleve the patient's distress.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the pancreas, and that is removed from the body as a whole, it becomes apparent on the outside. In this case, one should strive to remove all traces of asperity (sharp edges) with fine instruments, hours before allowing blood flow through those areas for which preparation has been made in various quantities so that they can be administered at most convenient locations throughout the body and in the most proper way according to how much tissue loss is observed after the fractured bone operation.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	In your ratio, administer first the lesser lat of those ingredients and use aprop the most subtle part thereof; do not stop doing so until you have managed to administer the greater quantity as well as the most refined portion of all such ingredeants.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any of the other minor capillary or subtle fractures, it is indicated that you administer treatment according to how much improvement has occurred in correction.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	E does not appreciate all those who have studied that subject.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	E, in fact, reveals much about the great ruptures we have shown them.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	When removing the tumor (panniculus), it becomes wrinkled as you excise the skin, then cover that with a dressing based on the amount of bleeding, and immerse it in oil ointment, and place that over the wound; then take another folded or tripled cloth and immerse it in oil ointamoil and place that over the first one, and do this as much as possible without making it too heavy for you to handle. Then apply it only with the amount of dressing needed by the bleeding so as not to burden yourself unnecessarily.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Elias has this remedy for a day or two; you shall be safe from abscess if applied promptly and followed by administering medications such as linseed flour, chalk powder, ash poultice, and similar applications to the affected area.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	E is what you should make of these powdered medicines that are pulverized over the wound, so they're dry; and universally, administer any medicine with properties to repel and not sting.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Watch carefully and ensure that the plague in your cure is pure; it should not be near any oil or other substance; nor should you add virulence to it. When applied over the scalp of the brain, it corrupts and spoils this area, and worsens the illness with its malignant malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	Accidents in the head, as when you manipulate its bones and mostly when you prescribe the cure for it, and blackness on its surface; therefore consider if accidents to illnesses such as those mentioned occur, know that it is possible they all happen due to carelessness.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it'n't a case of blackness but rather the medicine that is suspended so unusual, and owing to this medication causing such darkness, you might occasionally experience taking some honeyed portions and scented rose petals in parts III. The herbalist collects the required plants and prepares them according to traditional methods; then, they apply those remed cups containing the necessary medicinal ingredients that are suitable for healing.
Capitol .iii.	III. Introduction to the Legislative Branch - The U.S. Congress
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	At the restaurant, they serve a dish where it is tied off. (In this context, 'trincat' could refer to a method of cooking or preparation.)
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	It is not severed from its root but divided into two or more parts that are still very high and regal, or one of these has certain vestiges, having four roots with some branches, where the separated part remains fibrous, and it is not broken off but twists and winds.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two pieces breaks during your intervention, you must return it to its original form and place as soon as possible without further damage. This is in accordance with the rules for handling such items under Roman law.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	E shall grant thee water for thy ease, and watch that thou cause not harm to those affected by the illness.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the superior part of the nose and does not extend to either side, within a few hours it should be aligned at the end of the bone where the deformity occurred.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the break is in two pieces, hours will have a similar appearance to water droplets.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	On the first day of the break, if possible, I will try to have you fully restored by E coyta; otherwise, it should be in approximately 7-9 days for the abscess drainage rest period.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	A prop on the forehead a piece of cloth and if the fracture is in one segment or two pieces, depending on whether it's more substantial, you can wrap that up completely around your nose. (Translation from Catalan to English)
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Five days after the old restaurants where the walls were covered with tapestries, which changed every day, but I didn't see; suppose that the mosaic is wrapped in a book of sweets like powdered sugar, and before leaving, make sure that each piece has been firmly fixed and its frame reinforced.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Some wounds may be in the nose, near the cavity of breathing, penalty greater than if wrapped with lion's fur; and it is a serious injury to your nose which causes difficulty in breathing and not forbidden for ventilation.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	In this matter it is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do so, and if you wish, remain silent.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	If you experience another outbreak of blisters or a rash, apply a thin layer of vaseline on your nose or affected area to soothe and heal the redness. Alternatively, try using aloe vera gel for its cooling effect. Remember to keep the area clean and dry.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If Mays does not decide to take the aposteme off, he will have to keep it on for several days. He should use wheat flour and powdered eggshells as an albumen; then place them over his lion's paw without lying or causing any harm.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of your nose are fractured or dislocated, you should immediately seek medical attention to realign them properly and extract any foreign objects if present. Doctors may use instruments suitable for this purpose. Afterward, it is essential to keep the wound clean and apply a moisturizing ointamoconder with antibacterial properties to prevent infection and promote healing.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	He decides to inject the patient with a needle, knowing that it could bring relief and administers metal tubes within which they feel completely safe.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV. The Capital City
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	The reattachment of the fractured mandible is a surgical procedure that involves aligning and securing broken pieces of jawbone back into their correct anatomical position, typically using plates, screws or wires for stabilization. It requires careful planning to ensure proper function and alignment post-recovery.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	If the mandible is dislocated and the fracture does not involve an avulsion (bone fragment), if it is displaculed only slightly and is curved to one side without being trisected into two, then its recognition becomes difficult after a few hours.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	If the fracture is on the right side (dextrum), you should insert your left index finger into the mouth of the injured person and if it's located in the lower jaw (mandibula) then, similarly, use the right-hand index finger. Gently apply pressure to ease the dislocation outward while supporting the other cheekbone from outside; do so gently until you achieve alignment.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If a jaw fracture is split into two, administer extension of both parts within the shortest possible time to achieve stabilization.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	The jaw fracture is often caused by trauma to the lower or upper teeth that results in dislocation; therefore, place a pause on the broken mandible at chin, and place a support underneath it using a duplicate dressing (or a piece of material as long as the length of the mandible), ensuring you securely attach the sling according to how you are equipped for this application. Apply these supports without causing further damage.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	C commands the evil to rest and find peace, and halts the feast of its wicked lions.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	The ancient tradition holds that the figure has been altered in some way; by Tuesday you must feel disheartened and discard it on the third day; then promptly rectify what has already been changed from it, and sprinkle over it the cerot (a kind of wax), or an albumen of egg white, or a flour mixture of chickpeas. Then you will still have the old figure, and place it under warmth to dry.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	So, then the cast is attached and placed over it, and the position of the bone remains unchanged - let that be, which does not move out so that it becomes healthy and strengthens the fracture; many times this fracture heals in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If an abscess recurs after being drained previously, we recommend administering the amount of water mentioned earlier during the period in which it is healed and reabsorbed again.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is a simple plague, you should consider whether it's an isolated or compound fracture; in that case, you must carefully decide on the appropriate location for treatment of those injuries based on the nature and severerity of the trauma.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the mosquito menace is significant, you may increase the use of fogging according to your needs in quantity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And so you shall have those enduring thoughts again, and of them not being lost forever, the hours on which your fears return as a vast wave; or else, rest upon one of the beacons that are suitable for this and embody it, within which it is healed.
Capitol .v.	In the case of Capital v., a significant legal dispute arose, which set an important precedent in intellectual property law and contractual agreebetween parties. While specifics are not provided here, generally such cases may involve issues like copyright or trademark disputes where "Capital" could refer to either plaintiff or defendant, depending on the context of the case details.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	During the restoration of the furcula, when it is struck.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The broken furculum is detached from the starting point right beneath the muscle, and that fracture has been made in three different ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	The joint is broken, separated or split into two parts that do not come together again; it is more inclined to deterioration; or so happens that they remain fixedly joined and it is difficult to restore them; or the fracture is a disadvantage.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	In that case, when the fracture becomes too severe, you have to be present with two ministers; so that one holds the broken furcula steady and the other extends it on that particular side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Article II: Repair and Restoration of Damaged Structures
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If you wish to fasten your belt, loosen the holes for some inches of extension, and let its size correspond to the amount needed; extend and elevate the buckle and align it with your waist such that the fitting curve corresponds as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot aim the end of the furcula beyond the target, then as soon as it has reached its peak, let the pain be reflected upon your neck and pause on his muscles a slightly larger size.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The Minister places his finger between the bones that are now separated and raises them so they align with one another at their original position, then you realign the fracture and set it as per your instructions.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	In my dreams, I sense lingering echoes and sweet memories, trying to grasp onto them as they slip through my fingers, making it difficult for me to hold on to these sweet remnebrances.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, then for a while your ingenuity will be one of those instruments you have prepared here, and since you had left behind the furcula staff that serves the cipher; and this staff is made of wood or iron, which has this shape.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	E is similar to the hinge about which this curvature exists; and its width should be according to your need based on the size of the joint or lack thereof.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	In May's law of leverages, the length from the fulcrum to each load is proportional to their respective weights on the operation; both ends have equal distances as much as possible, and one end is wide while the other end is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disruption of the swelling, which you extracted while performing lympsuge, is extensive and there's a risk of infection, then adjust the edges of the swollen area with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the disturbance is slight, or you fear of abscess, use your judgment to apply bandages and poultices according to the severerity of the wound's bleeding.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	If you notice an abscess forming on your face, avoid touching or squeezing it at all costs and apply a warm compress to the area for some time; rest with your head elevated.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	The Mays tightening of the bone at its plague and section is that pauses are filled with a paste made from mill flour and egg white, and placed upon a lemon peel, and then pressed against the affected area; if indigestion occurs because of this, apply honey immediately. It's an old Sardinian remedy known for its lengthy use and wide application around the injury site. Then cover with pulverized oatmeal twice over the paste; wrap a thin board (about 3 fingers wide) around it in such a way that its width is about three times longer than the board itself, and surround this on top of the fracture location. Next, apply honey as if you were wrapping something up, and move it back and forth over the neck area and both upper areas affected by the injury; reduce to cover all parts thoroughly each time there's a decrease in bone at the fracture site. It is not recommended to conceal this treatment with your hands or clothing.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	"If you find the wool thread to be damaged under your feet and cut, do not leave it that way; and as soon as you see any discomfort every day, when such restlessness is soothed or you notice the star has been repaired, at once mend what'amoorto and strengthen the splice."
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	The patient presents with symptoms of pain and discomfort in the shoulder area, often accompanied by slight tingling sensations during nighttime sleep on one side. Therefore, it is suggested that an elevation of the affected limb might be helpful, raising the angle of the elbow alongside this to enhance muscle relaxation; as a result, the arm should be kept attached to the corresponding shoulder.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	F- If the wound is not neglected and does not become infected or form an abscess, it should heal within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	She examines the face of her patient at the pool and adjusts in the suture, restoring that which is restored and ensuring that the humerus fracture has healed.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	E is strict and comfortable according to the manner in twenty-eighth days, and sometimes stays at other people's houses during time of that event.
Capitol .vi.	The capital city of France is Paris, which in French is known as "Paris". It serves as the country'amoor region and hosts several important institutions such as government offices and cultural landmarks like the Eiffel Tower, Louvre Museum, and Notre-Dame Cathedral.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Shoulder fracture surgery recovery.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula was torn in the spot of you and not torn by you but at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	Therefore, what you see there is the location of it - and it's divided into two parts - and not known except by touching, now according to the shape of the fracture it reveals itself from within and reduces that according to its natural form in every way possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	The proposed pause over the polar bear album of howls and stopover for the leopard doubling; along with a gradual increase in the total quantity of spoons, following the subtle star table pattern.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	When Maya left the concave indentation on one of the sites of the spatula, now you align that concavity with the lion'cups, and then proceed to move the stele according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Article 12 - Right to Freedom of Movement and Residence within State Borders
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Each day he considers the matter anew; and after all attempts to soothe it, another approach is taken to strengthen both sides of the situation as soon as its place is restored.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Jagua casts a spell of malice over his land.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula has been restored in 12 days or less (0.25).
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Then you should know that this number has been completed by the hours when your body dissolves and that you are certain that that is of the bones from which it begins not to be feared nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If you find blood coming out of the nose or ears, and if there is swelling in the throat, then immediately cut open the trachea (windpipe) with your knife to let air pass through. Follow these instructions as advised during the fracture of the furcula (wishbone) due to an abscessed wound if necessary.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII: The United States Capital - Washington, D.ebra
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Restoration of the piezo fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Some branches are broken in the middle of their length and also at the ends, which become split and fissured.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	The accidents caused by when you break your leg are that it leads to the decline of your gait and causes events leading to great pain, difficulty in walking, and numbness; and it is clearly visible in the bone fracture which is not hidden from feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the hip should be done so that it is rotated on its axis, with a pause between the hips' shoulders and gently press against the muscles, and adjusting the ribs to the two-thirds level as much as possible and appropriate, maintaining the figure of the bone according to what is feasible and suitable.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	A light and delicate thread wraps around the ember of straw and over thin slats of willow or poplar, creating an appearance of levitation; you then wrap that in a cloth; and with subtlety, you tie it securely so it doesn't break easily. Proceed to wind the liadura (binding) following roundness on your back several times, and tighten it gently but neatly; always pay attention to the binding throughout, ensuring it is softened appropriately.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to remove a dressing due to corrosion, irritation, pain or abscess that affects the area, causing much discomfort and removing the bandage as soon as possible; rectify any issues caused by moisture through proper wound care. Then, reduce pressure on the wound occasionally if it is on the face; adjust the tightness to a level where the injury heals properly.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII - The Capital City
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	At the coastal restoration, how many sections are fenced off?
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	It should be known that fractures of the rib cage are not cuts but in large holes, and from the extremities on their left side there is no fall towards those injuries, but rather to this extent because they are cartilaginamois.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	One cannot understand a person if the feeling of empathy is not awakened within them; they should seek to listen and learn from others' words.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The surgery should aim to best restore and align the fracture as per the possible direction, within which it must be set accordingly based on its positioning; then apply plaster or other suitable methods of immobilization for the broken bone, if required.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the breaking of the ribs is descending towards the organs, it causes severe pain and piercing sensations as if by a puncture, thus causing difficulty for those who have been wounded, coughing, vomiting blood; this condition has a difficult healing process.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The Ancient Egyptians were skilled engineers in that area, creating many inventions.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	Here is the translation of your text into English:
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	In case you develop an abscess and it is not caused by a light matter, let water be given to them immediately so as not to delay the treatment; if it has already occurred, then urgent assistance with water should be provided.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They found that lowering the intensity of wind exposure and increasing its duration led to more robust growth; however, there is concern that excessive water accumulation due to prolonged wind exposures could damage weak locations.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They said aloud amongst themselves: "Where is the place that may be covered with the lamb's wool, which was previously submerged in oil, and where soft ashes lie between the shores within whose abundance it lies, when enveloping around as on its roundness; and near to it let there be a remedy for the maladies of pleurisy with food and medicine."
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	The disease does not cause strong contractions in the wound that was previously inflicted; therefore, they pierce it immediately with a pointed instrument. They fear over the illness and expect that cuts will form on the location, revealing the jagged edge of the bone. Then they remove the object which maintains the fracture and facilitate its removal by making incisions around the bone.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	When the slit of the lips is too large, sew it up and provide her with sutures until healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If your finger becomes infected with an abscess, apply warmth and gently press around the area for relief, and ensure that it is cleansed properly to prevent any further infection.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	The house should be built on the land where it rests and within which it is healthy.
Capitol .ix.	In the context of legislative bodies, "capitol ix" could refer to a specific chapter or section in a bill or document related to the United States House of Representatives. However, without further details on its content or purpose within this hypothetical scenario, it'amo possible to give precise information about what "Capitol Ix" is or represents.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Spondylodiscitis of the T2 and L1 vertebrae
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some neck injuries involve the fracture of cervical vertebrae and may extend to the ligaments or similarly affecting the spinal discs of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	E if you're wondering whether it will be cured or not, let hours consider this: how many times your wounds have been soothed and astonished and killed and could never extend nor strengthen those, and when constrained thereof by your words or pricked with a needle, do not feel any pain in them; then you know it's not healed. And within the same period of time, if disposed like that, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	If these things are true and you believe in them despite the constraints of logic or reason, then at this moment understand that the backbone of the body is saved and illnesses will be healed through prayer.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you think the coin is fair and want to know whether it lands on heads or tails more often, let's take into account its weight.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you happen to fall ill again and your condition worsens, turn to those who have experienced it before and follow their guidance closely; when you lie down on your back, breathe deeply and relax as much as possible, sometimes allowing yourself to roll onto your side and relieve yourself. Remember that death is inevitable, so do not rely solenly on treatments without considering all options.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If Maynard does not choose any of those options, the cause is better and more plausible.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment for this is to apply a cold compress over the swelling caused by spondylarthrosis or rosaceous ulcer, or from the mugols of hot ashes; place it on that area until the swelling subsides during the day.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	The healing hours are a time of rest and comfort, during which the spirit is strengthened; and it commands the illness to take repose and tranquility, that it may not sleep on the departing pain from which it shall be cured.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	He decided to extract the entire wisdom tooth or any other cause that is separated from him, as time goes by and you see overgrowth on the gum line and that the roots are exposed; accordingly close up the gap of the gums with stitches if necessary. Also treat that inflamed area around the incision site until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	Mays is torn off the last bone of the ossose (hooked ribs), and he't be the son-in-law, then take the dog to death on the left side as it lies down, so that you may reach with your right hand the broken bone while still possible for an exact second; place him upon a board or table if desired, and support that part.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	I sense scattered thoughts in you; times when that thought prevailed over the others, and this one too, and how to cure the illness before it can be healed.
Capitol .x.	Capital X is a term that might be used to refer to the most important city or place in a specific context, such as Washington D.abit of being a central hub for political and administrative activities within a country. In this sense, "Capital X" could represent any capital city around the world, like London (the UK's Capital), Paris (France's Capital), Tokyo (Japan's Capital), etc.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Wide-area network (WAN) restoration refers to the process of recovering and reestablishing a wide area network that has experienced downtamo due to hardware failures, software issues or other disruptions. The main goal is to minimize service interruption by ensuring continuity in communication across different geographical areas. This can involve various strategies such as redundant connections, backup systems and rapid recovery procedures.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anchor tarts are broken, and if they break, the hours since the fracture do not exceed those at the ends of those, and run into the length and decline to the parts thereof; and lead to bad pain in that place and puncture, and the chest is stunned when it is broken.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The instruction for the restoration of 'lu' is that you stretch your hand over the one that lies above the fracture, which figure do you resemble?
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If you break it entirely at the limb, after some time your arm will grow back in accordance with how it is balanced while being reconstructed to regain its original shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in your elbow or it extends to other joints, hours ago you should consult with a doctor about this discomfort on your abdabdominal area that may be related to the restoration of that fracture. (Note: This translation contains errors and seems nonsensical. A more accurate translation might be:)
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	Then you will have attached that piece on the glue, pause for a moment to press it onto that shard of wood or bone, and strengthen it with precise stringing over which there is no risk of cracking nor movement of the structure.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	The parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus is a story from Luke 16 in the Bible. In this tale, a wealthy man lives a life of luxury while a poor beggar named Lazarus sits outside his gate, longing to eat what fell from the rich man's table. After both men die, Lazarus goes to heaven and finds comfort, while the rich man suffers in torment in Hades.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	Mays decides to stop applying heat or cold compresses on the affected area until the swelling has subsided, and rests that area in water as described earlier; then resume restoring it gently as before.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If the eggs are about to hatch or are being broken, turn them around at that time.
Capitol .xi.	CAPITOL XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Bone healing of the tibial plateau fracture.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Assistant: The water is located between the two shoulders, at the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If the wire is broken, restore its hours in one of two ways. Which one should you choose first according to this guidance?
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Sian Liatz is located at the extreme ends of the bay's length and rises to an impressive height.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	The text provided appears to be in Catalan, a language spoken mainly in the Catalonia region of Spain and some parts of France, Italy (Sardinia), and Andorra. Here is its translation into English:
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	"A heavy cast iron pot should be placed over the fire, to which one adds some water and breaks down ingredients; then add meat to the mixture at intervals until it returns to a boil as described earlier."
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other method is that the malady should be resupplied over one's own cervical spine, and let it hang down from the head of its ligament; then command two ministers that one of them holds water above the fracture near to their hands; and the other takes hold of the tail end.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you wish the extension to be more powerful, hours work on reinforcing the crack and its other parts, so that both ministers are extended towards their respective sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	If the fracture is close to the end of the bone, then its healing time will be approximately three months and the other side of the fracture should stabilize as well.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	If the fracture is caused by a fall, one should rest with their limb elevated above that place and on that affected area.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	"Apply that cream appropriately and according to its coverage and application guidelines for proper use; avoid overuse as it may lead to skin irritation."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Mays decided to try an antibiotic cream for his acute hemorrhoids, and by the seventh day, he felt a significant improvement in swelling reduction with no further irritation after using the natural wool-based sutures initiated from six days ago.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The technique to apply that cast is by first placing the plaster over the fracture and then wrapping it with an elastic bandage around the plaster; next, adjust the arm using a splint holder and place your hand over the muscle underneastern.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	After the anesthesia wears off, patients are advised to support their arms with pillows or cushions while lying down, ensuring that the arm is elevated and there is no pressure on the surgical site in case of any complications related to the fracture.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	There are many uses for needles.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	Article E establishes that the fractured stele should be placed at a distance and height equal to those of the other stelae; it also states that there must be space between each stele according to its width, with their length being proportional in proportion to the breakage on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Article IV shall strengthen the regulations already established at the onset of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	The limitation regarding the site of the fracture is quite restrictive.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	E, the fracture is more elongated than the minor stricture.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Then if you come across the situation of these stones and the restriction as we have said during the time when restoring its position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear an abscess, let's not delay the incision and drainage; typically by day seven as we have instructed.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Article E establishes that food should not be stored anywhere for more than three days, as it may spoil or inflate in the production area; hence, the provision of surplus is prohibited to prevent wastefulness. Therefore, correct any discrepancies according to what has been stated above.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	In case you injure someone but do not intend to cause any harm, within three days or more, you should not detach the ligature but instead inform them of your apology for the incident.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	Blessed be thou in thy dwelling and on your bed; may it be peaceful and secure for you. May the head of your bed remain steady and sure as you rest upon it, and may your feet find comfort beneath it. Amen.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Rest during the full course of your meal and consider at all times whether day or night that you are not distracted nor in a state of repose when thinking about the severed limb, or if it is softened by moisture; thus adjust accordingly to preserve your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Pause the meal with dessert after having finished all dishes, as long as the dessert is subtle and consumed between bites during which it's chewed thoroughly; then proceed to eat heartier food afterwards.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The common remedy of the healer and the household consists in keeping them strong for eleven days; and hours apart, they should be bathed and have their wounds treated with ointments that correct such issues.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture is simple and stable, healing will usually occur within a few weeks or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII. The Capitol Building and Its Historical Significamoiety in American Governance
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Bone fracture surgery recovery.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	This text is in Catalan (Balearic dialect): "El braç és composit d'oses dues les quals es denomenen dos fulcils; dels quals una és petita i és aquella que sigui el dit pous, i l'altra és gran i és aquella que es pauseix de sob a la petita dit, de la partida més pus deja".
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	The big window is broken only slightly, and the small one too broke into pieces.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	At some point, the small lamp goes out above, shortly after its restoration it is barely noticeable, and its healing effect is even less noticeamo.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	The light from his left eye is broken, and the healing of it is difficult, while its healthy state is challenging.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	The bad smell of that rotten meat made my stomach turn twice or more.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	If the bone that is broken is located above the ankle joint, it would be best to consult a doctor for restoration of its function; take some time off until it has healed enough.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	The ancient well is deeper than the fenced one; hours pass as I extend my gaze towards it more ferventamoùg.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If the two foci are closely aligned, it results in a stronger focus of light through magnification.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	The bishop should be standing over his kneeling hands, which are extended outward on a chair, with the palms of his hands facing upwards and towards different directions than the rest. His right ear is lower than the others, and his left eardrum hangs low like a pail that has fallen from a height.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	E is the essence of humanity, in its highest glory or deepest despair, for that's when malice shall not thrive.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	The Minister extends his hand for the signing of the agreement, and another Minister follows suit accordingly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	A physician must strive to ensure the well-being of their patients and seek the best possible outcome according to medical science.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	"In the bill of your tasks, the hours you dedicate must be fully invested in its place for it to bear fruit."
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	A andar in the two separate sentences that make up this quote from Dante's "Divine Comedy," it says: "If there be none to take your place, neither is my hope of your redemption lost; then you will come on him according to the manner which we have described above."
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the Mayan fracture is a simple fracture, I have made no attempt to manipulate it myself, so I will take care of that procedure.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you decide to drain an abscess during the course of your meal at a restaurant, first line up a sterile gauze pad made of cotton and beeswax, with its texture being smooth and subtle. Then gently press it over the very spot where the abscess is tender; afterwards apply a prepared plaster using powdered moleskin mixed with clear honey, and then wrap it around that area tightly but not too much to restrict blood flow. Place the bandage which has been soaked in warm water on top of the fracture for added relief.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	The names of the stars on this map are placed in accordance with their major coordinates or divided into one sector or two sectors respectively.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	However, if the crack extends beyond its usual boundaries or affects lower segments of it, relax this restriction a little after being mentioned in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The sheets that cover your fracture should be made of soft cloth and not hard or abrasve; the thread with which they are strengthened should lie properly between fine and thick, as we have explained above.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	Person A contemplates the members and their connection to certain days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If you experience any condition that requires rectification of the limb, similarly as with previous injuries, ensure to immerse the affected limb in water until such time the pain subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	He left the member in such close confinement that he returned to find it withered.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the contract is modified and the obligations are mitigated accordingly, then all things considered, your virtue recovers completely. (In a legal context)
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	E considers whether the supplement should be avoided due to strictures; if so, it might be necessary to administer that in small doses and strengthen its consumption over several days until tolerance of the supplement is achieved.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	In case of illness or accidents not caused by the ones mentioned earlier, one must notify within two weeks or sooner if possible.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	A proper treatment should be suspended for its effectiveness in managing restless movements, and that causes the patient to sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	The healing of this fracture may take between thirty days or thirty-two days, and in most cases it is restored within twenty-eight days, depending on the complexity of the case and the instructions of the doctor.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII: The Legislative Process and the Role of Congress in the Federal Government
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Restaurating the break in the forearm and addressing the associated symptoms.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You know that the witch's potion and her spells can cause paralysis of speech and not death; rather, she casts many enchanting charms.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	Evan accidentally injured the man's fracture or attraction; hours later he felt that the pain persisted and spread following equality, and accordingly paused to place his hand gently on her extended limb.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	The minister shall extend the offer of equal positions to those within that are properly qualified for such an appointment through suitable connection.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	In case of cuts or grazes, wash with clean water and soap. If infection occurs, seek medical attention; otherwise, cover it immediately using a dressing material according to the size of the wound, and wrap it securely in sterile gauze.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	The key to the lock is hidden in the folds of the vault door, and at that moment it appears as if by magic, and commands the evil spirit to bring forth with his hand the palm trough locked; long lengthy it may be brought forth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	Let S be the armor piece that is hung in which it floats, so that its body may be applied to the palm; and straighten that according to cover.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the crack is outside of the partition boundary, the hours must be counted until you reach the designated stone and another such stone of the previous partition in hand; so that it may remain open and straight; and pass through the narrowest point, as when turning the rod between the two mentioned stones.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you break one of the nuts from these trees, later on he tells it grows, its husk is stripped off according to when and how it ripens, with its shell attached at the base so that it can be lifted up easily without being damaged. He takes a small straight wedge and places it beneath the cracked area to help lift the nut's shell open properly.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the break is on another finger (index, middle, ring or little), then it should be treated similarly to this one of today's thumb, by setting and tying it with the same bandage; or if all are broken in a continuous manner, that's better; or pause for a short while on that small stone, as we have said in the bone.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	In my establishment, I aim to prevent and mitamoor any instances of food poisoning as outlined in the following description. This includes implementing strict hygiene practices, proper storage, and thorough cooking techniques. Furthermore, we will adhere to local health regulations to ensure a safe dining experience for our guests.
Capitol .xiv.	In Chapter xiv, the following passage is presented in English:
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Bone fixation for femur fracture repair.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the cuyass mate were broken and it was declared as follows, according to which it was transferred in front of and under the supreme authority.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of the loom shall be done thusly that the lame one is strengthened above the fracture and other limb beyond the fort; the evil spirit shall lie prostrate upon its belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The minister extends the entire treatment according to the quality when the fracture is located on the inner side of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Mays was running through the forest, when suddenly she stumbled upon a hidden path leading to the old mill at the edge of town, and in doing so, extended her hand out for balance while the other momentarily broke the twig underfoot.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the breaking is due to negligence, then both parties shall be responsible for paying damages resulting from such negligence and limit their claims accordingly.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	The surgeon should then compare the two pieces of your bone and ensure that they are joined together in a way that appears natural to the bone; afterwards, he may proceed with bandaging and suturing, unless there is an incidence of post-surgery swelling.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	In case of an insect bite, apply cold compresses for two to three days until the swelling subsides, and then return to your usual care routine.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The wrapping of Lucy's wrist fracture: cover the fracture with a stiff bandage, and fold it over two or three times, trimming any excess; then wrap another layer around so that it reaches the bone protrusion on the elbow.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	The long pole gets caught between the chessboard and the table edge of its owner's side, causing the end of the pole from the higher-ranked piece to move over towards the opponent's board; when this happens, if it touches a piece or an empty square on that side during the movement, those pieces become en prise (captured).
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	He bent down over the kitten at that spot with the broken leg and placed a stone on its hind legs.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Fill the cream cheese containers between the walls and the large cloth-covered table, to ensure that it sets properly.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	A: Begin by applying a firm bandage over the area of the three-finger fracture (or four fingers if applicable), and as you move away from the fracture site, your grip on the bandage should be lighter and less saturated with moisture.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	A proprietary extension to the ends of the field up to those partitions that reach until it arriveby the pole, and strengthen both the ends of the beams on the other side such that his support is not lost from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	The agreement stipuleby both parties ensures that neither rust nor corrosion nor swelling similar to those occurs; and if any such cause arises from those, you shall promptly discontinue the use of it, and rectify all that has occurred in accordance with what has been mentioned multiple times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	The Mays of the Church is in the Lord's power over this bone that may put it away when you are able to do so; and if not, then upon your request, he shall remove that bone, and cure whatever ailment has preceded within which is sanctified.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some waxes strengthens this ankle fracture more than other ointments when applied to the joints, as we have mentioned in the appendix and on the label.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in restoring lu in such a manner made, it does not lead to the bad limp; and if restored alone, another water should be applied alongside the other spring, then after some time the one from which it was taken will start limping again.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	The swelling of the abscess lasts for several days or a little more, and all depends on the complexity of the cases and other factors.
Capitol .xv.	Caput XV or "Chapter 15" in English refers to the fifteenth chapter of a book, manuscript, document or legislation titled 'Capitol'. It could be found within any such contexts where content is organized into numbered sections for easy reference and navigation. In this case, it denotes the specific section labeled as fifteen in the Capitol text.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Repair of the Denolh hip socket fracture.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Knowing the breakage of the shield's rim leads to additional accidents during its mounting on the pole.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	May Sinclair suffered from broken bones at one point; now it's just a crack or strain in her joints, and that'cuz it's quite painful, so overall she feels very uncomfortable.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the ruin is to be carried out in a manner that best replicates the original water system, as described by those who witnessed it before its removal, and reconstructed according to what is fair, feasible, and efficient for convenience and ease of construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	He picks up the paste and applies it over that round stone; if you want to use water appropriately, then stretch your hand towards a suitable amount.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Article E considers all the measures previously recommended in other fractions, as well as applying them to cases of contusions and similar situations where it is necessary that they are healed within an appropriate time frame.
Capitol .xvi.	Title: The Influence of the U.S. Capital on Federal Government Decisions
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Rehabilitation of the clavicle fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	In the bush there are two bones of which one is big and it's named after the bush; and the other is small, and it's called honeypot. (Note: The original text seems to be a mix between Old Occitan and Catalan)
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	Accidents involving the breaking of water that cause injury to both bones in the arm result in repair as much as restoration of the arm with such a procedure being considered one operation.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If the shank bone is broken into two or more pieces, the entire piece is considered invalid.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	Sei's trekad les os plus subtis, la camba es converta en parts desanantes.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	S'es trincà les ossos grossos, atravalla aquell ripensament, i és d'aquelles causes per les quals no saps més pensar en tu amorats.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Article II provides for the extension and equality of rights and liberties in accordance with that alignment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, Sir Cove, if the split in the barrel is a patched hole, let it be extended as light and easy as possible, and compliment your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the field of carpentry, a beam is any cause for concern regarding its structure and stability, especially when you attach brackets or fasteners across your entire construction, taking into account pieces of wood that may be knotty from past damage, as well as scratches or dents. Remove those with minor superficial blemishes but avoid the ones affected by rot or deep decay. The length should match that of the beam, and extend slightly beyond its end part.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Wrap each package around the longest side of the box and place one end at the top edge of one half while aligning the other end with the bottom edge of the opposite half, ensuring both ends are within an inch from the base corner.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	The structure of the sail consists of three pairs of extreme tips and one middle section; in this stretch, leaning to the right or left side is strictly forbidden for safety reasons.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	The administration of a fleet is based on the length of service; it remains attached to the fleet in order to maintain that continuity.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	The English translation for your given Catalan text is: "The majority of the coasts where you find this rocky fragment are naturally prone to erosion."
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Aprop should consider each day the change and study that arises for second studies, and you keep them away from inflammaturm and other similar causes; and in case of any such occurrence, then take measures to ensure their well-being with the help they require if sick.
Capitol .xvii.	Here is the information you requested in English:
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	The ankle and bones of the foot, as well as their injuries.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	In the talus bone, a complete fracture occurs; however, in the foot, some fractures may be stress or minor ones that result from overuse and not necessarily accidents; but serious injuries can occur as well.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	The birds of prey break their bones and lift those bangs upwards, hence the pain makes them sit on the earth as if they were ascending so easily.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	A prop for the bowl that is elevated from others, and approach it, then press down on it, and align those edges so they turn around in their place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	There is an empty stomach and a sudden stop; there are two closed lids on the small table in front of him.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	The strain of that arm is increasingly extended, so you have wrapped it with bandages and other items from which you derive support.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	After three or four days have passed, you will release the bandages when you find the bones to be swolamoins, broken, or dislocated, and surgery on those shall be done with such care.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	Mayes's secret recipe for pie crust is to use only half the amount of butter you would usually add and replace it with an equal quantity of shortening, as I have done myself and recommend this method in restoring those old recipes from your grandma's cookbook.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	This is an excerpt from the Catalan version of "The Book of Disquiet" by Fernando Pessoa'cuy written under the pseudonym Bernardo Soares:
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	Mays, he must ensure that the bird's legs are securely trussed with two to three or more twigs, then I take a pause while arranging each section of the wrapping in lion-print fabric, and tighten the table at the lowest part of its chest so that it holds firm. My hand rests on one of the table's legs, near its belly, to keep my tongue under control.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	E be mindful not to forget that you have not considered all the causes which I mentioned in other types of bone fractures from similar accidents, and this applies to any such incident as well.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Fracture of the femur bone and patellar bone, along with the man'ebu (male pubic) ramus in a male individual.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman's ring finger is cut off, she will remain in that state for hours before falling asleep on her side with a slight bend at the joint where it was amputated, and remaining there.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	The mother holds the head of her child close to her chest, and as she does so, she feels a deep sense of hope; meaneblty, she lifts her baby's tiny body higher and higher until it is completely outside that part where there is no air (like suffocation) and the bone-crushing force returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	During the pause between bladder contractions, when one feels the urge to urinate, it may help facilitate and empty the bladamoeba by reducing pressure on the urethra and allowing for a smoother flow of urine, which can then return to its natural rhythm according to how it initially started, before returning to its original state.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	After two weeks or so, the environment is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take a sheep bladder and stretch it over the trunk of him, then insert it entirely into his mouth, and afterwards blow into it until the bladaster is inflated within the trunk, so that the wound closes up again.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	As soon as you recover from your illness and have been symptom-free for at least seven days, please get in touch again to continue our discussions. Stay safe!
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	The surgical implants of the hip prosthesis for men or women are screwed into the bone and administered in the restoration and alignment of body mechanics that have been recommended with respect to the hip joint.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	The water that is right does not hide within these narrow fissures and mostly towards the one to whom I have dedicated my study and understanding; for that fracture symbolizes you in the greatest legal provisions regarding restoration and strict regulation of it, and thus understandably so.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	In the home's garden where it is pruned, take an eggplant seedling, and place the stem in that soil; then cover it with planting fabric, and wrap it around so it is completely covered, and leave it like this for three days or weeks, until it has healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX of "Capitol" by Suzanne Collins is a part of the dystopian series, The Hunger Games. In this chapter, Katniss Everdeen continues to navigate through her challenging experience in the Capitol after being rescued from the Quarter Quell arena.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Bone healing at the site of a fracture when it is immobilized.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is adviseback to that which occurs in cases of broken bone, especially if the bone is large as it is with the cow's or assistant's bones, or similar to what you call, that syringes should be used immediately if your conditions require surgery as we have previously mentioned.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the storm clouds gather and you seek refuge in my shelter where I provide warmth against them, as long as there is no other reason for your presence.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Person A: Hey there! I heard you're planning to repair that wound today. Just be sure not to leave it open for too long or else an infection might occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	Mays decides to treat the abscess quickly; within eight days you should restore it completely, as the abscess needs to drain by then and do not approach it on the third day or after four in total, for this may cause further complications.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	When the broken bone protrudes through the skin, it is called an open fracture. In such cases, you should immediately seek medical attention to reduce the risk of infection and ensure proper treatment. The sooner you get care, the easier and quicker your recovery will be.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	May's stretching is not suitable for your condition and balance of health, as it increases the risk in those cases where you are most concerned; instead, I recommend using this support which is made of iron, its length being about seven or eight inches and its width according to the amount of padding required. Thus, it becomes necessary for a doctor to choose among three or four such supports based on what your fracture treatment requires in terms of specifications.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	In case of any delay or disruption, F is responsible for informing G promptly and providing a reasonable explanation before the scheduled operation time.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	The territory in question shall be bounded by its extreme limits as delineated on the attached maps; and it should extend to such depths or widths where applicable, taking into account the largest dimensions within said divisions.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	En esta es la forma del inglés:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	It appears that you've written a phrase in Greek which says, "λάβρη βουλεντ καθιλέμπω," but it seems to be incorrect or nonsensical as it doesn't form any coherent meaning in Greek.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	The tendon at the end of the raised limb is paused over the tip of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	Certain types of engines operate within a cycle where gases expand and compress at certain intervals. They are balanced through some form of equation.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Then you must compare the ends of the fracture between them, and if the transected end is too delicate, and does not accept that instrument well for good alignment, then you should insert the end into the bone that the instrument has the power to grip onto.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce all the losses to water that have been repeated, then at least avoid those risks associated with which we have mentioned to you from ignorant sources; or cut it by one of the mountains in any way you can.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	A prop of the rat that roams in the vast fields and small corners.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is broken and I place it in reduction, immediately the intense pain subsides, as if hours had passed before it returns to its original position; hence, here'amo provides great relief from the severe suffering.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	The completion of the restoration you have performed on your skin caused periodic submersions in a clear black substance, and more specifically during the summer season; do not expose it to seawater or any other cause that may lead to irritation and corrosion.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	In the procedure of bone grafting, special care should be taken when handling and preparing tissue samples during the restoration process. Ensure that any excess material is cut using appropriate surgical instruments according to the amount of tissue involved.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Carefully watch over the wound to prevent it from getting infected, since dust particles have fallen on your surgical instruments and unfortunate events may occur causing death or severe illness to your patients. It is important for their health.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the treatment of a fibular fracture is different from other types of fractures, it would involve stricter measures due to its unique anatomical position and function in weight-bearamo. This could include immobilization with a cast or splint, possible surgery if the fracture is severe or displaced, physiotherapy for rehabilitation, and ensuring proper nutrition for bone healing.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	Is the plague great or is it a bad plaster? And you fear those accidental injuries of which we have reported to you, and you feel pain in that place, for hours now you do not want to rest on top of that pillow, but rather go under that enveloping tough sheet over a bed of stones.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	On the day or two after the storm is to begin, when it has already started brewing in the sky and its clouds are gathering overhead, be prepared with warm clothes and some provisions as we often do during such weather events; just like those which include essential medicines and supplies that one would need.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	The members should be dressed in such a manner that the padding runs from top to bottom with ease and comfort, ensnaring the limb at all times during day or evening until it is fully consolidated and immobilized; hence ensure proper preparation for this method.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If it rains for several days and the soil is not consolidated or detached from its base, be aware that here you may face challenges with erosion if you attempt to cross a river in such conditions.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	Of those injuries that have been separated from other lesions, which are not separate themselves and cause pain by affecting the limb; proceed to incise them as is possible at your discret [assistant stopped here, likely due to an error in text generation or a misinterpretation of the instruction].
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	In this passage from Dante's "Purgatorio," the speaker explains how sins of greed or gluttony, such as hoarding more than necessary for one's needs, will be cleansed by a storm of rain and wind until they are thoroughly washed away. This punishment is a consequence of excessive desire for material goods and demonstrates divine justice in Dante'amo poema.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	In the water where my speech stands and you now present your piece: when thine arms are raised, let them hover over thy limbs as if they were the bones of a skeleton and its joints; appear to others as those of large members, yet do not assume attachment or detachment from it too often lest many times one might fall into death through this; keeping within that which could break easily for strong impact may cause harm in 20 days or 30. At the time of the feast, come to the church, and if you see her there, greet her; but if not, let it be.
Capitol .xx.	Capital XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The healing process that occurs in the vicinity of any bone fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	These repeated injuries worsen this condition in the remains of bone healing, especially near the joints, and it becomes filled with a lump-like structure of the limb; and greatly restricts the member's natural function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Adonc (Then), he considers if the wound is recent and severe in order to administer certain medicines such as aloe, balm of Gilead, mirabolans, asses ointment, acrasia, and similar ones for those who have consumed any or all of these. Also, I prescribe them a remedy using the same substances but mixed with white wine or vinegard to stop the wound in gauze, and then bind it firmly over the wound.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	The removal of a splinter that has not been out in more than two days should be done carefully; if possible, remove the same one again until it is fully removed and does not cause pain or discomfort any longer. Alternatively, you can press down on the affected area with a sheet of plastic (such as plastic wrap), because plastic has properties to keep anything impressed in the body members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays shall not be compelled to change his place of residence and move against his will, nor shall he have to endure excessive or disproportioned burdens, as long as these do not affect the higher authority's domain; only if it is necessary within that territory which has been redeemed. And for such matters where sanctuary may be granted.
Capitol .xxi.	Title: Capital XXI (21)
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	During the healing of a bone fracture, it is restored to its original shape and function in accordance with its natural structure.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone is fractured, and the proper blood flow to the affected limb is not provided soon afterward for various reasons - among which one is excessive swelling of the lymamoi (inflammation) and vascular ligature that was done incorrectly; or due to an overabundance of stricture in the sutures preventing nutrition from reaching the limb; or due to superfluous compression; or due to excessive movement at an inappropriate time; or due to a lack of blood supply within the body of the malaise and weakness of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The cure of water is to soothe the illness and make your tender heart within which the wound may multiply, and brings healing baths; and enters laughter and joy over you.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	The absorption process occurs in the intestine, so that the substance can be properly digested and to prevent further dilution of the already present water from gastric secretions; thus allowing the nutrient to pass through correctly and return to its original form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	The restoration of fractured bones and the prohibition of their operation in water that heals.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	Quan the fracture and restoration of your bone are performed with proper care regarding its curvature and prominence, it will be naturally shaped in a functional form; however, you should not expect that this procedure alone will completely restore the original strength and shape of the affected limb. It is important to consult with the doctor who belpsure that your bone heals properly and regains its functionality.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Mays and so they build farms, markets, butchers, restaurants which have been created in our land; this operation is shamefully causing great fear for the symbol that it threatens to destroy.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	Mays's claudication and anemia are recent discoveries; they often occur due to excessive water consumption with herbs such as yarrow, similar to stinging nettles, mallows, and semblances of those mentioned earlier; his remedy involves a mixture made by emulsifying them into a paste much like a diaper rash ointer; or that it consists of the mucilage from the seeds of yarrow with its application being as such in the form of an ointment; or that they are fatty figs, which have been crushed and mixed with cologne oil, resembling some of the medicines previously mentioned for relief.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some veins are frequently exposed to rigorous friction and should be treated with gentle movements applied throughout the entire limb at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Mays' tortuousness and its subsequent formation into a rock have led to the need for surgical intervention of his hip, so that he may be relieved from severe pain, as well as preventing the continuous dissolution of bone due to excessive pressure on subtle fractures in the affected area. The procedure has been provided with ease and care by highly skilled and dedicated surgeaderes.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De sermo en dislocacio.	The topic is about conversation and displacement.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	A dislocation is a displacement of one of the joints in the body, preventing it from moving and causing severe pain and damage to the tissues.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When a joint is dislocated, it should be promptly reduced as soon as possible, and not delayed because if it's late, the area becomes swollen and much harder to perform the reduction of dislocation due to excessive water accumulation in that area.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	The use of antibiotics without proper prescription and adherence can lead to ineffective treatment or even worsening symptoms such as muscle stiffness and pain during an inflammation episode, among others.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove che tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malattie, ed apri son layssat en que repause l'apostema; ed apri son membre ch'embrocà am agüa cauda e oli, ed apri sia reduzit am facilitat.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	Every member shall be entitled to a fair share of the water from which the source arises.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	The capitals of the affected territories are moved according to what has been stipulated in case of a division; from the superior portion upwards, into the lower portion below.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV. In the heart of Washington D. C., the United States Capitol stands as a symbol of democracy and governance, its iconic dome visible from all corners of the city. Within its hallowed walls, history is made every day as legislators meet to shape the future of their nation.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Treatment of the lower jaw dislocation injury.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Dislocated jaws if not treated; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are slightly displaired from their location due to minimal movement, and then mildly relaxed; or they are completely dislocated through full dislocation, within which they are initially mildly relaxed at the joint between them where saliva from malocclusion prevents it, and that cannot open its mouth nor can its tongue be wrapped around its speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	The displacement of his leg is minor, so the time spent in major surgery returns to him with minimal cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	When a displacement occurs due to an accident or injury, it must be fully and properly addressed; hence, you should seek medical attention promptly without delaying unnecessarily.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	E is that the minister must touch the affected area, and interpose his finger between one tooth of the patient's lower jaw on the side of the dislocation if it is only partially displaced; or he should interpose both fingers simultaneously in case of a complete displacement, and all other methods are equally effective. He then commands the malady to cease and absolves those teeth from any position as they return to their original place. The physician aligns the mandible and pushes it back until it resumes its proper location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	Reducing a hernia is difficult, especially if both the mandibles are dislocated; thus, it's necessary to administer some water and oil in order to facilitate easy reduction of both sides, as mentioned earlier.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so they returned and were equal in their misery, with the mouth of grief closed but not comforted, moments paused over those dusty rags dyed red, made of wax and rose oil; and it should be tied around easily to alleviate much pain.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	E shall lie in pain from a severe sickness, with his head between two pillows, to ensure that he does not turn either right or left; and you must not force him for any cause; during his meal, let the lion'nibble be present, so when pains increase and jaws become numb, he may eat as much as he wishes.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	The water intake should be easy and it is not required to open the mouth for drinking and eating or coughing as long as the jawbone has been fractured and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	When a dislocated jaw is difficult to reduce and cannot be fixed in its proper place at any time, there may arise frequent fevers and persistent sores, accompanied by severe pain from the affected area, along with pure vomiting due to cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	Once upon a time, there was an old man who knew the value of water more than anyone else in his village. He had seen its scarcity and understood how precious it was. In just one day, he would collect rainwater, storing every drop to use for days when drought struck their land.
Capitol .xxv.	Capital twenty-five. This refers to the Roman numeral representation for the number 25 (XXV). In a legislative context, it could potentially denote the title of a particular chapter or section within legal documents, statutes, or regulations that pertains to matters related to Capitol building security, maintenance, operations, or events.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	The reduction of the sternoclavicular joint dislocation and distal end of the muscle injury.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furculum (wishbone) is not dislocated from the left shoulder due to its continuous attachment to the breast; however, in some cases it may become dislocated at departure and this has been reported before.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of Lu involves the disease casting a shadow over his body and extending its tendr^ils.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	An apple that is squeezed by the lock with your palm will return to its original shape.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Please apply that paste, powder, and strength to it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The extreme point of that which is cut off and continuous with it shall not be displaunted at any time; the hours cover so that it may be reduced and leveled according to what has been said, and according to how you have prepared it.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	He takes the paste in hand and applies it gently to the wound, along with powders and ointments, instructing him to maintain tranquility and rest until healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	The treatment of this type of injury reduces the affected limb when it is separated from its original location.
Capitol .xxvi.	In English, "Capitol" is typically referred to as "CXXVI". However, this appears to be an error or confusion with the Roman numeral system. The correct representation of "26" in Roman numerals should indeed be "XXVI", not "CXXVII."
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Reduction of the shoulder joint dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	The translation is as follows: "You should know that the muscle can be displaced in three ways, of which one is displaced from its original position to its neighboring position."
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second rule is that it must be displaced above the joint, and not below; and it should not be displaced behind for the shoulder; nor displaculed in front of the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	The majority of cases involve displacement and removal from the designated areas due to lack of space. This occurs mainly in those with fewer body fat percentages, as it is easier to remove them; however, in those with higher amounts of adipose tissue, it becomes more difficult to remove them.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	The loud noise from the construction near the lake caused stress to the residents of the nearby houses, and as a result, they experienced headaches due to the noise pollution. Furthermore, one resident had his jaw misaligned after an accident involving water.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	I ask that you keep your promise within reach of me and proceed at times with the care of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	E is the dislocation of the upper end from its usual position; therefore, you must distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the muscle sack, because there are visible differences between those two; and touching at the concave end on top of the muscular bag as if with a thumb, in which case the pain cannot be reduced to its original place, nor can it move that way during all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is moved from its original place and you notice a change in texture or color, and it has not been damaged, then it's likely the work of vandalism.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	D of this displacement is made mistakenly reduced when it's fresh and the illness is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The expansion of the fortress is that the minister lifts the wall above existing sections and raises his own adjacent towers atop them, thereby strengthening their position in their location; the minister also expands this section further outwards, and it extends beyond such that it returns significantly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	According to Mays, if you have been told to return home and not eat until the dislocation occurs, wait for a few days or hours depending on how severe the pain is; then drink plenty of water and take a soothing herbal bath with ingredients like aloe vera. You can also use flaxseed in water, fennel seeds, fenugreek, and melilotus (sweet clover) infused in water for relief.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	The illness spreads across his back and becomes worried about the threat of death that may happen in it, so he turns over on his side and feels for any signs of swelling or rigidity. He then asks a doctor to examine his spine with their hands, lifting up the muscle cap at the back, and tossing aside the illness so it doesn't harm the nerves below, while also checking that there are no other issues present in those areas as they may return quickly to its original place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to do so following this method: present yourself as a man who is much longer than the wart, and stand on the side of that wart. Insert your muscle just below the tip of the wart and elevate the wart's point upwards towards the parts above where the wart is suspended in air; another person then pulls off the wart from those areas above your abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the disease is liar-like and recurs often because of another cause being sustained, then it becomes a serious condition as the displacement returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	E is reduzit in form secondo un'altra maniera: ed è che si fissa nella terra un tronco lungo col quale sia ruotato il capo del quale sia dotato di figura, come un mortaio, per cui non sia grosso né sottile e sopra esso poggi vengano le lune, e anche il malaun sia sostenuto secondo la lunghepressura del tronco; poi che so poggiate sulla capocchia delle lune drappeggiato di luce dal'altra parte. E sia esteso il suo corno d'altrove dalle parti restanti del tronco, e a proporzione della sua distesa la maestà cresca verso le due parti in forza; e sia ritorna al suo loco con velocità.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	It seems that the text you've provided is in Old Occitan or a similar Romance language. Translated into modern English, it reads as follows:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Here is the translation of your text from Occitan to English, along with its linguistic analysis:
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	The following is an accurate and formal translation from the original Catalan medical procedure to the equivalent in English:
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	A precisely place the arm above an inclined scale according to latitude, and let it be extended towards the left parts, while the other side is suspended from the opposite direction so that the joint moves as quickly as possible.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	C clean the inner surface of your ear using any means you can, and let it dry as much as possible; then apply olive oil to soften the wax deeply, wrapping a cotton ball over all the skin, so that when pulled outwards, the wax comes off easily. After preparing the paste with beeswax and almond oil, spread evenly on the entire affected area. Then, press down on the inner surface of your ear to release any loosened debris; gently remove the cotton ball from the outer part of your ear, ensanguinately connect it at the base of the earlobe, and leave it in place for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	In times of illness, it's important to rest and eat well so that the body can recover more quickly; this is especially true for those with weakened immune systems.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	The appetizers served earlier and the main course accompanied by a dance performance have been appreciated highly. Therefore, it is advised to remain seated and not move around, as health protocols dictate.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If the laryngeal joint is dislocated due to moisture or another cause, it should be treated as soon as possible by administering three applications of cauterization, according to what is described in the Cautery Treatment Chapter.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If the cast and splint remain in place for more than a few days without being removed or loosened, the plaster may gradually pull on some of your skin causing discomfort; thus, it is important to regularly remove or adjust the cast to prevent such issues. The nervous system muscles at the base of which are affected by the cast might become lax or stretched and relaxed, so ensure that the joint does not remain immobile for too long as this could cause problems in the future.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	If a dislocation is made from the one that has been done, you should pull and extend it as much as possible until it returns to its original position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Let S be administered in that other prescription, and ensure that it is done within the scope of its intended use.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	If one suddenly losps the sense of gravity in their limbs and there is a delay in the movement of their body, it may be due to using banned substances that have been taken internally; as this altered gravity reacquires its original state and returns to nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Treatment of the shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Sapiens that the knee joint is displaculed it's difficult and similarly returns it's difficulty; and in case it is completely dislocated, mostly towards the front of the backside, this dislocation cannot be mistaken as a mere tear or touch if observed after any figure is dislocated. And when you adjust a dislocated knee, that it becomes apparent to you, because the joint cavity is concave and cannot bend nor touch its own muscle tissue.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	Those who have sprain their ankles and receive treatment promptly will experience less difficulty in healing; however, if they fail to treat it quickly, the swelling may result in a more challenging recovery process. The condition is especially troublesome when located on the posterior parts of the body, as this type of dislocation causes greater pain and distress compared to other kinds of ankle injuries, often leading to severe consequences or even death if left untreated.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	During the restoration of health, when it is possible to reduce swelling, ensure that the affected limb is elevated at least four inches above heart level and the armband should be expanded if necessary; gently press on both sides of the swelling with your fingertabns until you feel a firm indentation.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	If the joint is displaced backwards, return as soon as possible to double check with your doctor's office that there are no complications in the area of your wrist upon impact.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If the fault does not obey reduction, its hours dictate an intense extension and strong movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	Article III: Two Ministers Shall Extend Their Arms and Hold That Instrument Between Them So That It Is Not Lost During the Execution of This Agreebetween them.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	The sleeves of the dress extend all around, and it has long overlapping layers at the shoulders.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	E quant the midwife touches the joining with her hand, applying some oil there so that it becomes smooth; and gently pushes the jointing forcefully until it slips back in place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	The procedure involves reducing the length of the male's foreskin that is tight and causing problems in the area where there is phimosis; performing a careful circumcision with strict surgical descent; suspending the scrotum to expose it clearly, and leaving it covered by sterile dressings for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	A propria discrezione, quindi alla giunzione è formata nel suo posto, tolgi il legame di lui ed abbandonati quel lato.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If the joint is not too strained, apply your turn to plaster it immediately after washing, and leave that on for several days until it's dry; then remove it gently.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Mays decides to try a new method of reducing the joint inflammaturage and feels that it's in motion. It offers gentle moisturizing and soothing warmth during use; then, resting on the joint area, it acts as if it were a massaging movement; afterward, applying it with gauze over the bones, day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	The bird takes to the sky and then descends into the water; after some time, when its joints are warmed up in the early morning chill, it repeatedly lands on that same spot, moving rhythmically with one wingbeat at a time, first for a while, then again, and once more.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Title: Dracula's Migraine Elixir Recipe (Autumn Harvest)
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish to do so, pause on that cow's wet and scratched crack at the edge, and sprinkle some seeds there; since it is moist and facilitangs them growing into new grasses.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	The Malassane syndrome's cure lies in the junction between the arm and the elbow.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	"The dislocation of the malunion in the joint is slightly reduced, and its displacement counteraction is contrary to other joints; however, it suggests that there should be a speedy reduction at the moment of dislocation before it becomes stiff or causes pain."
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of this dislocation involves the patient sitting on a chair and extending their arm affected by pain over the table while the doctor places his hand or palm over the joint's vicinity, and gently pushes until it returns to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must also be noted that the palm should not already have been placed in the mother's womb; during those painful pauses of her labor, extend and reduce her arms over a table so that if the child dislocates itself from beforehand under her hands on the table, then its position will intrinscuely be above the joining of the two bones (of the arm), allowing the doctor's hand to grasp it easily.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	If you return soon and the wound is healed, that's good news. However, if it persists, do not hesitate to let an expert examine it in case of infection or inflammamo; also, don't delay too much as time might make matters worse regarding the progress you have made so far.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the meeting with Romans was due to its tortuosity; there is not much anger from any cause, but rather it seems softened and unable to raise any cause; now you should know that nerves are strengthened or weakened, and at times they do not exist in them but rather they have been reinforced by cauterization as part of the examination procedure.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	The text you provided is in Occitan (a language spoken in southern France). Here'amo the translation to English:
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	The movement of the liquid is always due to some gravity and occasionally by other forces, within which it gets heated.
Capitol .xxix.	Title: "Capitol XXIX"
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	The curative process for the displacement of teeth, or dental dislocation.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some verbs are displaced in the entire sentence.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	In certain cases of clavicle (collarbone) dislocations occurramo a dos o en el vientre, las horas se puede escuchar un clic y mueven la dislocación de su propio peso hacia abajo, hasta que vuelve.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	A proper support should be provided to the affected area and avoid any movement that might stress it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Article III of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states that "Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in teaching, practice, worship and observance."
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	In the evening of that night, listen to what follows this story and do not cease doing it during the day and exercising through movements, and practice it every night; keep at it for a number of days until you have mastered it.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	If you feel the urge to vomit and it is located in your upper abdaturant, do not induce emesis as a first response; instead, try sipping water slowly or nibbling on bland foods like crackers if possible, ensuring that you are in a comfortable position. If symptoms persist, consult with a healthcare provider to determine the appropriate treatment and care for your condition.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Pretending to be an expert, how much water do you think would displace the other components?
Capitol .xxx.	Capital XS
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Treatment of the scoliosis in the thoracic vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	If a person suffers from complete displacement of any vertebrae in the spine or neck, and undergoes surgery to replace those displaced vertebrae with prosthetics, recovery time is typically prolonged, as the body needs to heal from such an injury. However, death can occur due to complications related to this condition.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	Sign of water discharge is that the excretion of illness is involuntary, and cannot be contained; and often times it soothes aching body parts with lukewancious liquids such as one or two glasses of water, or a spoonful of some medicine from its location. In many cases, this has been remedied and the discomfort alleviated to four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	That one has now been updated in the records and is referred to as "yellowed".
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	The key message of this paragraph is that the quality of life depends on whether people can access fresh produce or not; hours do not matter if they lack access to it, nor does a general state of health in such cases.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In that which you see in cementation or percussion or imitation on those (ancients), let's say the ancient ways of conversation about curing are prolix, to which the more often one returns for profit; but I am quite familiar with that of which little is excused by its excess due to my closeness to the main point, for which I have exposed and formed it in various ways different from those in which you showed me this and explained this.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	"E says that in the cage made of glass that hangs from the front porch, it is neither healthy nor comfortable for them; similarly to those that are created with two latches."
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	Neither the former nor the latter is cured, but that which happens in both cases pertains to them directly.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The sickness is such that it extends over his face like a patch on one side of the wall, and remains as moist soil for its sake which does not crumble the stones beneath it.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	A prop up a straight pole that is planted in the ground near the head of the dog at one end of the post and another pole on the other side of the dog's weight at the opposite end of the post.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The bishop took the reins and was not confined to a tomb; another minister held the other in accordance with that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The handle wraps around the upper part of the axe head and extends to the end of the haft, which is attached to it; then strengthen the other attachment on its thighs at the hickles (notches) of it, and attach the cheeks to them; and adjust all the straps so that they are secured onto the opposite handle.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	The minister must extend the levy to the departure of the goods, and they shall not be exempted from the levies on their places where they are situated; however, we have stated that these places should not be seized in this way.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The mage places his hands upon the ancient scroll within that awakens, and then he rests them on that one tablet, adjusting it onto the table as it comes to life.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If Mayes does not return in this manner, the hours take a table whose latitude or longitude is three feet from it on each side, and digs into the wall where we have stated that evil resides at a location between the extremities of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	The patient lies on their stomach on the table and the therapist places their hands under the other extremity, then gently pushes inward until the spinous process is realigned and returns to its original position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you want to, then turn the pole that revolves around the moon; and stay in land with its head at the very end of the second branch, whose length is a cubit, and let its top be at the very end of the branch exactly two branches down; and each branch's length shall be a span, and they are all made to turn around within it. Each one should be firmly fixed in place on land according to its own nature so that it does not rot.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	Let S be a solid cylinder in which the rotation occurs, and let it rotate around both ends of the two cylinders.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	C is the top of a trunk in which the wood is formed, the length of which is equal to five palms and one foot that turns around; on the two other trunks it appears similar.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The ties that you have strengthened during the time of your illness and the troubles in which you were involved, as well as those that you endured throughout your journey where you held a position of leadership, are now yours to command and control at will.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Nearby each door stands a minister who guards the door and matches the seal as you have described.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	Esta parece ser una pregunta relacionada con el idioma. En este caso, se te pide que indiques si un fragmento de texto está en inglés o en otro idiamo. La frase "E esta è la forma del torn" está en italiano. Una traducción al inglés sería: "And this is the form of the storm".
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	The vertebra has returned to its original position and the location is now level again; after a few weeks, you may start doing gentle stretches and exercises on an exercise album, along with appropriate rest periods; the duration of each activity should be based on your comfort level in terms of exertion, and over the table which extends three inches or more from both sides, its length being proportional to the height of your torso, and at a distance equal to the width of the vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	A properly read the text you have provided, and use the malady of subtle deficiency that is within which they are healthy.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	There is some concern regarding the location at the end of the sanitary process, as these hours need to be managed with medicines that can effectively disinfect and cleanse for a long period of time, which we have recommended; it has already been administeralled in that location using plaster.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	In some cases, the displacement occurs at the last of the vertebrae and is conjoined by that displacement; it is that bone which may become imminent, so you should not undergo any surgery for this condition as this treatment could cause a fatal incident.
Capitol .xxxi.	Here is the translation of "Capitol .xxxii." from Latin to English, using Roman numerals for the numbering system:
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Treatment for a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	In cases where the articulation of the shoulder and muscle joint do not result in dislocation but merely slight movement, it does not lead to those issues that occur with other small joint movements or hollowness.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The joint is dislocated according to four movements, namely, it is dislocated forward, backward, upwards, or downwards.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	In the majority of cases, it is located on the front parts, with few on the rear parts or behind them.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	When the signal of displacement from Lu to the Malaute parts is four, when you adjust the malaute scale against healthy sickness, it becomes more prolonged and severe than that of healthy, and the sickness cannot double its own pace; therefore, one must speak softly. This is where the inflammamatory sputum occurs due to a cough abscess, because this part has reached its peak here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The signal of that which causes displacement beyond the parts is that the incidents thereof are opposed to this incident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of the person to whom this accident happened causes dislocation of the upper limbs on his left side according to the witness's testimony, however it does not double the pain that is in his lower belly; and if he tries to walk, he cannot go past the affected area. His urine is retained, and there is a swelling around it. He must be made to move over a stretcher.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	Signal of the part from which an accident occurs that does not expand its endings or pull back to double that fold when it bends, and the curve is wider than the other, and the folding is softened, and the tip of the object is at that point.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of these spices in this displacement is that you consider, at the present time, if the displacement is old and ancient, then it has become outdated and belongs to your administration's reduction according to its disposition; therefore, now there isn't a need for such an adjustment in all situations.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case of recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocation, you should as soon as possible return to the joint position and gently extend it towards both directions inwardly and outwardeste, and slightly rotate it right and left, so that it quickly returns without requiring any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If Mays does not return in this manner, he must prepare and stretch out the shroud of departure on his left side; or, if there are other souls to be buried with him, then extend the shroud over their bodies so that it falls on its front edge above them. Another minister should take hold at the middle of the shroud and another minister should stand at the end of the shroud.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	In English, the sentence can be translated to: "The extension from line L or from departure D to the angle's opposite side." However, this translation may not make complete sense without additional context as it seems to relate to geometry. Could you please provide more information about what exactly is being described?
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	S is the extension of those who in a countryside where evil is widespeby means that they are ashamed to touch their land and roam around.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This kind of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	If the displacement returns what we have said water, yes; if not, it is necessary for all species of water to speak of the proper treatment for the wound.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own body, when it is displaced, and the dislocation occurs in the internal parts, it causes pain over its left thigh; and as much as possible, the limbs are supported above the area of the wound at that location where between the top of the injury and the place that was hit lie. The extension of the limb is towards the posterior side from the part of the humerus to the most anterior part of the furcula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	The Minister took firm hold of the situation and tackled it head-n onedly, as that issue belonged to his jurisdiction; he extended efforts forward in order to resolve it thoroughly.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This particular species is somewhat less irritating for the affected area compared to other types, which makes it more comfortable.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	Mays is concerned about your disregard for this specific type of treatment for all illnesses and insists that you should have faith in it at times; he believes that both the physical and spiritual components must be addressed simultaneously, with honesty and sincercuity on both sides.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Let S be the length of each side and let M represent the area of a square. If one dimension is increased by four units while the other is decreased by two units, then we have an oblong (rectangle) instead of a perfect square. The new dimensions can be represented as follows:
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	The malfunction has been fixed atop the masthead and it is now lost to the sea; its length from the deck of the ship measures two fathoms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	A propulsion involves a young strong man who swiftly lowers his cap (possibly in respect or readiness), and he is suspended by the malaise of another youth, while the other young man raises up strongly (in an effort to counteract the fall), so that the joint returns to its original place at high speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In Mays of the reduction, when it is displaired beyond the part, there seems to be that the trouble moves on with their inflammation as they have recounted in the possession; and it's strengthened over the infected area itself and over its surrounding pieces.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Near the deathbeds of both the rich and poor, their last will should be adjusted accordingly; and near these deathbedangs, the documents shall be wrapped in cloth upon which writings are enclosed so that the malady is not aggravated by the presence of said objects. Therefore, you must extend this precaution to the lower parts as well, so they do not become infected.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Article Q156 - The Ministers shall share their respective parts in proportion to the criteria set out by law; and the physician will receive an amount equivalent to that of another as stipulated in the relevant legislation.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	If you follow my instructions precisely, success shall be yours in abundance; but if not, pause and reflect upon them carefully as we have discussed earlier for alignment.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	At Mays Cove, the black jaguar is lying on his back calmly resting.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	In the case of dislocation towards the extremities, it is advised that surgery be performed as soon as possible; according to this methodology described in ancient texts, the surgeon should take the patient's right hand and stretch the affected limb out on a table, then place his left palm over the injured area. He will then use forceful motions to reposition the bone fragments into their original position, enscribing as necessary to align them properly before immobilizing with splints or casts.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is to the front parts, there's a fear that the illness might spread to the rear parts as well and it elevates above the ground; people should expect that it rests on firm ground, just like when we talked about its width being displaced towards the front - according to what has been said. Its surface is extended, as described earlier, there's no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	The translated sentence in English is: "The doctor advised applying pressure on the table where you feel the joint."
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Once the reduction is completed as indicated by you— and the signal for the reduction of your sin does not seem to appear to you, and that you extend it to two churches, when you visit those altars and remove the evil from the other church and expand that excuse, then know that the member according to which it was returned— and then align both causes and pause sufficiently so as not to be harmful in any of them; and let the evil remain at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	A prop of the lean versus the fat and comparing one with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those enemies approaching with hostility, remember that the situation has already been resolved, so let go of any ill will.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If the pain persists and there is no improvement, you should return to it in three days and remove that bandage according to your first wrapping method, leaving it for another three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	A similar event occurs when someone takes that potion and then takes a long time to walk over here for a few days until they are fully recovered.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXII - The Capital City's Secrets
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Treatment for shoulder dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The dish is located according to three ways: it's displaced from the parts on the left, and from the parts on top, and from the parts below more towards the parts behind; but not in front of them.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of a joint displacement is that you command the malady to apply its force near the joint; then you will know that it's dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of all your limbs is to be done in this way; first remove the evil wrong, even if you have extended it far off, so that you can touch upon it; then clasp their face with yours, and place your foot between their feet; then firmly grasp their ankle with both hands, and gently stretch them across their ankles over your fists. Then bring the limb back to its original location through this method.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	A sign of a redirection in light is that its beam strikes the wall without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	The shepherd shall blow the ram's horn and gather his flock to move them from one pasture to another, and he shall tie those sheep with ropes for three or four days, and then untie them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	The patient may use a walking aid for days after the operation, until fully healed and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	My apology for reducing it to you, however, I will now extend further the details of the previously mentioned ankle injury treatment.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capital III.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Curable treatment of ankle dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Some nuts are roasted for short periods of time, while others are cracked according to preference, and the shell opening is done either manually or using specialized equipment at home or in factories.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The hallmark of the luxatio erecta injury is that it originates from an impact with a flat object at the location where it is displaced.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	May's curing period for the removal of his/her leg is considered to be relatively short-term and it should be extended as much as possible in order to facilitate recovery, with equal attention being given so that he/she may return to normal life activities.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the location of your worshipful Lord Quan is dislocated after a compliment, it means that he should do everything to allevee his suffering correctly, and have a strong and valiant representative from the party behind him in this matter at hand.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	To the left of your upper jaw is the most superior nerve, and to the right side below your chin near the location of the ligament.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	The boy approaches his father and then moves to the right for two steps, extends his left hand, and grabs onto three wooden beams.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	In accordance with the county, the water rights shall be distributed as follows:
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	A prop employing the keys of the same chord for the third variation, and you're on the right track.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If a number is divisible by one or two following this manner, and if the product equals the input number, then it's good; otherwise, repeat the operation for that time period again, because that number returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	You are forbidden to diminish the water of which we have reminded you, and to speak ill words about your brethard on earth; also, not to raise a dispute in the land, for it has been involved with its affairs, and you already enveloped it with clothes so that no evil may come upon it.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Article I - The ministers shall state the matters of their respective departments and extend to each other their proposals concerning those issues discussed during the cabinet meeting; additionally, every minister should present evidence or arguments supporting his own perspective on the issue at hand. Furthermore, every minister is obliged to counter any objections made by another regarding their proposal and ensure that their argumentation remains focused solenly on the matter under discussion.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	A sprain is the medical term for an injury to the ligaments caused by sudden stretching or tearing due to trauma such as falls, twists, or blows to a joint. This often results in swelling and pain at the affected site. Treatment usually involves rest, ice application, compression, elevation (RICE), and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSA <|im_sep|>id="user"
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	So let it return the displacement and be declared to you the sanity of the reduction area, then pause embellishments and extend that one vigorously, and link the left leg to the sling.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Fear not the nerves that lie behind your spinal cord; by taking care of them, you can prevent a sharp and painful sensation in that area from becoming intense.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	A chaplet is worn for two or three days; and if the distress subsides, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Article II: In case of infractions occurring on the third or fourth day, and any form of vandalism for forty days, is hereby forbidden.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	Being confined to that space, he's not ensured that the displacement won't be overwhelming and corrupted, or exposed to any harmful effects.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	As you decide to take the prescribed medicine, hours later notice that your symptoms begin to improve, in another place of treatment and healing, where it has been successful.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 24 - The President's Address to the Joint Session of Congress on National Security and Defense Priorities
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The treatment of shoulder joint dislocations.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The one that is said to be talented has little experience in his work; and what is not difficult, he embellishes it excessively.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If your dislocation is in the elbow or shoulder joints on either side of the body, you should seek immediate medical attention as it could be a severe pain causing limitation of movement similar to when one goes walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	C to your feet, and pause at the point you believe to be along the line that runs from your left shoulder towards your right hip. Then place your left hand on top of the position that is beneficial for your balance as you walk this path, and ensure that it does not stand out in a prominent location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	The provided text is in Catalan. Here's the translation into English:
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter Fifty-Five, The Capital Scandal
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	From the displacements that would be feasible in the sky or after a fracture or any trauma event.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When an individual succumbs to any cause related to that, and you pursue the cure for it as well as its restoration, multiple times success follows death.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	"In the event of a disease that affects you, seek out not any doctor who is untrained and inexperiennced, but rather one who is skilled in their art, long-standing, merciful, compassebtive, patient, and modest. Only they should be trusted to use medicines that only alleviate swelling caused by abscesses; you must entrust the illness to divine judgment, not expecting a cure from ruin or an alleviation of sickness without some hope."
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Thus, let us begin with the reduction in front of the cause so that it does not develop into an inflammamo(r).
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	Therefore, the member returns as desired, and hours later administers the treatment of which we provide the appropriate ointment and water to treat the dryness caused by the ingredients on you.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	A dislocation occurs when a bone is affected by multiple fractures separated by hours and then requires surgery to fix it; this happens in cases where there have been simple illnesses before, as mentioned previously.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	He observes and avoids the path of fear as you have been preceded by my preaching; for it is better to your Creator, more permanent to your glory, and brings greater favor to those truths in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Yes, it's indeed correct to say "Ayse Fineysol" in Catalan for the phrase "I pray that God blesses your words perfectly." In Catalan, this translates as "Ayse Fineysol las paraules de Albúcar perfieytament de les quals Déu no sia benezeyt". Here'prisefot on how to pronounce it: [aɪz eˈfoːts le paɾoʊleʒ də əɫbuˈkaɾ pɾefiˈeʃtən dɛ lɛs kwaɫ ðəu no sia benesɛjt].
Amen.	Indeed, amen! How may I assist you today?
