Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Aysa understands the words from Albuquerque.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O children, as you have completed this book, which is the last of the medical science series, for your own sake and in celebration of your birth to me, and for your contributions throughout, I believe that you should present this treatise to us, which is a part of my work on surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The art and science of geometry were once completely suppressed in our realm and during our time, entirely privatized so that only a few learned it, and their views on it remained; but not many descriptions of it can be found in the books of the Ancients, which transformed most, leading to errors and heresies through which its essence has been concealed and its strength diminished.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	I understand that you intend to enliven this decree of the treatise following the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so it comes in accordance with the forms of the instruments of cautery as well as with other tools of work, through the addition by means of the declaration, and for the preparation thereof, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	Mays the cause for which a poet is not blamed by art in our times, lies in the fact that the art of medicine has grown long, and its practitioner must be skilled in the science of anatomy - knowledge that Galen possessed about limbs' movements, their shapes; joints and separations of these parts; awareness of bones, nerves, and muscles, as well as names and structure of them; and also understanding of pulse-bearing veins and stationary ones, and the locations of their discharges.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	PER AQUO DIZ Ypocras QUE AH MON NOM ES MOCT, MAISEN EN LA OBRIT PETITE E MAISTRALMENT EN L'ART DE LA MA.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	In the opening lines of this book, we have mentioned to you about Anatomy; those who are not knowledgeable in this field might fall into errors which could cause people's deaths, as I have seen with many individuals who were taught in this science but later forgot it.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I came across a medical document referring to an episode where a woman developed erysipelas in the neck region, and as a result some arteries of the neck were affected causing significant blood loss that led to her death among many others.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	In the village of Tarnavell there lived a baker who was kinder than anyone else in town. He came across a heavy stone carried by a man passing through his estate; this stone was large and cumberspectively, he took it upon himself to help lift the weight off the traveler's shoulders. By working together with the stranger, they were able to move the heavy stone up a steep hill, ensuring their safe passage.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	Oh yes, I can translate that to you! Here's the translation in modern English:
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Another surgeon in our land received payment of one ducat to perform surgery and happened upon a black cradle which was used for fractures; however, due to the surgeon'amoor ignorance, he misplaced the fracture on the shelf, using pillows and splints with excessive tension, and failed to properly immobilize it.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	The lord should always follow their own desires and interests, leading his people away from the truth through deception and deceit over many years; and it is so that evil comes to pass, and they fall into ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And then I called upon Him, and He provided me with the comfort of His embrace, granting me peace and easement from my pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the contagion was already confirmed in the member, so he could not restrain it; and thus the corruption continued to spread throughout the affected limb due to the worsening ailment.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	A certain physician caused a cancerous boil to form and become an ulcer close to the ears of days; during which time the vile nature of his lord was greatly magnified.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The main cause for me to feel melancholamo is that, in these times, I do not see myself progressing towards my goal of becoming the best version of myself, but rather as a member who feels overwhelmed by everything being around me.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	EPA water quality standards are essential for ensanguinati to ensure that the operation is divided into two phases: one phase is associated with health and the other involves risks in major infrastructures.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	You are commanded by the law to abstain from any action which may infringe upon this freedom enshrined within our land; for such acts bear both error and fear, thus it is imperative that you uphold these liberties so as not to undermine speech nor dishonor yourself.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	So take up your arms against the sun's solicitude and by God'n protection, may your sick ones find health and be healed.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	We pray to God for the grace of saving those who are lost and leading them to safe success; we take away from you the terrible diseases that cause difficult healing, and remove your fears caused by water, so that through steadfast faith in your name and trust in God, nothing will be able to drive you away. For it is better to remain in glory and ultimately rest with your sanctities at home or elsewhere.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Guillem de Berguedà, also known as "Guala Jocerig", was a Catalan troubadour from the early 13th century. Here are some of his notable compositions in both Catalan and English:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"There is no such disease as bad luck, because if you have good food and drinks, nothing will happen to you."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	Title: The Three Pillars of Wisdom
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Beginning the division of the free and first from the initial partition.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	First chapter concerning surgical instruments and tools, in their forms and materials used for sterilization, as well as what is required for operations.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	Division of the second half.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter of the textbook covers topics such as surgery and perforation, as well as techniques like cupping therapy, acupuncture extraction with needles, and various other methods applied to those conditions. This section comprehensively deals with the forms and procedures of these instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Third Piece Division
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third capital, regarding restoration, displacement and treatment of torsion as well as appearances to those affected; stipulated within the scope of resources available, along with forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	The fire in the hearth of acute medicine brings to mind a recollection of the opera performance.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	The treatise on the entire book begins with this chapter.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I told you about the quality of that jeweler's items and his merchandise, as well as why it is forbidden for him to perform any kind of surgery or medical procedures.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	It is said that the language of youth'amo(juvenile) and cautery as well as nocciput(the top part of the head), its speech is long, prolix, subtle by science, and somewhat secretive; already many wise ones have spoken much about it, yet they are in disagreement. For me, a small part of their sermons suffices to fear for its protracted nature.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Well then, I'd say that the two cases which are generally considered as matter or their material exceptions consist of complexes where both components share a common characteristic. The exceptions being those complexes with one component not sharing this feature.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the case of oily and dry skin, applying heat is benefuted; however, some argue that it's not suitable for diseases characterized by its qualities and dryness because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it isn't advisable to heal a disease such as oily and dry skin with water that is hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	The one opposite to that which is caused by cauterization and brings relief during any disease with tail and dryness seen in the bodies of men; for when you compare the body of man to the moisture of his system, you find it like a burnt corpse.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	The text you provided is in Friulian language and not Italian or Esperanto. Here's the translation into Esperanto:
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, I do not know of any book that covers the matter that has been criticized and practiced in the Capitoline Hill for a long time through annual exercise, and is aware of the diversity of human conditions, the disposition of diseases in their bodies, the causes of those, and the aspects of that period.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In the other cases, it's not about your fear; mostly in leaky and damp illnesses, as all those areas are prone to such conditions, so they shouldn't ignore that issue but rather be cautious during the heating process.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Ah, my children, I shall reveal to you the secret of curative burning with fire and the virtue of its healing. Only simple heat should be used for medicinal cauterization; its action affects only the limb that is being cauterized, causing no harm to other adjacent parts.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May's herbal remedy of medicine provided relief to those suffering from limb pain caused by cold exposure and brought about difficult healing in the affected area, as well as intense listening.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Mays the flame, for its sublimity and substance goodness, does not make water but overflows; and it is known to us by experience and by the length of servitude in study of the art regarding the truth of causes. And that'amo excused for the length of this sermon, and if it were not so, it would be unfit to my free time here amidst your secret thoughts about the flame; and also the quality of its action on bodies and the whole expulsion by which you drive away illnesses—philosophical discourse demonstrative of these things might sharpen your ailments.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Hey kids, those who disagree on the best time for a hair removal and rest - it's better to start in early springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	I believe that cauterization is beneficial at all times since the harm caused by accidental events is overshadowed by the benefits of having underg gone cauterization; especially if it's for severe and persistent pains, which do not tolerate delay so as to prevent malicious effects, which are greater than slight discomfort during the process.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	In the old villages, only peasants and fools were believed to suffer from this condition, which is healed by caustic treatment but does not always provide lasting relief or alleviate its consequences.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The cause is not as they think for which they consider heat; caustics are only in the place of medicine, which changes the condition and dries out the moisture that is the cause why pain arises.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, unnecessary surgical intervents on the medicine due to the surgeon's greed and value of his operation and greatness of their lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is not always certain that the disease may return at any time in the future, depending on the complexity of the illness and the location of its occurrence within one's body, as well as the virtue of oneself being prepared through a lack of excessive substances in one's body, and what has been consumed to them from those causes; instead, the disease administered by cauterization is a subtle illness involving few superfluous humors, just like teeth cauterized for pain resembling it, so it may not return at all in that area but rather be healed through treatment.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	"The common belief is that cauterization was the last resort of medicine in the past and now it's considered archaic, although I don't fully understand this notion as I believe it to be an ineffective treatment from both medicinal and other perspectives."
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is contrary to the air; I understand that cauldrification only serves as the last resort of medicine and not when administering treatment for certain illnesses, so one should apply cauterization at the end of the course if necessary, but preferably use other medicines.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Here are the twelve chapters that make up Book IV of Caelius' Medicine, not according to the version understood by common and slovenly surgeebut rather as follows:
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	They argued that gold coins are better than iron ones because they have the beauty of gold and its sublimity in substance; there was no discussion about water for equality of gold's worth.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	They say that the place of caution does not work well when water is not completely absorbed because I have already tasted and tested that it does not make a difference, rather than others; however, with gold fire you do get better results as they claim; but if you use gold foil, this has not been specified by you, since the amount depends on the quantity of gold you want for its shimmering effect, and also because it is prepared to receive friction. If you apply over a flame, then gold will spread through the heat, and in case there are metal sheets so that the artisan can work with this tool.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	PER AQUO, the iron is made through smelting and refining to achieve both lightness and durability for our surgical operations.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	He divided this chapter into several sections according to chapters, and has ordered those within the Psalebeasts, so that it can be easily found by whoever wants to consult it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	The headache due to cold and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	First capital.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers moistness and cooling on the affected area of which there are two causes; one is due to soft tissue inflammamo[u]ration around the ears and numerous tearings from the upper chambers, called corisa, from the head down to the temples, and numerous sleepless nights, and pain in teeth and throat, universally of all illnesses that occur through coldness, such as paralysis, stroke and apoplexy, etc., in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The shape of this cauterization is as follows, which initially commands the ailment to be evacuated with medicinal enemas that purify it for three or four nights, according to the potency of the illness and the age of the patient and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	A command to your horse that it may lower its head as close as possible to the razor, and ask him to stand between his legs over a fallen log and then place its hoovebeans on top of the stone underneath it.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	A prop of the top part of your palm towards the bottom part over the tip of your nose between your eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, upon hearing what you said about that place yesterday, I tried to approach it and noticed the olive oil burner there, which is in this shape:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	In the quiet space above your head, visualize a sphere gently descending towards you—a representation of your burdens and worries. Imagine these weights as small pebbles that you can gradually release from this sphere with each breath out. As they detach, watch them fall away into nothingness, leaving you lighter and more at ease with each exhalation.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	A little lift your head and look at the place, if you see any part of the cap exposed, just as many grains of error raise your head, then turn away from that iron or another piece of it, if it is cold, until you see with your eyes what I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	A recipe to make homematur salt solution involves dissolving a small amount of salt in water and leaving it at that location for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Please pass me that tool over there on the bench, and then place it inside to cover the fireplace where the protective screen is missing.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	The Latin phrase "Ea propria loci angusti tetrapraeconis intus, quia sitientibus sanat" translates to English as "This very substance of the narrow place within the four-cornered container heals those who are thirsty."
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	When the Roman Empire fell, there was more peace in the land, because it was better and more beneficial for people.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	On the seventh day, they would remove any bandages from their neck within the bone and place any cauterizations that were applied to a section of the inner surface of the bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	A proper amount of water and the adjusted dose are required, along with appropriate care.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	In the event that other individuals arrive after you have reached the last one and before which first in line there is a strong urge to relieve oneself, here's a small guide on how to manage it politely:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	It is estimated that the gases from that place will eventually dissipate into space.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	E be the flood waters still raging for long times, and soon be healed so that it is stabilized.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	Mays I cannot see these two types of cauteries anywhere other than in small homes, according to the way of fear; but let that one, which belongs to me, be more salutary for you when it is, as its cap becomes inflamed due to continuity of use just like we have testified with the other members and especially when the head of illness is of natural origin.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first act of circumcision is my salvation and bestowed upon me, and from that hour until this work I shall be saved.
Capitol segon.	Capital second.
Del cauteri del cap.	The head's burning.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	In cases of chronic headache and long-term water issues, as well as the use of glasses, hearing aids, dentures, contact lenses, prostheses, makeup, etc., if it has been previously cauterized with a caustic that does not address any of these causes, then now consider whether the headache stems from an inherent growth in its nature; and this is no trivial matter. The same should be treated using another type of caustic only after some time has passed since the first one was used.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	A cautionary note is placed over the wound on his forehead before it is cauterized within which the tendon has been severed.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the gland and then expose of the bone the amount which we have counted and cauterize that one with a cautery in the portion behind the head at the location called "vas", and it is that location where the vacuum procedure is performed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	My grandmother had an accident and she fell on her head, but she didn't break any bones; however, the internal injury causes a very different kind of pain than that from all other cuts in the scalp.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	In the above Old Occitan text, it discusses a specific method of performing a cautery or surgical burn to treat corns on the head and occiput (back part) of the skull. The process involves using two different types of cauldrons - one for heating and another for burning.
Capitol ters.	Capitol Hill is a prominent neighborhood in Washington, D.cuh-tle DC, United States. It serves as the home to numerous government buildings and offices of members of Congress, including the iconic U.S. Capitol building itself. As part of the East Central and Downtown areas of the city, Capitol Hill is situated on a sizable hill at the eastern edge of Washington D.C., offering magnificent views of various other landmarks such as the National Mall, the White House, and Lincoln Memorial. The neighborhood's rich history dates back to when it was originally settled by European immigrants in the late 18th century. Today, Capitol Hill remains an essential part of the political landscape of the United States while also offering a vibrant array of restaurants, shops, and cultural attractions for residents and tourists alike.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Cold cauterization of a non-healing ulcer.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	In the case of a severe headache or if pain persists in the temple, apply remedies to relieve it and administer other treatments as indicated for diseases; if nothing works, cauterize at two points with either hot medicinal substance or iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Mayes' caustic ointment is an irritant that you should take a bowl of salt and water, soak the affected area in it and dry off the edges with towels.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	A drop of blood is shed on the altar at an unspecified time in a specific location wherein a lancet blade has been used to make an incision. The wound may be hidden or not visible.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	A strong wind prevented the plane from descending due to air traffic constraints, so it made way for three-hour gaps; and then released its grip on the controls, letting go of the tension for two or three hours, pausing over the submerged border within which it passed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	A person who has been injured is entitled to compensation within the law.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you would like, here are some burning medications that I have written in the aforementnioned treatise on burning medicines:
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	May's follow this guide for cauterization using an iron cautery, which is the form mentioned below:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	The tip of the leaf is somewhat like a rose bud, and in its middle part there is an evident smallness; it also has a slight curve.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	As you approach the location of pain, and remove your armor—so that the arrowhead left behind does not hinder you further—and rotate the small wheel gradually at increasing speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the quantity of blood that is attached to the skin surface were equal to the amount of blood, and your hand would open up enough for the artery not to be tied off, so that there wouldn't be any bleeding flow.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Boil water with salt and let it cool until lukewamr; then pour over the wound, leaving it there for three days; afterwards boil goose fat and apply this ointment inside which is healing.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	Indeed, if the blade of a knife gets infected, cleanse it according to sterilization procedures and carefully check for any signs of an incision into an artery on this migrant vessel not long ago.
Capitol quart.	In the context of music, "Capitol Quart" could refer to a string quartet that is affiliated with or sponsored by a record label called Capitol Records. However, if you are referring to something within a capital city'cued for example, Washington D.C., which houses many cultural institutions and venues where a musical group like the "Capitol Quart" could perform, then it might be that there is no direct connection between the term "Capitol Quart" and English language music or culture without more context.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Ancient emigration cauterization.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	The person who has emigrated from the therapy mentioned in the previous curative session, and that which was said about the divisions of diseases, does not utilize the treatment, but instead uses the medicine or cautery as follows: you must heat up the metal instrument until it is white-hot; then place it on the site where there is the most severe pain, using a long needle-like tool. After that, remove your hand for one breath and pierce the tissue with the instrument until reaching the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	It is essential for you to maintain proper oral health and avoid issues such as jaw misalignment which can affect your ability to chew properly, ensaturation of the ligaments and nerves that may lead to discomfort, and muscle spasms/twitching. Regular dental check-ups, good oral hygiene practices including brushing twice a day and flossing daily, as well as avoiding hard foods can help maintain healthy jaw function.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	The text appears to be in Catalan and translates as follows: "The law is about the custody and caution of blood flow restriction, which is initiated, mainly towards those who do not know what they are doing and are careless; and leave the operation on them from the start."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	I recall the flow of blood from an injury to the archery arm according to its usual manner, in its place as a free being.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	The text you provided appears to be a fragment from an old manuscript or medical treatise discussing the treatment of certain diseases and afflictamens through cauterization methods. Here's an attempt at translating it into modern English:
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you please, administer the cauldrons as we have mentioned in the chapter of stretched armor with two handles; this one is a better cauldron and more efficient to use.
Capitol .v.	"Capitol v." is not a complete reference, but it could potentially refer to one of the many legal cases wherein 'The Capitol' (such as The Capitol Corporation or another entity with similar name) was involved in litigation. Without more specific information about the case number, court, jurisdiction, year, or subject matter of the dispute, it is difficult to provide a precise answer regarding the details and outcome of such a lawsuit. If you can supply additional context or keywords related to this particular 'Capitol v.' case, I may be able to offer more detailed information on that legal proceeding.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Cauterization of earlobe pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	If there is pain in the ear and it is caused by an infectious or inflamebale condition, as mentioned earlier, one alternative treatment could be a hot compress. This method involves applying a warm cloth or heating pad to the affected area for short periods of time (about 10-20 minutes) several times a day to help reduce pain and discomfort.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	A) The nerve endings spread along the entire earlobe move around so smoothly that in any given instance pain may be felt anywhere within it.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	It's important to gradually reduce the frequency of using earplugs, as it helps your ears adjust little by little without causing discomfort.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	The lice are treated by applying heat to all the spots on the head and also those areas which have been healed but remain sensitive.
Capitol .vi.	In the United States, "Capitol" refers to the building where the Congress convenes for legislative sessions. There are two such buildings: one in Washington D.cu, known as the U.S. Capitol, which houses both chambebls of Congress—the House of Representatives and the Senate; and another called the Capitol of California, located in Sacramento where the California State Legislature meets. The term "Capitol" also commonly refers to a legislative building or complex associated with governmental functions at various levels within different states across the country.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Tonsillectomy procedure.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The turturine which is boiled and cauterized consists not of the spices which come through a sieve, as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoidance of cauterization for the species that suffers from severe or nervous spasms.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	I will treat the specific type of headache with jars and capillary punctures, as well as guaiacum resin; then you should cauterize it three times: first on the temple area near your ear, second a little below that point, and thirdly between both lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	The patient's fever will pause his surgery unless the opponent's party is injured, as healing cannot occur in the match where they are healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is to cauterize the root of the earlobe with a small portion of the crown, and in addition, a strip whose length corresponds to that of said pus; then place your sterile instrument within until the specified amount of tissue has been burned away.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of a cauldron and it is a type of cooking utensil, with the shape similar to that of a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, he was quite subtle in the way that not so many people knew him very well; and it seemed to some like a mere display of unnecessary grandeur by someone.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Article L.1234 - Water pollution control; measures regarding discharged substances into the water.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII. The Capitol Building in Washington, D.C., serves as the center of American democracy and houses some of the most important federal offices, including those of the President and Congress. Constructed between 1820 and 1863, its iconic white dome stands out on the National Mall and symbolizes the values upon which the United States was founded: liberty, justice, and equality for all citizens. The Capitol Building has witnessed numerous historical events over the years that have shaped America's past and present, from presidential inaugurations to landmark legislative debates.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Ancient treatment for epilepsy involved a procedure called trephination, also known as "craniotomy" or "skull perforation." This was done by drilling holes into the skull to release evil spirits that were believed to cause seizures and other neurologeal disorders.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	Apoplexy is an ancient disease and the remedies you mentioned involve using water that has been boiled and applied to your medicinal poultices. They also recommend not having fever, but instead cauterizing all four corners of his head, as well as the middle part of the forehead, thus following what we have said; and cauterize in the neck area.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of the cauldrons has been made according to what is mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	The surgeon made an incision near the mouth of the stomach and then proceeded further inside, carefully suturing it in place to ensure proper healing with sterile water.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII (Capitol)
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	The caesarian section performed due to placenta previa.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	At the beginning, there were large pots and capsules with relaxing properties.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Chapter IV: Comprehensive Overview and Pause of the Use of These Ointments as Described in The Treatcuits Manual
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	That pause seems like a relic from the past; indeed it appears to be an old-fashioned contraption for cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Certainly! In Old Occitan, the sentence "I want to tell you about that man who I have mentioned before" would be written as:
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	If there are no illnesses; then you should apply three small blades on the lower area of your head, these should be placed from the highest portion of the head downwards towards the back below the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Pause between each of the following sections and while performing the procedure with water that is being used.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you have chosen low-dose radiation therapy and the pain is tolerable, apply heat to the affected area at bedtime; if you prefer high-dose radiation therebutter, cauterize the points above both cornicles.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Do the operation within that area which is healthy, and apply the olive oil cauterization as shown in the illustration provided.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX of the English version of "Capitol" is a significant section that continues to delve into the themes and character development present in the story. In this chapter, as with others throughout the book, readers are treated to an exploration of complex social dynamics within the Capitol, the challenges faced by characters from diverse backgrounds, and further insights into the overarching narrative that interweaves personal growth with societal critique. Please note that for a precise summary or analysis, it would be helpful to know which specific "Capitol" text you are referring to, as there could be multiple books with similar titles dealing with different subjects.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	The cauliflower and the entire body were subjected to a cauterization process.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	I will process the following treatment on your scalp with water and oil that we have used; gently rubbing over the area of pain, carefully using a heated instrument at the center of your head, and moving it around all the knots in your hair, applying heat to the back part of your neck as well. Then, I will perform three cauterizations on the small bumps under your collarbone.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary for the treatment of enlarged veins and if patients tolerate well and the condition is severe, then four times a week apply heat cauterization on the spines in the back area, and always use internal caustics that are not too hot, and elevate your legs.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	A proper oil is within that which is healthy, and this shall be olive oil.
Capitol .x.	The term "Capitol" in the context of government and politics typically refers to a building where a legislative body meets or to the entire complex that houses such buildings and offices related to governance. In the United States, for example, the U.S. Capitol is located in Washington D.C. and serves as the meeting place of the U.S. Congress, which includes both the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Epilepsy surgery is a treatment option for people with seizures that do not respond to medication. This procedure involves removing or altering part of the brain tissue where seizures originate, in order to reduce their frequency and severity. The goal of epilepsy surgery is to improve quality of life by allowing individuals to achieve better control over their condition with fewer side effects than antiepileptic medications.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It's not the seizure itself that is problematic, but rather its impact on one'ebrity.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, it is important to consider the following factors at the onset of an illness and other circumstances which we have mentioned in the division when the disease is severe and tolerates exceptional conditions due to medicine.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	"Even though he did not suffer from illnesses, the herbs and medicinal preparations served to restore his strength for several days, along with a nutritious diet."
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And the Lord healed him, and at once drove out a demon that was incapacitamoal from its dominance; He cauterized it with a hot iron on the temple region of his head, following the previous methodology, and then another one over his occiput.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the pain is severe and tolerable, this ointment numbs that area which I have mentioned; it has a weakening and soothing effect on the muscle tension over the vertebrae of the neck and back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	E should be treated with olive oil, following the previous instructions.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the ailment is in childhood, heal it with subtle caution according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Capital XI, also known as Rome in ancient times, was the center of power for the Roman Republic and later, the Roman Empire. This historic city played a significant role throughout centuries in shaping European culture, politics, and history. As one of the most influential capitals of all time, its architectural marvels like the Colosseum, Roman Forum, Pantheon, and Vatican City continue to captivate visitors from around the globe today.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Cauterization of melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	There are two causes of melancholy that I will discuss: excessive humidity and a significant fatigue. In the latter, one may resort to cauterization at those points which we have mentioned in relation to localized paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	The cause of melancholy is the decline of superfluity leading to melancholy, and the course of this illness is humid; therefore, drink water that purifies the brain according to what followed in the division (of fluids).
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Upon reaching the peak of the mountain, and then flying back in a straight line towards her original position above the circle, she descends to that same location below the peak.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The disease is widespread everywhere, and affects everyone from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	A propensity for pause in liming; it is even more deserving of an ancient border like that of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	The radiator above the stove is used for early heating by measurement; it becomes warm when put in use.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	A person is standing at the edge of a circle and wants to draw an arc within it such that its length equals half the circumference of the circle. How would they go about doing this?
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Every Monday of each week, one can let the ailment go away by following another regiment that has been prescribed; if you wish, perform cauterization on those places affected using heated points according to the most common method; this is the specific type of cauterization which equalizes the brain.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	A young boy starts his journey at that spot near the edge or on the hilltop of Galena.
Capitol .xii.	Capital XII refers to the Roman numeral representation of the number 12, which is often used in contexts such as naming volumes or editions of books, issues of periodicals, sequels of movies and TV series, chapters of parliamentary acts, and other enumerations where a formal system is desired.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	The downward flow of water was cauterized into the groove.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	And thou shalt declare the beginning of water in its course for the signs which I tell you in division, hours begin and give drink to those afflicted with thirst that may purify their minds, and watch over them from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	She always makes the best apple pie for our family gatherings every weekend.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	"The person commands the priest to bless his hair, and then cauterizes that part of the head; they also cauterize another place on the temples if it's a meal with water in two bowls or from one vessel if it is a meal with water in one bowl."
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise all the veins and arteries which are located in the head, and perform the cauterization at that spot on the forehead near the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	When you are bleeding after being injured or cut, and if you notice blood flowing out, stop the bleeding as much as possible with any available remedy (such as direct pressure, bandages, etc.)
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	You have received a summary extracted from archives and the abstract of those, along with caution regarding certain information flows.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Some veins are being ligated below two or more bones, resulting in multiple vessels being tied off.
Capitol .xiii.	Title: Capitol XIII: The Hidden Chronicles of the Capitoline Custodians
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Ancient Lacrimae Cauterization Techniques
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	Tears of the old springs suddenly poured out from veins and arteries which are located in that part of the head manifesting themselves; it is verified that such an abundance of perspiration occurs frequently, so a cauterization must be applied to this point as we have mentioned at the beginning of the chapter about water sources being drained, and also a cauterization on the forehead area itself, and two cauterizations in the region behind the temples, and two more cauterizations behind each ear.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If you suspect a hair burn injury, apply aloe vera gel to the entire length of the affected part on the tip of the finger above the nail bed.
Capitol .xiiii.	Title: CAPITOL XIV (CHAPTER FOURTEEN)
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Nasal fumonectomy is a surgical procedure performed to remove excess tissue or correct structural issues within the nose, often resulting in improved breathing and reduction of unpleasant odors associated with certain conditions. The term "fetor" refers to an offensive smell that can sometimes be linked to nasal problems.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	The text provided is in Old Occitan language, and it's a traditional remedy recipe for an illness involving the eyes (cochias). Here is a translation into modern English:
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	A careful application of the hairdryer on both sides of your eyebrows, above the brow bones, will slightly straighten those hairs.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Fear not the archery, for you shall not be set ablaze by it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	The cauliflower cuts this shape, that's the form.
Capitol .xv.	"Capitol XIV" is a phrase that could refer to the fourteenth volume or issue in a series titled "Capitol." Without specific context, it's difficult to provide further information about what this refers to exactly—whether it's an album by The Capitol Steps (a political satire troupe), an installment of a fictional book series called "The Capital" by John Grisham, or another work altogether. If you can give me more details, I would be able to provide more precise information!
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	The eyelid soothing cauterization procedure for albinism patients.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the upper eyelid of a stye is soothed due to illness or moisture, it may become ulcerated and form an ulcerous or cicatricial cauterization. This results in a scar-like appearance on the eyelid.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you wish, cauterize a small area over the two upper eyebrows on both sides and make them longer by using tweezers or threading methods.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let E be the length of each cut according to the quantity of overcasting.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not overdo the application of your eye drops; instead, follow the dosage instructions on the third page of the leaflet regarding how much to apply each time.
Capitol .xvi.	In English, Roman numerals are used to represent numbers using combinations of letters from the Latin alphabet (I, V, X, L, C, D, M). Here's how you can write each number in Roman numerals:
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	The ritual of the eyelid fold has converted it into various segments and given power to the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	The contents of the ink are transformed into accounting entries so that I can write the book with this ink; it is according to these rules, whether the ink is oil-based or water-based, which are two different types and belong to the category of combustible materials.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you cauterize my wound with a hot iron, command the evil spirits before me that they may read their letters as those on these which are known, and let them be prolonged and identical; and if possible, provide for their numbness the help of an enveloping band around it so that when the hair grows back, it is not matted.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	The people of the land and their rulers shall unite, taking a break from all discord within your household, and placing trust upon each other's eyes with tender care, showing love as symbolized by the form of a dove, beginning with one's own family name.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	A creamy dip to accompany chunks of bread in an assortment of hummus or a platter of pita on the table.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	A proper apliques of cauldrons are the form in which this is found.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Apropriately cauterized on the figure is represented by a pattern that gradually fades in small patches until the surface of the skin has been completely burned off, similar to a juniper shrub, quite accuraturally.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	A sign of good health in your work is that you should be able to close the lid and the hairs on it should rise, the puncture hole must be present.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Thus raise your hand and lay it upon that place for three days, and then rest beside the edge of her land where she is buried in a grave.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Person A: I think this medicine will cure you if taken within the prescribed timeframe.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	Mays returns for any reason to his dwelling place and the eyelid is softened; then he performs another technique by applying a hot iron as before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If styes are present on the lash line, they should be treated by cauterizing only the portion that protrudes above its normal position and ensuring that the hairs do not come into contact with any foreign material.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May's cautery is the medicine that causes the illness to read the pores so that they become extended and enlarged, and in accordance with his instructions, make a letter of leather in the shape of an olive leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	A propensity to use soap and live healthily is known as hygiene consciousness. Title: A Brief Overview of the Fiboncu's Sequence and its Applications in Nature, Art, and Science "Take a sip of water three times to quench those causes and be diligent that it is not spilled; then spread the water over the paper so formed as an olive leaf, pause with both hands over it; leave one hand at the beginning on page number in the booklet, and let the bottom edge rest."
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	He took the medicine without hesitation and didn't feel any bitterness that would typically accompany it; in fact, its taste was not unlike that of honey.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Thus, after the person has experienced sharp pain (probably due to a procedure like eye surgery), they should apply the prescribed medicine immediately; then, as soon as the sharp pain subsides, remove the medicine and gently wash the affected area with water; afterwards, check if there are times when your eyelids seem naturally lifted, just as you'd done after rinsing it off, to make sure that stitches or incisions made have healed properly without any signs of inflamm
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Article I - All property within the boundaries of this agreement shall be free from encumbrancuo and any charge or lien, unless otherwise provided in this agreement. Furthermore, each party agrees to maintain the good condition of their respective properties during the term of this agreement.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	E is essential to you; you must guard your work with utmost vigilance so that nothing falls into disrepair in the medicine. If the edge of the eyelid appears swolcued and any cause of hair touches it, repeat your medication on that spot where the eyelid is affected, as well as previously mentioned, and enter within a week if it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the form of a myrtle tree's root system.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	The size and shape of men's noses are diverse according to their magnitude and smallness; therefore, so is the way they make a contract or agreement.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	Article X - Transparency and Accountability in the Field of Study: A Guide for Students
Capitol .xvii.	"Capital, Volume XVII" is the title of a book from the renowned series by Karl Marx called "Das Kapital." It'cuocialist critique and analysis of political economy based on historical materialism. However, there is no "Volume XVII," as the series comprises three volumes:
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Cauterization of the lacrimal duct in the upper eyelid.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	I will treat the fistula with water as follows when it comes to diseases and do not cure your healing, you must carry out this procedure: command the disease to pause its movement in your presence, and hold its head between my hands in such a way that it is not hot or agitated by its own movements.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	A burst of passion captured in an album of vine leaves or as the hue of love over millennia.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Certainly! Here is the information in English regarding certain types of electrocautery, specifically fulguration and desiccation:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The surgical procedure you're referring to is known as "Brazilian Butt Lift" or BBL in short. It involves liposuction and fat re-injection techniques, where excess fat is removed from other parts of the body (like abd#ominal area, thighs) and then injected into the buttock area to enhance its shape and size. The entire process aims at contouring and volumizing the butt for an overall improved figure. It's crucial to consult with a qualified plastic surgeon to discuss risks, benefits, recovery time, and other details related to this procedure.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	Certain cups can indeed fit within each other - this is often the case with nested sets of measuring cups or storage containers designed to stack compactly for space efficiency. However, some cup designs may not allow them to be nestled inside one another due to their shapes or lack of a compatible structure for such fitting.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	Se voleva sia uscito anche lui con il tentativo di raggiungerla.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the one who remains humble is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	The abscess over the fistula has formed and between its walls there is dryness and emptiness.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If not wasted, that time will be added to the abundance of gold. (Translation from Basque)
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	A prophecy speaks of a certain cauldron which shall be ignited, and upon its edge you must place your very own small piece of the cauldron at departure from your nose, so that no harm or ill fortune may trouble you; for many hours pause by the cauldron on its handle and cradle it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	At the beginning of your caustic application near the bone, it's okay; if not, repeat the caustic one or two times after a few hours if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, then rest on that spot over the area and apply an anti-inflamamoind cream in which it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	For thirteen days and not healed, Mays lies resting on acute corrosive medicine within which the bone is discovered and treated as it should be according to his condition in his capital (city).
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	E is another method of cauterizing a fistula which follows the first described one: at the location of the fistula and near it, there's a subtle crack through which this technique takes its form; here, an amount of lead is melted. And in your own house, have good receptivity, so that no harm occurs from what the molten lead does not reach to where you stand. Also ensure that pauses are taken above the spot of malady, and it will harden quickly by using a copper or silver vessel, or water; this way, the lead remains in place at the fistula site, leading to amazing healing effects.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula has healed as we have indicated with cauterization and dressing, it is well; if not, in a few hours you will need to administer some antibianguan and reduce the fistula along the nasal course according to its proper location.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18: The Senate's Dilemamo
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Cauterization of the perineal tear.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Misoprostol causes the rupture of blood vessels, mostly in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Certainamo, come hai letto di recente quelle crepe nell'acqua che abbiamo menzionato nelle divisioni e non si lasci addormentare la tua cura. Seguendo questa tecnica con una piccola padella in bronzo secondo questo metodo:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	S is the sweetness of its second as delicate as silk.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	In that pause he entered those cracks where the torch would eventually reach at dawn.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	A proper care should be taken to ensure that the red color remains within the bounds of what is acceptable.
Capitol .xix.	The U.S. Capitol Building, located in Washington D.C., serves as the home of the United States Congress and symbolizes the legislative branch of the federal government. Constructed between 1847 and 1863 with later extensions and restorations, this iconic neoclassical building stands atop Capitol Hill and is an essential part of American history and architecture.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Cauterization of oral fistula.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	In cases of uvula or palate abscesses and tooth root aphtae, it becomes swoln and breaks open, gets old, bleeds, and leads to fistulas; if you don't cure them promptly, they will cause serious harm. Later on, you should perform a cauterization according to the amount of tissue received in the fistula, place that hot iron within your mouth so it reaches the tip of the gum or the root end and create one or two loops; then, apply the liquid mentioned for treatment inside until healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the wound is superficial and it heals quickly, you don't need to worry. But if it doesn't heal soon or shows signs of infection, then you must discover its location and remove any infected bone according to what arises in your situation.
Capitol .xx.	Capital letters, also known as uppercase letters or majuscules, are a set of distinct glyphs that correspond to the first letter of each word in written language. They play a crucial role in written communication by indicating proper nouns, the beginning of sentences, and emphasis on specific words. The use of capitalization can significantly affect the meaning and clarity of a sentence or text.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Las incrustaciones y la dilatación de los vasos sanguíneos.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are soothed by moisture and the teeth are strong, those with wounds should use medicine and not bandages; at that time the remedy takes effect on your own pain, and lightly ignite a cauterizing tool which will approach accordingly. Then place the needle above the tooth and insert it quickly into the wound, so that the heat of the flame reaches the depth of the tooth where the ailment has been achieved.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Here you go, your mom's hair is about to undergo some iterations of laser treatments as per your wishes.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	The old man complained about his mouth being salty and thirsty; he placed that water in his mouth for an hour, and by doing so, the bad tooth was stopped from causing pain, the swoln gums were softened and returned to normal, and the corrupted moisture became dried out.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI: The Capitol Building
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Cauterization for tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	Toothache accompanied by foul breath or pus drainage does not require the administration of medicine; instead, caustic treatment should be applied to that area in two ways: either by cauterizing at the edge of a wound with hot irons or by using heated blades.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	In the border of this procedure are used cauterizing borders made from copper or brass, and they should be wrapped around the affected tooth at its base, encompassing it completely on the tent's edge. Then, heat up that border until hot, and quickly place it onto the painful tooth area while applying gentle pressure. This will help allepine the discomfort by creating a cauterized seal around the nerve endings in the affected region.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Here is the translation of your text from Galician to English: "The heat will reach the melting point of some vegetables within which their texture becomes soft."
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish, immerse a cotton or gauze in the solution above mentioned and place it on the sore tooth, and pause for that which enters the nerve of the tooth when the heat from the iron reaches the point of numbness.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization is hot and you should attend to either a goose or a pig's liver, placing it in your mouth so that the heat from the caustic does not reach the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Apply steri-strips or a small piece of gauze over the burn wound to protect it, and keep it covered with your hand while applying the cauterizing agent in the form that will come out, and pause for a moment on the tooth until you feel comfortable that the cauterization is complete; do this several times as needed if pain persists or recurs.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	The text appears to be in Occitan, a Romance language spoken mainly in the southern part of France and northern Italy's Val d'Aran. Here is an approximate translation into English:
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Caucasus, on which you intend to travel as soon as it is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the form of a catheter, also known as a cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Title: "Capitol XXII"
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Cauterization of the foreskin (also known as circumcision).
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	The cataplasm of earthwax and cold humors shall be applied to the swelling; you shall then administer medicines for it, and after a while, using tongs, heat the form as follows: having two pointed ends from which smoke is produced, hold this cauterization over the abscess once. If needed again, place it until reaching the edge of the abswolement.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, apply heat to it for periods of time according to its size, and keep a dressing on it for three days after which you should observe that the area has healed where the heat had burnt it out.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	A proper care must be taken with that ointment and cloths within which it is applied.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the nozzle or electrode is such as to convey air.
Capitol .xxiii.	Title: Capital Clashes - Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Laryngectomy and vocal cord hemorrhage with cricoid cartilage compression.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity rises in the pulmonary airways, mainly when it becomes excessively moist due to chronic mucus buildup, there is a need for the discomfort to be relieved at mealtimes with laxative medications, and also by cauterizing that area of constricted gullet in the previously inflamed location.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Forgive me if I accidentally burn the little tail or hurt your leg instead of just a bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	He cauterizes the other wound near the junction of your neck at the last spondylus (vertebra).
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	A- The procedure for the removal of a benign tumor in the knee joint is as follows:
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	A person is considered alive if they have shown the ability to sustain themselves within that period of time.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter Twenty-Four (Capitol)
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	The treatment of lung disease and cough through caustication.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	Both the lung dampness and pulmonary disease are caused by excessive moisture, without fever or coughing being present, which indicates an old illness. In this case, perform a cauterization on that area above the furcula in the spongy parts near it; also, another cauterization should be performed on the middle part of the breast between two nipples; and her clavicle should be treated according to the previous procedure.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you choose to, apply the point of caution as indicated by the term "cauterization", which involves making a small burn or cauterizing at the specific spot. The shape referred to precedes in the earlobe pain location.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Puntz is found among the reeds near the waters; and in accordance with what was previously mentioned, it enters when it gets wet.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	Whether you have three or four cauterization points, the procedure remains essentially the same. Here is how to perform a cauterization on one point at a time using this method:
Capitol .xxv.	Title: "Capitol XXV"
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Cauterization of the thyroid gland that is part of the endocrine system.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	The ankle joint is displaced due to excessive lubrication and it has not been allowed to resume its normal position at the time of its usual return; so that as we have testified, it moves slightly but steadily until it becomes dislocated again, therefore you should first reduce this displacement. Then let the malady revert onto your foot or onto your shin instead. Elevate the leg with the knee which is in the lower part of the citellus (hip socket), if the joint is dislocated towards these parts.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	A propinkeys do not have two caps; this is the way it goes:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	A: The ligature should be applied between the ends that enter each other, and it will result in a figure of cauterization after four to six hours.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	C'est un cas subtile selon la quantité d'essais ; et c'est ainsi que cela se fait :
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some wages are adjusted according to this count and because there are eight cautions.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	A cotton swab can be used to apply alcohol-based solutions for cleaning wounds or applying medication, and it can also help in calming down a painful area without causing any discomfort during the process.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is at the distal ends and the bone is fractured thereabouts, it shall be treated by cauterizing over the muscle near the clavicle or around the joint points, as the joint is confirmed and moisture is reduced, and illness is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Stomach cauterization.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	Once the illness arrives in his stomcu it creates humidities inside which that same week of its complication and increase multiplies, soon you may need to expect that the disease will turn on their backs, and extend their limbs and joints, so be cauterized with three cauldrons: one a little less than the width of a finger's nail for each cauldron, and at the two sides of the cauldron make a triangular incision; between those that are not aligned should cause friction.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of the cauterization is equal to two-thirds of the length of the femur shaft, then what is its depth?
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	S is a figure resembling this shape and if you wish, make a large cauterization on the lower part of the stomach in this manner: also it shall be a circular cauterization as per this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	S is to be cauterized the stomach at those places that are scared of cauterization: and you should place the stones on top of the stamen, according to the amount you want to try with them; then cauterize those parts that have been previously cautioned, in order for it to heal.
Capitol .xxvii.	Title: "Capitol XXVII"
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	The electrocauterization of the rectal fistula.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	The patient is suffering from a disease caused by excessive discharge due to coldness, moisture or too much windiness outside the normal range of his complexion; he should be treated with the water that we have mentioned and not be overfed, so as in three days time his illness may rise up on its own above the spine. And sometimes use caustic cauterization according to this method and quantity applied to the fissure left by the ipocondriac: lay him down flat.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Let E be the set of all curves that cross each other according to their thickness as described, and let L be the length of said curves following the direct course of the body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	The cat does not buy the red ball from you.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of water that adheres to the quantity of the main dish from the chicken is not more adjusted; and if illness persists on its bodies; and if it does not exist, then hours should be passed over them, which have already stretched out their limbs, raising their wings.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	I think you might be referring to "cauterization," a medical procedure. However, the term "form" isn't typically used in relation to it. Cauterization is a process where tissue is burned or seared with heat, electricity, or chemicals (like silver nitrate) to stop bleeding and prevent infection during surgery. Would you like more information on this topic?
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	It is indeed possible that you can perform surgical cauterization using a heated instrument or tool if you possess the skill and expertise in this art form. Cauterization involves sealing wounds or blood vessels by burning them, which requires precision and knowledge to minimize damage and ensure proper healing.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Watch out so that you don't overprocess during sterilization, and the whole chain is sealed to ensure it's properly sterile, so that the bacteria does not enter through any crevices as it can be quite subtle; and know why this matters.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII. (28 in Roman numerals) In this chapter, the story continues to unfold as our characters confront new challenges and make crucial decpressions that will influence their paths ahead. The narrative takes a dramatic turn when unforeseen events test their resolve, forcing them to reassess their goals and relationships with one another. As they navigate through this chapter's twists and turns, the stakes are raised higher than ever before.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	During the drainage of a Bartholin's gland abscess, electrocautery is used.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	Quan Endeve excites the hematoma in the leg and wants to know if that hematoma is in the muscle of the leg or in the tissue layer above it; if it's in the muscle, the illness intensifies pain quickly.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	Si he is in the lining of the intestine, it is a severe pain that has often caused the surgeons to consider treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	The disease has shifted to his brain; and he tries the place of the swelling with warm iron, the shape of which is described in the following page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	She cauterizes the wound and then covers it with a bandage; she brings relief until healing begins, so that pain is eased.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	A proper care for the wound is essential to facilitate healing in comparison with other injuries.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	In this particular way of cauterization use not that which you have learned in the study of medicine; it is extended from other methods, and those cause more harmful diseebites than they are known to prevent. However, let him who wishes to try this procedure proceed with caution and heed well its potential consequences.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX: The Bustling Heart of Governance - U.S. Capitol Building
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Cauterization of the hemorrhoids.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Disease eradication procedures from the field of archeology require careful and thorough methods to ensure accurate results and interpretations according to this approach you take from the disease patterns in ancient societies, and it is what you extract information about a long-lasting disease that was found, along with its degree of severity.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	The surgeon should make a transverse incision in the upper part of the abdomen, then dissect through layers and locate the gallbladder; clamping it with a hemostatic clip at its base. Then ligate the cystic duct and artery close to the liver bed using non-absorbable sutures. Subsequently drain the gallbladder contents and apply electrocautery around the edges, being careful not to damage nearby structures such as the common bile duct or vessels.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	In the workshop where you purchase your own tools and equipment, they should be present in the display of products on offer.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	The priest says prayers to the saints who are invoked against burns resembling ray and fire, placing it in a location between the coasts, where we have arrived at this sore (ulcer) and its associated healing properties, as mentioned in the wound of Saint Fiacre.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this surgery he had the cauterization done without fear; for as soon as it was placed in the location of the fistula which did not heal, it acted instantly.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital X!
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	About the treatment of hemorrhoids (melsa).
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	I treat the disease of gout with water as we have mentioned in the treatment in Part IV; do not confuse your treatment with these hours cauterizations, which are all lawful, and can be done in three ways or four lancings depending on the length of the affected area according to the shape of the cauterizations shown in Fig. 4, whose figure precedes this text.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	In every country where a wax seal is used, the size of the impression should be such that it can cover at least one letter or a small portion more, and the moulding of the seal shall correspond to the moulding in the seal of the document as previously mentioned.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Do not buy my dear mother the candle, and may evil be upon your head.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	E is an alternative method of cauterization; it involves using a hot iron with two holes that cause heat on the muscle'aturf and elevate the tendon which lies at the end of the belly, thus alleviating the painful condition without surgery.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	The translation of this text in standard Italian would be: "E sia l'altezza H della quale si eleva il pendio secondo la lunghezza del corso d'acqua, per cui siano fatti calcoli proporzionali alla larghe che del letto.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	A person inappropriately enters the private domain of another through the use of deceitful means or tactics.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	A) Take out the cautery, and then his feast has four cauteries.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you will, sterilize the tools that have three sharpened edges.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Adopting the use of caustic paste can lead to more healing in fewer days compared to other previous methods in treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	CAPITOL XXVII (Latin for "CAPITAL 27")
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Cauterization of a wound.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	The Catari did not have any cattle or sheep, but rather horses properly speaking.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	You are to cure the diabetic in the following manner that we have described in the division (of the body), and do not perform your treatment as you wish, but when he has been cauterized at four points on his circumcision wound, then place a cupping glass over his abdomen, another one over his thigh, another one over the mesentery, two others between the spinous processes of his spine and one more in the right side of his pelvis.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The quantity of the depth of the caution is proportional to the height of the earlobe.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	An adequately applied cauterization procedure can result in you having braces for an extended period of time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	The illness is not evacuated by the curative art of acupuncture using water to make them added as generous offerings, and promptly attended by the healing aid.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cauldriform that is cauterized on the abdamo follows that of the previous one; it is similar to an olive, and its two lobes are shaped according to the former's form.
Capitol .xxxii.	CAPITOL XXXII
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	The procedure of hemostasis involves the treatment of bleeding vessels and damaged tissues to prevent excessive blood loss during surgery or after an injury. This can be achieved through various methods, including direct pressure, electrocautery (burning), clips, suture ligation, topical agents, and more advanced techniques like laser coagulation and ultrasonic energy devices.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the fish are covered with scales and filled with clear water, let them be cauterized over your head in warm water that is between your earlobe and ring finger; then raise your left hand holding the cautery, without turning it back; now lift up your right hand and do not put it down again, as the clear water drips.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The burn is performed as follows: Make the incisions with two surgical scissors and at each wound site make a cauterization using a heated instrument, placing it near the edge of the scalpel blade.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	S is to make cauterizations along the length of the wound: on one side, the edges should be denuded and the other side located adjacent to the wound; and two cauterizations per each wound.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Lassus had a blue parrot for a long time, which caused no water to drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	B) Therefore, the subjects will be responsible for those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capitol (III) is the third studio album by American indie rock band Death Cab for Cutie, released on October 3rd, 2005 through Atlantic Records. The Roman numeral "III" indicates that this was their third official studio album. This record saw the band moving towards a more expansive sound compared to its predecessors with greater use of strings and keyboards in production by producer Chris Walla. Some of the most notable tracks from this album include "Crooked Teeth," "I Will Follow You (Into The Dark)," and "Different Names For The Same Thing."
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Abdominal hysterectomy (partial) - This is a surgical procedure where part of the uterus, specifically the cervix and possibly the upper part of the vagina, along with the surrounding tissues such as ligaments or lymcuits, are removed. It's also known as a partial hysterectomy or radical trachelectomy when performed for cancer treatment purposes.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	The contents of the stomach are for boiling and moisture within which causes digestion, so it is the digestive and retentnative qualities that are in the stomach and intestines; and it is treated with water to dissolve humors according to its nature, sometimes pains relieved by cauterization of these qualities manifesting. Therefore, cauterize that which is large on the patient's stomach as described in the previous stomach cauterization, also cauterize around the navel and four times along the belly button area (navel), then over the chest bone or two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	When the humidity levels are extremely high and there is tolerance to water exposure, the heating pad should be applied over the neck and shoulders, as well as on the back and lower abdomen area, which effectively relieves cramps that may occur due to such conditions.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 45 (English) - The Senate and Its Proceedings
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Treatment of old hemorrhoids through cauterization.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When an abscess or a swelling caused by ancient wounds or humid and corrupted humors are present, they should be treated with warm water as described in the section above; otherwise, do not administer any other treatment. Afterwards, cauterize thrice over the remaining pus on the small spondylolisthesis of two little triangles, and then cauterize below the navel twice according to these instructions.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If the stomach is cold and the food not digested, or if the face turns pale often, perform moxibustion over the stomach with a large cone as described above; on the shank, another cone; and near the navel, one more cone. Leave the cones to burn for some time while applying pressure until it heals.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital XXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	During the incision of the abdomen, approach the appendix carefully.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	I extract the hydrogen from water and combine it with carbon to form methane through steam reforming.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	The substance is then introduced into that specific vessel of the body, and only when it reaches its final destination within the main blood vessels leading to the site where the cauterization occurs at the opening of the vein through which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	In case of minor cuts and bruises, use water to clean the wound, then apply ointment as required based on your assessment; in severe cases, seek immediate professional medical attention. Apply a bandage until fully healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you apply an alcohol pad to a large wound covered with alquitamid, it should be done in three stages of healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	"Capitol, chapter 36" in Roman numerals is represented as "CAPITOL CXXXVI." Here's the breakdown of the conversion process:
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	The treatment of naturally occurramenous fistulas results in the disappearance of symptoms.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not respond to the remedy that has been recommended in its location, and the patient is frightened by this, they are treated with caution therapy.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Whenever there is an old pipe in nature behind, it serves as a source of health from the decay and corrupted humidity, hence water that deserves to be sought after more than before should have its depth carefully explored.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Approximately ten years ago, scientists created iridescent cauldrons that resembled rainbows.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	A physician should administer the appropriate dose of this cauterizing agent into this fistula and according to the amount prescribed by him/her.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	It is necessary to apply the herbal poultice repeatedly for a few weeks or months, depending on the amount of necessity you have.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	In case of nerve or vein burns, keep an eye on them; if the fistula goes along the course of the bladamoor (probably intended to be "bladder") or colon tract, monitor all those areas as well; do not touch it until the fistula is in a superficial location and you are sure that it is non-penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	A proper care should be taken to ensure that the place is safe.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	The house is sealed up, and the doors have been separated from their hingebacks for a long time, so now you know it has been fully repaired.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the subjects are not of legal importance, it shall be understood that they refer to penetrating or obscene topics, or arise from those causes which will lead to a recollection in their place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	In the given text, "Capitol" refers to a building that houses government institutions and legislative bodies. The term is often used in countries like the United States, where it denotes the main building of the U.S. Congress on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.cuce DC.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Caustication of the nostr
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	In cases where patients experience throbbing pain due to severe inflammamo(u)nto, the origin of the disorder is thrombosis, and so the treatment consists in applying caustic substances over the veins or vessels concerned, cauterizing each individual vessel beginning with the main one.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	First the wound is cleaned with a saline solution to remove any dirt or debrebris; next, an antiseptic cream or ointment is applied to prevent infection. Then, using sterile gauze or cotton swabs, apply a small amount of adhesive tape over the wound for temporary closure.
Capitol .xxxviii.	In English, the Roman numeral "Capitol .xxxviii" translates to Chapter 38. The term "capitol" might be used in titles or references, for example in books, and ".xxxviii" denotes that it is chapter number thirty-eight of a sequence.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	The bladder is swollete and inflamed; the urine does not flow out due to this illness. Afterwards, at that point of discharge (the urethral meatus), cauterize with a hot iron on both the right and left sides, as well as the front.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	E is the length of each incision according to the number of knots on the pattern; and perform one incision at a time in the lower part of the back, or two incisions if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	B is the surgical excision of a keloid according to the procedure followed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX: The Capitol's Secrets
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Male circumcision.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When she arriveren in the higher freg and humidity, pregnancy is prohibited, and her menstrual flow becomes disordered; thus delaying conception, it causes her to suffer from thirst during labor - her location should be cauterized with three burns around the navel area, as we have said in the bladder's causticization. Also, over the previously mentioned painful spot on either side there should be two more cauterizations or one cauterization at the clavicle.
Capitol .xl.	CAPITOL, XL (40)
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Cauterization of the ankle dislocation.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	Humidity is generally higher at the beginning of the morning, and this is due to factors such as condensation in its location, and a sign that this situation persists longer compared to other times when it is measured there.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is observed in white light.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	The malady shall be cauterized over the departing of the limb as you have been instructed to do with the bandage, and afterward you should try in the vicinity of the departure just like it is wrapped up, so that when the limb falls off, it lands right at the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	Let E be the set of cauldrills following the form used in the gastric cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	This sentence appears to be in Catalan and it's not clear from the given context. However, if we try to approximate an English translation, it could potentially mean: "If this cauldron is not at your disposebefore that time cauterize him three times with a caudry olive orchard." Please note that without proper context or understanding of the original text, this translation might be inaccurate.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Fait the cauterization according to the extent of the inflammaturgy affecting the entire limb; and proceed carefully within that area where it has healed.
Capitol .xli.	In the context of a discussion about United States history, "Capitol .xli." likely refers to an event or item numbered 44 on some list or document associated with the U.S. Capitol building or legislative matters that have taken place there. The Roman numeral "XLI" stands for 41 (with X=10, L=50, and I=1; thus XL=40+1=41). However, if you meant to reference the U.S. Capitol itself or a document numbered 44, please provide more context so that I can assist you better.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Hemorrhoidectomy of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When someone suffers from an anal fissure and its causes are related to bad hygiene and moisture, the disease is cured by drinking water as we have mentioned before, and not administering it; old-fashioned medicine suggests that you should eliminate this illness caused by thick humors using stinky pills or artificial pills or similar remedies. And then proceed to cauterize the affected area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterization follows two approaches: hot cauterization using heated materials (cautery with heat), or chemical cauterization using caustic substances (cautery with medicine).
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	According to two scientific methods, one of which involves using heat treatments at three angles following this pattern, and making shallow incisions on the widening part. This refers to a surgical procedure known as "cauterization" or "scalpel incision". In medical practice, cauterization is used to prevent excessive bleeding during surgeraturas by burning tissue with heat (using caustic substances or electric current), while scalpel incisions involve making shallow cuts using a sharp knife-like instrument. These methods can be employed based on the nature of the surgery and specific requirements, such as minimizing blood loss and promoting faster healing.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	E is the space between each cautery, proportional to its size and both are either olive-shaped or round.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some of these treatments involve using small cauldrons over specific areas, including the top of the ankle where there are four such points.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If it moves, the circle surrounding the figure should be cauterized as well in order to treat the displacement of the ankle; and this circle must enclose the whole limb and cauterize the entire area.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the chiropractic method called cavitation, where pain is attached to the spine and cannot be extended within the case.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	Mays, if the wound is within a joint, sterilize it first. Then place two small cauterizing instruments over the joint on the limb where you intend to apply the remedy that is pain relief; and at one of these points insert a needle slightly into the tissue.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	The depth of the cauterization depends on the quantity of skin incisions.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the pain spreads to other areas, they suggest you use ice packs or heat pads in these places as well. Additionally, if needed, sterile needles can be used for cauterization at that point; three or four pricks may suffice, depending on your needs.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the illness causes pain that is located near the spinal cord, then use a sterile surgical scissors to carefully remove it here and now.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	I observe your entire surgery and ensure that you do not harm the surrounding tissue while using the cauterizer as an assistant in treating neural or large arteries, and thus for this reason you are under a medical condition of severe pain or sprain.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	In this case of acute pyogenic osteomyelitis, the primary bacterial infection occurs directly on the periosteum and ultimately leads to cauterization. The inflamed cavity that forms traps heat within it and eventually perforates and corrupts all layers of skin tissue.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	An accidental fall resulted in severe abdomebdominal pain and ultimately led to his death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain persists in two separate episodes, each one should be treated accordingly following this method:
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	In this procedure, eight sterile cups made of silver are used for the cauterization treatment described herein. The following is a guide to creating the instrument that resembles a circle of iron whose circumference is about the width of one palm; and its hole should be according to the thickness of an olive or almond pit, roughly a little more than a pinch.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	In the given circle with a certain diameter is another third; and it has two spaces whose quantity of points equals that of the circumference. The circles are divided into two parts, and their lengths are one or two units each. These parts should be arranged uniformly around the circle's circumferences as shown in this diagram:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Light the fire under it until it starts to boil and produce sparks, then place the pot on top of the flame carefully.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	So, let's cut that into three parts for a change of pace.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	For three days, apply that ointment to the affected area and let the rash dry out for several days; then apply this cream within the time it takes to heal.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diys Albucasis: Oh children, of this particular kind of cauterization we have seldn't used much because of the fear concerning its care and because few instances have been found that deal with it thoroughly.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May God bless those who have suffered and comfort them in their pain.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Mays cauterizes a medicine that is adherent, and you should make two circles having an armillary sphere with pierced gates; their length in the natural state of its nuts or such as those ones.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	Sì, gli spazi tra quelle che sono le diverse quantità della grandissima variabilità del suddetto possono essere utilizzati in modo diverso a seconda dell'altezza e della posizione, e possono contenere cose di più importanza o meno rispetto agli altri seguendo questa struttura:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	An apple a day keeps the doctor away, and to prepare for this prevention, drink water beforehand, forming two circles with your mouth, allowing its quality to gradually diminish as you sip it little by little for about an hour, enduring slight choking and discomfort from swallowing—as if one was swallowing hot liquid—until the sensation of burning subsides.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	A proper elevation of your arm is required with the instrument in order to fully drain all the water from both ears.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	In three days and resting at that border within which the night of August is darkest, she shall leave her hometown, and wander for several more days until she reaches the northern region; this will be her last journey.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	B takes care of that person until they are healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain is spreading to the shoulder or arm, make a statue in which there is water according to how it was made in ancient times.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of cold water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the purification of drugs.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkaline pasta with two distinct parts - one smooth and creamy, the other a crunchy topping that has been carefully scored into new waves, allowing the top part to perforate slightly, according to the desired amount of saltiness in your taste.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Pause briefly as the wave recedes and gather yourself atop that crest of another incoming wave; then, dive beneath it to encounter an underwater current which will carry you for several seconds before you push off from its backside. Aim your body towards the direction where you wish to travel, maintaining proper form during this maneuver. Allow the sharp water flow at the base of the crest to guide your ascent into a glide position on the approaching wave's face.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Approach the entire water and pour it over another living cause as well as other alkalies that are renewed, for there is strong acidity during those hours which is administerd in various operations of medicine and also cauterization of other members, where operation acts like a burn.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	Indeed, some of these medicines are applied with a wide cautery, so they must be thinned and non-cauterized in such a way that they can be mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	The tale tells of an old man who underweb a certain operation and treatment was cured from his hip pain as well as sciatica; indeed the result is remarkable in that, according to the story, he needed no further therapy and within a week he was able to bathe and walk again like before.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	It must be of a certain age to be harvested and not rotten; it should have recently blossomed; and moreover, it needs to be thinned down slightly with some forceps during the time when it's attached to the vine or tendril that caused pain or discomfort.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Law S is applicable if the amount does not exceed three hundred or in case of bad faith, a penalty equivalent to double the value may be imposed.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	A prop met the body in water and then place its head under, when it starts to choke, push that into the belly, as the pain stops and gets healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Herbs that should not be consumed without professional guidance are these remedcuations, but rather for the purpose of cleansing the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Mays and Escorides advise that when you cut the great vein of a goat, it should be cauterized; then restrain your breath as follows: take some woolen thread soaked in old oil and place it between the fingers and toes.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	To dye wool using onion skin and alum mordant, follow these steps:
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Upon drinking water, and as long as the refreshing sensation persists, it will bring relief to your achy muscles and soothe the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This particular method of cauterization is called the cattle cauterizer.
Capitol .xlii.	In the context of government and politics, "Capitol" (capitalized) refers to the building in which a legislative body meets. For example, in the United States, it often refers to the U.S. Capitol Building located in Washington D.C., where both houses of Congress - the Senate and the House of Representatives - meet.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Cauterization of the second degree burn pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some heart pains occur on both sides due to various causes such as compression or impact, excessive evacuation, and similar reasons, as well as through the ingestion of moist, dirty material.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	"A cat's claw is not made of this one species, which is produced by the effusion of a sticky substance."
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	In Donc Cove, a prop of the evacuation from illness, use am pills and similar items on your skin that are applied in lines across where you feel pain, but be careful not to overdo it for each line with cauterization or more, according to the tolerance of the sickness and the potency of the treatment.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	S has underg cuatreraio cauterization of the point.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you get cut or injured in three places (or four), apply a sterile adhesive bandage to each wound according to the following method:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII (43) in a book is referred to as "Capitol xliii" when using Roman numerals. In the context of an index or table of contents, it would be written with the letter 'C' for Capitol followed by 'XLIII'. So if this were indicating Chapter 4amoongst other chapters in a book titled "The Rise and Fall," you might see something like:
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Cutting during the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Malformations occur due to this illness in the childhood period, and a sign of its commencement in children is that it affects their skeleton structure by causing elongation and movements.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	At the last vertebra of the second section and in the notes that begin to rise above the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Thus when you come upon an opportunity and desire to forbid or block something, here is a way to create a circle around that particular object according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Take a cauterizing agent over the entire area of the spinal contusion.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you want to perform a spinal fusion surgery using bone grafting and metal rods or screws, follow these steps for the procedure:
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	The French sentence "Les points de suspension sont utilisés pour indiquer une omission ou un espace" translates to "Ellipses are used to indicate an omission or pause in English." Here is the translation with proper punctuation:
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	A proper care within the limits of water that has been mentioned is necessary.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	May's doctor advises that caulking should not be administerer in cases of hemorrhoids that have caused muscle spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLV (45 in Roman numerals) of the United States Constitution is dedicated to the legislative branch, known as Congress, which consists of two chambebters - the Senate and the House of Representatives. In this chapter, various powers, responsibilities, and limitations are outlined for both houses of Congress, including their composition, rules, procedures, and methods for passing laws.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Treatment of gout and joint pain flare-ups.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	There are various joint pains that stem from imbalanced humours and cause discomfort in every member of the body; these often result in pain in the limbs, as is common among physicians, they recommend leech therapy specifically to address this issue.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	Then go to the doctor as soon as possible because of your gout pain; it won't get better on its own and may require a special treatment or surgery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is that you cauterize the tube for drainage in the loop of the joint of the middle third toe.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Let S be the oval shape of which this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	It is necessary that the piercing on the earlobe be done by a professional during scheduled cauterization appointnment.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If the pain persists in the joints or at other junctions, and then moves to a certain vein, it should be punctured with three or four lancing tools of equal size from this olive tree lancet set.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	Then you may apply the cautery at such times as it is necessary; but do not apply too much heat to your own body beforehand, just warm up only the area around the vein.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	"And the two pains struggle within the throat, while hours distribute the cauldration that we have mentioned in its capital."
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	The pain is only in the most intense moments, and it seems unbearable; hours pass as if they were part of a light bulb' cuircuit, oscillating just like those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	"The pain leaves through the words, moments pointed in the circuit of the lights above each night and over the edge of dawn."
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	When pain comes close to heartaches or muscle aches, hours of resting help alleviate all types of discomfort.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	In the event of an injury or illness, prompt medical attention and proper treatment are crucial for healing. May God be with us in times of need.
Capitol .xlv.	In the United States, a capital (also known as "Capitol") refers to the building where state legislatures meet and carry out their duties. Each of the fifty states has its own Capitol building in which its senate chamber and house of representatives can convene for legislative sessions.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Cauterization of fistulas.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	Quaen endeve wandered through the fields and saying the words before the altar to his father, and then he began to pray that you might not command your enemy to starve on this day and that use of lenient reasons so that he may be freed from his own body.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Follow the rules of good conduct among your peers and command them to keep their hands within that is not thrown or appears outside the boundaries.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	E à propos retorna o que lhe parecem as chaves e a senha, tenta então a divisão sobre os óleos do pentanilh, a extremidade da qual seja semelhante ao maior de círculos das subiranas partidas do cordeiro.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Approximations of the cauterization methods which this form represents:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Within the realm of light, may we always embrace and adorn with sparkles.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Person A apologizes for reducing the size of his/her tent and promises to move it back over their spot where the tent does not encroach.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have traversed through the trials of sickness and loss, but now you take a moment to pause, and serve others from your abundance, holding onto what is most precious in life.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Article 508: The landowner shall provide the necessary tools and materials for burning at his boundary markers, including wire for marking; if not obtained during the first attempt within one year from the day of notification (hereinafer referred to as "the time of notice"), further attempts may be made annually until then.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	At the time of the bees' incision, you observe the nature of the wound in Buddha's body, which does not burn that cloth solecuously to prevent such evil from causing death or other great misfortune.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	The elders say that if you do not use the lens for observing stars and other celestial objects, your task is incomplete.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	B. The manner in which the circumcision of children is carried out should be subtle, according to their size and measurements.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	A proper care of the wound site for three days is essential to ensure that it heals without complications following cauterization around the area where the lesion was located.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	A friend who is true in times of health and sickness will always be appreciated by others around them.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The illness must remain silent upon his head for forty days, during which the place and its people shall be sealed off.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	A cove that pauses nurture the wound as time heals it; and the belly does not swell from excessive effort to fight.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	How long does it take to travel from one city to another by train, including layoangs and other stops? This journey will last approximately X days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	A is to abstain from labor and food excesses, and drinking copious amounts of water; in its entirety, this regimen will lead to complete health recovery.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	The healing of ruptures in the other parts of the belly should be treated first, and at once, cauterize the rupture on that side using red-hot iron according to its amount, together with all exudates from the wound as well as blood from the third part. Then attend to the mentioned area with warm water until it is healed, without causing injury.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	In the initial steps to close a wound using a triangular cautery technique, follow these instructions carefully and ensure safety at all times:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	In the field of linguistics, line length and syllable stress play a significant role in determwart the rhythm, cadence, and overall fluency of speech during language breaks such as pauses or hesitations. Proper line lengths contribute to easier comprehension, while appropriate syllable stresses can enhance the natural flow of spoken words.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Torus fracture cauterization.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	A patient is experiencuing persistent pain due to fractures or trauma and has not found relief through conventional medication. They are seeking advice about the use of cautery needles for treatment.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	E be the cauldrations of all limbs according to the size and smallness of them, their value and inflammation, as well as location of ulcer and pain in them.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the first attempt at burning is not successful, she will repeat the procedure; because it is customary for those pains to be located near a certain limb, so that you hope that with these further burns around the area of discomfort, the illness will heal.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Leprosy cauterization (also known as the "cobbold method") was an archaic treatment for Hansen's disease (leprosy) that involved applying a caustic substance to lesions on the skin in order to destroy them. This method, however, was not effective and could cause severe damage and scarring.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The ancient Lebroso remedies are often used for great pain relief and modestly for the type of leprosamo caused by brain fatigue and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Thus you shall cauterize the mentioned spot, considering if leprosamen is common and that said water may heal it as per the division aforesaid, neither this nor any other place should be left out or neglected, lest the corruption consume the whole body and cause total impairment. On the crown of his head (H=V), make the first cauterization at the temple near hair parting; secondly between these temples on the forehead; thirdly above both ears; fourthly behind the ear, or over a node if there is one.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	The final step of the procedure involves making a small incision within the bone using the hot iron, and removing any previous scars to allow for an increase in thick vapors rising from it; then proceed with cauterizing over the wound as soon as possible.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy is manifested on the body, then you shall cauterize the affected areas as mentioned before in the head; and burn with a hot iron on the extremity of the nose, and two on each nostril, and two over the vertebrae of the neck, and five over the spine, and one across the collarbone area, and another above the shoulder blade. Also, cauterize two on each arm bone, and one on each finger joint; and two on each leg bone, and one on each ankle, and one on each toe; and two over each rib and one on each hip joint. Additionally, you should cauterize all the affected areas of the skin and limbs mentioned before with leprosamo, as well as on each muscle and tendon of his body.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	The nerves that are not under the spinal cord do not control those muscles.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	In some cases, certain wounds are treated with a heated instrument known as a caustic cauterizer on the tibia of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and yet another one on the anus.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	The wise ones who are more accustomeed to the fire will find it less painful and beneficial; but those with a poor constitution should not endure the cauterization, for their bodies have been astonished by this method too much.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	A) Clean the wounds, then apply large or small dressings according to the size of the members and joints as previously described for the types of instruments used.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	The correct translation of the text from Friulian to English is: "He applies the caustic ointment made with wax and honey, as well as another cure within which it has been healed."
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII (48)
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Cauterization of a stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	If any member is wounded or bandaged and is being treated with medicines, ointments, and plasters, but remains unhealed, then you should cauterize that member using a caustic agent according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	F is the heating element inserted into a small incision in the knee joint slightly.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	A) To heal with this ointment within which is healthy.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Some cases of paralysis are treated by cauterizing certain nerves which supply the muscles and surrounding tissues of the affected limb(s) or region, after which the paralysis is alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Mays does not prescribe the water itself, but that which is found in the dissection of limbs and nerve exits throughout the entire body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX (49) of the United States Constitution is not explicitly called "Capitol". The term you might be referring to could be Article I, Section 8 which outlines the powers delegated to Congress, or perhaps it's a chapter in a book that discusses aspects related to Capitol Hill.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	The removal of a mole that is nevus sebaceous.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	Quan albares es antiqua et no confieraís a l'algua dels enfangis de medicina, tostant sobre aquella amb un poc segons la quantitat del tinc que és remugat entre la blancura i el color d'ell. La cori acaba de canviar.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Take equal quantities of barley flour and lentils; roast them separately until they turn brown. Grind the drumstick seeds (Colombo) and the wing beans into a powder, each in equal parts, then mix everything together. Finally, pour in oil and stir well before serving hot.
Capitol .l.	The U.S. capital, also known as Washington D.C., is the seat of government and houses important federal buildings like the White House, the Capitol building, and the Supreme Court. This city plays a crucial role in American politics and history.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Cerebral aneurysm clipping surgery involves the placement of a small metal clip at the base or neck of an aneurysm to stop blood flow into it and prevent rupture. This procedure is typically performed by a neurosurgeon through a craniotomy, which entails removing part of the skull to access the brain.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	The Cancer constellation is one of the twelve zodiac signs and represents a crab in astronomy. In astrology, those born under this sign (from June 21 to July 22) are said to possess characteristics such as adaptability, creativity, sensitivity, but also stubbornness and moodiness. The constellation appears in the night sky from late summer through autumn, revolving around the celeste circle along with other zodiac signs within a year's cycle.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The following text is in Occitan language (Occitano-Romance), which belongs to the Southern branch of Gallo-Romance languages and predominantly spoken in southern France as well as parts of Italy, Spain and Monaco.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	E is more direct than its counterpart in the electric circuit as we have mentioned earlier, which has ten resistors.
Capitol .li.	The capital of Liechtenstein is Vaduz, which corresponds to the domain ".li" as it is a top-level domain (TLD) designated for the country'aderence code for Liechtenstein in the Domain Name System (DNS).
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Cauterization of an ulcer.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When certain types of fertilizer are delayed in maturation, and as such result from excess or bad health (as it ages), little moisture, or over time, if you wish to hasten the maturation of fertilizer; spray at times throughout the yearly cycle with a cauterizing agent like lime powder. And apply it so that it does not deplete during maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you want to perform the perforation of your animal'n horn, here is how this procedure goes: firstly ignite a cauterizing tool (such as silver nitrate) and then insert it into the base location where adornments are usually placed until it penetrates through the horn core. Please note that performing such procedures should be done by professionals or under expert supervision to avoid any harm to your animal.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In cases where the wound has scabs left over, in order for the body of the arm to be healed up, and as soon as it is within that it is cured.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 12: The Legal Landscape of eCommerce in Europe - An Overview from www.capitollibrary.org/resources/legal_ecommerce_eu.pdf.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Cauterization of a carbuncle.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	"Corrosion eats away at the limb in much the same way that fire consumes dry wood."
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	If you apply the caustic substance where there is a burn with heat, then afterwards ignite small and large pieces of charcoal as appropriate for that location where the burning occurs.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Cauterize that area completely in order to eradicate the entire corroded portion and avoid any possibility of leakage.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Righteously so, he shall apply that ointment for three days and place it upon the caustic spots until all scars are fully removed and complete rejuvenation is achieved.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	A proper care should be taken for that which causes us pain.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la cual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	The cream is used in the treatment of certain wounds as a topical agent for acute medical conditions; however, it should not be applied to areas where cauterization may occur.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, he also burned the fat in a cauldron with wild herbs brewing.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	You should go to the emergency department of your local hospital if you have symptoms of acute illness in the division, and therefore take whoever amount of your medication is needed.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter IV - The Legislative Branch
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Sterilization of needles and other similar instruments.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	In cases of skin ulcers and wounds left by the disease known as clavus (corns), a significant cause and occurrence, two methods of treatment are applied; one is heat cauterization, where the area is treated with heat or fire, and the other is water-based cauterization, which involves using cold water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Here'n the cauldron with fire you shall make a cautery which resembles a penance flame; it should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the nail in its entirety and is composed of fine filings.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	A brief pause occurs as the spark jumps across the gap and you rotate your hand over the soldering iron within the circuit of the joint where the solder reaches depth.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Elias said that he would enter the gate within three days when it begins to grow cold.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	The traditional recipe for Catalan "salsola vermiculata" or saltwort involves pickling the young leaves and blossoms in vinegar, along with other aromatic herbs like rosemary and thyme. Here' grower’s step-by-step guide to making this unique condiment:
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	A proper care at the site of minor injury is crucial to avoid infection.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If you do not convert, and some of your vessels sink in the water surface, mainly on the sea or near rocks, then take care to ensure that there is enough water intake from these outlets using a jug. Take one quart of rainwater, iron water, or pine resin water (pine pitch), and pour it over the clogged pipe; afterward, add some small quantity of cold water and turn on your faucet. Rotate the pipe with compressing force and hold the rim of the canula against the threaded end of the valve, then direct the water flow toward the top of the valve thread. Wait a little while for a slight pressure from the water to loosen the clog; gradually add more liquid if needed until it clears.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	The fishes that are under the sea swim towards one another before they come over all of them, each within their own bodies.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	The water that flows through those cracks where the nails of the hinge are removed will end up in the basin, which the body enters when leaning.
Capitol .liiii.	PART I - Introduction to Capitol
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Tremor ablation procedure.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When someone experiences tremors due to nerve irritation or fever caused by something similar, in the first four hours you should cauterize that area on either side of the spine with a cautery over each spinous process, between every spinous process there is one cautery; and also above the pelvis.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	The lightning of lutein levels rests and hastens the healing of freckled illnesses.
Capitol .lv.	Capital LV.com is a prominent news website that provides comprehensive coverage of the latest events, trends and updates from Washington D.cuede, the capital city of the United States. As a reliable source for national and local news, this platform offers readers in-depth analysis on politics, economy, culture and society while featuring diverse opinions from experts and influential figures in various fields. The website also encourages audience engagement by providing comment sections for users to express their views and participate in discussions regarding important issues impacting the community.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	The accidental cauterization of the abdomen during surgery.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	"Quando the vessel is dilated and has formed pustules caused by corrupt materials, therefore approach for treatment in such a way that it's cauterized over the entire surface of the fistula using a delicate caustic agent; or with an erosive technique along its length; or with lenticular caustics."
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Some weeds are burnt before the harvest of their exile according to this manner; and they do not grow again, as well as those that were cleared up, leaving only healthy ones.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, he also pointed out that the water was used for flood prevention and hydrobotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI or "Capitol lxi" refers to Chapter 56 in a text, such as the Bible, wherein roman numerals (L and VI) are combined to denote the chapter number. In this case, it would represent Chapter 56. If you need further information on Capitol lvi from a specific context or source, please provide more details so I can assist you accordingly.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Cautery for a penile fracture due to incision injury.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops that venture into archery battles should avoid the plague and prevent its outbreak by either beginning a campaign of inoculation or inciting outbreaks of boils or cauterization of limbs, among other methods; however, it is difficult to eradicate such diseases.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	And come accidents at sea, your thoughts of your mother during the horrific scene in the arcade, pause on that line you just remembered about times gone by when it was still flowing with the blood of those before you, and which no longer exists.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	A prop of space in the focus are olive trees with many branches and it emits over those inside that have fire sparks.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	In the case of an injury to either a small or large vein while it is bleeding profuscuously and has filled up your mentioned vessel, enter in that vessel quickly, thereby occluding and narrowing such blood flow.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If you clot the artery when you say "hold" and remove the cauldrons, then it takes another one immediately from among the remaining cauldrangs, which are in the fire being prepared, so that the blood does not constrict again.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Here he looks at you so that you don't get enraged with this illness and bring harm or other malevolence upon it.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	In cases where there is an excess of blood in the artery named "flueys sanc," treatment at that location may not be possible due to certain restrictions, especially when the artery is large; however, there are generally four methods available: cauterization as previously mentioned, extraction if it has not already been removed (since once extracted, the extremities of blood vessels become charred and narrow), or using a thread made of wool or linen through strong tension to constrict them. Additionally, they can be tied down with a decent compress applied over medicinal substances that help restrict the flow of blood.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	The one who administers a fair and reasonable restriction of your property or the use thereof for reasons such as fire hazards or similar circumstances shall not grant permission without justification.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	May it be known that the vein in question is not open to anyone, neither through surgery nor medical treatment, at all times taking into account what has been said about the orifice of this vein as we have mentioned before; and understand the great hardness within which the blood remains part of the sovereign party of the wound, and that over the incision it is not healed; and furthermore, whether there needs to be cauterized or medicated.
Comensa la segonda partida.	In the second part, we will delve deeper into the subject matter and explore its various facets in greater detail. We aim to provide a comprehensive overview of the topic at hand by presenting supporting evidence and engaging examples that can help readers form a clear understanding. Throughout this section, our goal is to enrich your knowledge base while keeping you engaged with interesting information and thought-provoking ideas. So let's dive in!
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	The Cutting and Piercing of Veins, Bloodletting, Leech Therapy, Plagues, and Their Relatives.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are sentences from the Asturian language, also known as Bable or Leonese. Here they are translated into English for better understanding:
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	In the first chapter of all diseases in which burning cautery is found to be convenient and used as a medicine, along with its occasions, causes, and the instruments necessary for such treatments; I have also prescribed the rules of the subjacent membrane when applied to the head.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	You are required to go through this process in this office according to the procedure indicated so that your claim is lodged within the specified hours after you have requested it.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Given that you begin the water, cover, son of fire, let it be understood that in this capital there is a sense of fear regarding the burning of that first capital.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	"Pay attention that it is of great caution, as the operation mentioned in this chapter has been performed multiple times, involving evacuation of abscesses (which are related to life-threatening risks) such as vein spraying or incision over the boil, exploration or drainage of wound/ulcer, extraction of splinters or stone removal, and excision of stones."
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	Of those who are accompanied by fear and trembling, death will come upon them suddenly. (This is an old Occitan text)
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	I beseech you not to subject yourself to the waters in which disease often dwells, for on occasion such places can become breeding grounds for illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	E of his enemies he may go with the sickness and is deceitful to him, causing his death; thus because of the severity of this illness that he finds from his sickness, and due to its longeatury nature, and by means of the sickness which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	The one who provides you with food and clothing is to be thanked; hoping for his well-beeing, your own sickness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Let not your judgment be clouded by what you see in him from whom this matter arises; and let your caution exceed your covetousness, and may your rapacity subside. Do not presume upon any cause without certain knowledge which verifies the necessity of it, leading to praisewn success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	We use this tool for the treatment of all your health conditions related to prognosis and indication of the place where it is converted into well-beamishness, because in that place you will find help in acquiring fame, memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh Lord, in your grace bestow on us understanding and guide our steps; may you protect the one who dwells within your care. Amen.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	Chapter IV: Distinguished Capitulations Concerning the Treatment of Livestoken within Boundaries of Weight Measurements, as Per Demands for Clarity and Necessity
Capitol primier.	First capital (English) - Washington D.cu, the political center and a symbol of national pride for the United States of America. Established in the late 18th century as the nation's new seat of government, it hosts iconic landmarks like the White House, the Capitol Building, and numerous monuments that pay homage to American history and ideals.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	The amount of curare in the water, which is contained in children's capsules.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	This illness passes on to children during pregnancy, and when the queen conceives a child, she is afflicted in her head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	A few cases are considered to be false alarms, where it is unclear what the cause may have been.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	I do not consider this disease to be found in adults only, but also in children; and as far as those are concerned whom I have seen dying of it, thus appears to me the deadly work upon them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	In the land where a child had abundant water on his head, and his hair was always so magnificent that it couldn't be tamed by its grandeur; moreover, the humidity caused such a foul smell to emanate from it.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This humidity is added between the skin and the bone, or it's deposited on top of the bones after death.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	In the case where the moisture is between the scalp and bone and the abscess is small, you should make incisions in the area of the head using a single cut along the width. The length of this fissure should be two inches to ensure that the humidity can escape properly. This forms the shape of an incision or spatula for draining purposes.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	If the humidity is increased and the gap becomes larger in this manner, then there will be two cracks according to this rule.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is gone, leaving only your breaths open from all sides and water trickles when you press that same spot on both cheeks and it doesn't happen to your other side.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Describa dins la sua propiària perspectiva les tres fisures i el seu paper de cap, seguint este diagrama:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	"When a headache is caused by excessive moisture, place dry herbs and linen near the affected area; securely wrap it with cloths soaked in oil after one or two days, gradually loosening the bandage as the swelling subsides, and strengthening the hair for equality. Eat a diet of dry food with low humidity that will comfort and heal the member."
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	E is another form of incision, which I consider the severity of the abscess and the collection of water flow; some cases occur more on the occipital region, or in front, or on the right, or on the left side; therefore pay attention to the incision where it seems most appropriate based on your best judgment.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	He observed that the separated vessel did not include veins and capillaries, but only blood cells to remove moisture from its flow of blood through evacuation of fluid.
Capitol .ii.	Capital II is a political thriller novel written by Vince Flynn, published in 2016 as the fifteenth installment of his series featuring CIA agent Mitch Rapp. The story revolves around the threats to national security and the complex measures taken by intelligence agencies to combat them within the United States' capital city and beyond.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	The dissection of the artery which supplies blood to the ears, called helixes.
Capitol segon.	Second capital.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	The old practice of bloodletting is not recommended today as it does not contribute to the healing process and can potentially harm the patient further by causing bleeding from these two arterees. This outdated procedure has been largely replaced with modern medical treatments that are more effective in managing ailments and promoting recovery.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Then go to the place where you want to cut those that suffer from hereditary disease, and approach closely to the site of interest with your fingers, then feel for any abnormalities or growths; also consider the pulse at this location; and ascertain what veins lie over these spots. Moreover, all parts above each spot are hidden, like in the bodies of healthy individuals.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	The passage discusses the intricae and their attempts to capture each other's territory while considering ways to prevent any encounters from happening within their borders. Additionally, they seek a solution that promotes peace among them.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	As he pulled back the curtain and hooked it to the sides of the opening between the sections.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	Let E be the length of the line segment connecting two points on an adjusted axis, where a certain vein is dissected and blood exits through a pulsing ejection, which jumps forward periodically.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the archery bow does not fit under your chin, try adjusting it so that you measure three inches of ear length less than the string'aturature (distance between the two strings), and then pull through the nock smoothly.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	The quantity of gold that comes from a mine per year, is measured in troy ounces. In case of a fire, do not try to extinguish it yourself and instead follow the quantity indicated by the degree of malfunction or heart attack symptoms.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Person A considers the plaque and therefore if there's any cause for concern regarding its composition, hours should pass before applying a topical cream to avoid possible inflammation.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	The plant grows in the presence of phosphorus and magnesium soils and requires care when applying that substance to avoid soil saturation; it thrives well with regular watering, sufficient sunlight, and a temperature range between 60-75°F.
Capitol .iii.	III. Legislative Procedures in the United States Capital
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	The removal of the arches which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	A variety of ancient methods were used to treat wounds and injuries in the past, including humidity from agricultural lands and improvements in temple quality as well as hot springs that resemble those found today. These remedeby are also believed to have been effective for healing wounds through medicine and non-boiling water. Nowadays, we have adopted extraco techniques of draining abscesses within temples or cauterization of these methods as we have shown before.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of extracting those substances is that the evil root infects the hair in places where it resides; and understand the apparent archeology within the temple as it has been shown by your pulse, and hidden from most people due to the intensity of fear.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If you are ignorant of this, the hours will become long with illness; and so apply yourself to a dry dressing or use heat if there is water nearby that appears from your archery injury.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	In the early hours, she took possession of the space where this form existed.
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	To extract the code from an online source and identify any uppercase letters within it, you can follow these steps in Python:
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is very thin and wraps around one of its branches at the end, and if it is cut according to the length which are extended by their extremities and they contract, there will be no blood flow out, because if not severed completely, all the blood would gush from them.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	A proper drainage of the sewage system is crucial for effective waste management and environmental protection. Ensuring that all components are well-maintained, free from blockages, and functioning efficiently helps prevent flooding and contamination risks to surrounding areas. Regular inspection and cleaning can significantly reduce potential issues in urban infrastructure. Dentro de tres (Within three)
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the archery is great, cover it with two layers of strong leather or durable strings along its length, and do not let it become rotten before the consolidation of the arrowhead and the fletching'cups flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	"The increase of the surplus between two harvests and its value at that time or another time."
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If it is possible, use the cautery tool to close that wound within the boundaries of its edges, ensnaring any protruding tissues. Keep this in place where you've done your surgical work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	E is better to treat this illness than that fever here as it's in its febrile phase; indeed, cauterization helps with such causes that contribute to ending the inflammaturition, and therefore it is better in recovery.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	In the old town square, several arches stand proudly amidst the cobblestone pavement, with gentle moss covering them neatly, and its care is taken through medicinal herbs placed within that keep it healthy.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If while another wound is healing and there is an outflow of blood from the arrow wound, you should now try to stop that blood flow by applying pressure, using a cauterizing agent, or filling the wound with cotton or similar material; strengthen your heart as much as possible.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	In no case is the cause of that which you have spoken about within this place related to a sanction being imposed therein; nor does it pertain to pouring water with vehement chilliness in such a way that its coldness subsides, and becoming stiff as described.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	The extractor that is more effective in vein extraction is one where you have sterilized the instrument with two blades, and you have ensured both ends are clean, and then insert whatever needle or tool you're using, entering through which it reaches your skin and splits the vein into two locations so that they become elongated at a point between their extremities, as this is not fully connected by these blades.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	A esta es la forma de un cauterizador:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	Let H be the height of the two right triangles examples.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the knife is sharp enough like two blades are better, because it will more easily cut through any food and won't tear the flesh at high speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Whenever there is any swelling, the heat of the fire is felt in those places and the flesh separates more easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than all other works and I would highly recommend it.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Let E be the region between two coats, corresponding to the thickness of the said coat.
Capitol quart.	In music, a "capital quartet" typically refers to the string quartet genre in its most esteemed and classical form. The term could also imply a premier or renowned group specializing in this repertoire. However, it's not a standard musical terminology; so when referring to a capital quartet, one would likely be discussing either:
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Treatment of Acute and Sour Colds from Pine Hulls
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	Many times the veins in that area on top of your head become swollen and tender due to an illness or other causes; however, they do not bleed, nor does it have any connection with medical treatment. Sometimes you may notice redness and a feeling as if there are insects crawling over your forehead, which is similar to the sensation of having a wood louse on your skin. The veins become so swolamoind that they feel like their walls humidify themselves when touched; moreover, the hairs become damp due to this inflammation from tears and matted fur as seen in animals' grooming during an illness or after surgery, but no matter what it is not healing rapidly.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	A is the command for your mallet to hit the balls that are on his forehead and to carve three evenly spaced slits along the length of his forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	If the fissure is of two lengths: one being as far distant in length from the nose at the middle point of the forehead and the second according to a small measure of the movement of the lamellae which are in the lacrimal bone, then the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Look at the beginning of the arches which are two-sided and extend your jaw from the connection of both lower jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	The space between each item of any list determines the quantity of three adjustments.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	It's like an intricate tapestry or woven fabric with delicate threads that the blood leaves behind.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	The space between two sharp points, of which this is the form of its incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	The text appears to be in Spanish and refers to the second session of an event taking place within various temples, possibly religious or spiritual gatherings. Here'amoartizo a la segunda sesión de nuestro encuentro celebrado dentro de las diversas templos.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Extract the entire word that is between two quotes and replace it with its corresponding Caesar cipher version using a shift of three letters forward in the alphabet. The original quote is within the text, excluding any other characters.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	The key of this piece is C major and it involves entering the primary section with another voice using a plucked string instrument called a pizzicato. One part uses gut strings while the other does not.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	The claw of that sharp axe shall sever the flesh adjacent to it and the claws of the lion will enter into its bone, and push forward whoever reaches the crack in the skin, separating completely all the veins that descend from the head towards the tail.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	The water should continue to flow from the source and be directed into the first crack, moving towards the next one.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Extract the locations of blood clots within a vein confluence.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	As rain falls on each crack and crevice of this vast field, and settles upon those dust particles beginning to rise in the air and smell so earthy, but doesn't cause any allergies.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	E is the third day after the injury and administers great enthusiasamount of water to the tail, and appropriately with oil based on basilico and other substances that help wounds heal.
Capitol .v.	In the case of Matal v. Tam (2017), the United States Supreme Court ruled unanimously that federal trademark law'cups prohibition on registering disparaging terms, as established under the Lanham Act, violated the First Amendment’s Free Speech Clause. The court found that this provision of the Lanham Act was overly broad and an impermissible restriction on free speech.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of wounds and its healing, descendants from parts mentioned in the chapter.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When certain individuals are exposed to poison ivy or similar plants, they may experience symptoms such as itching and continuous skin irritation. This is due to the urushiol oil found in these plants that can cause a delayed allergic reaction. The affected areas often exhibit redness, swelling, blisters with clear fluid, and intense itching. Additionally, scratched palms may develop ulcers and hair loss from rubbing or touching the rash. These reactions are caused by urushiol oil entering through small cuts in the skin's surface rather than larger veins originating inside the body.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best treatment for this condition is to instruct the evil spirit that resides within his forehead, and then pierce a small hole in the middle of the forehead, starting from one temple going into the other; insert your finger between the temples' laminae (and your incision goes into the bone); lengthen your fingers towards the clavicles which are the spirit's abode to make it emerge.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	The bladder is completely empty and the urine flow between the two lips of the urethral opening or the drapes of it.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	A prop is recommended for use beneath the polished shoes in case they do not cause blisters or calluses to form again.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	In this recipe, the apostema has completely disappeared and it seems that the pain in his chest is starting to decrease as well; soon he will be able to consume food again. The appetite returns as if by magic, similar to taking two parts of wheat flour mixed with four parts of cocoa, and blending them together before applying a paste on these areas like a natural treatment for the chest area's original condition.
Capitol .vi.	The United States Capitol is the home of the U.cu.s Congress and the seat of the legislative branch of the federal government of the United States. It's located in Washington D.C., atop Capitol Hill, with its iconic dome standing as a symbol of American democracy.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Healing water in the golden wells.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	In the cause of cats' ears being one among four species, whether it is a mineral stone or appears to be rock-like, like iron and copper, or plant-like as chickpeas or fava beam, or fluidly like water and sour vinegar and similar liquids, or an animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Therefore, if you put pebbles or any other similar objects in the ear, block the ear canal with cotton, and occasionally pour water into that area of oily secretion or discharge, over time this will facilitate the extraction of it, and induce sneezing under certain conditions, which helps prevent wax buildup.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	The earlobe piercings are made with some type of metal or gold, and the lobe is extended to unusual sizes due to various reasons such as personal preference or cultural significance.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you are not thrown off by this intricate and clever manipulation of time known as "epicicurean gesture," then here is the essence in English: The subtle art of managing hours with a mysterious instrument called the Epicicurean Gesture. This ancient technique, often lost to history, allows one to bend and shape time itself for various purposes.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it's a well-grinded coffee bean, yes, it is fine; if not, the machine distributes its extraction evenly with subtle double increments of lesser intensity.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	If it is not the "ear wick", then for hours, place an ear cone in the opening of the ear and close around the tube with a softened wax or oil-based substance such that it's not too tight but just enough to hold the cone.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	The wind is blowing very strongly towards the shore, where troops are advancing with water that they have previously counted on.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If the injury is not severe in this manner, take off your shirt or an item of clothing with which you have pinned down the injured limb to a certain quantity, and wrap that at the extremity of the ray (bone), then properly bandage over that area.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	An external ear device helps to keep the ear canal clean and prevents it from becoming too moist.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	If you are not allergic to the causes we have mentioned, hours of this hardship may result in an inflamatur or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting this is such that you first bless the malady of venous and arterial blood according to the manner of the virtue of truth, then place that clamp between your most skilled hands and turn the earlobe towards its parts, and create a small incision in the skin where it has been previously prepared.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	E is the lunar crater within which you can reach with an instrument suitable for its size and depth; then approach that crater at right angles or as close to it, and in this hour of opportunity use a velocity suited for its depth. And care when entering into it during that time.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of your ear discomfort is due to one of the greases that you believe have infected it, then over time administering treatment and extracting them will help. However, if you do not heed your doctor's instructions, eventually you may develop a subtle paralysis according to this pattern:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	The doctor prescribed that medicine to the person in question, which was found in his ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	E is not possible to capture the essence of water that you imagine evaporates through your exhale, and it stops at heights as high as peaks, or with a subtle gesture or due to such carelessness we have said, for its extraction has already been removed.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	The patient is in water, which enters the ear canal where the illness causes itching at the beginning, and fills its entire canal up to almost halfway, then drips onto that part of the ear. If by any means this happens, it's okay; if not, there are numerous pebbles and lions according to the length of the mentioned area, and they warm those in a small fire, and the patient inserts one into their earlobe on that side and hops over it onto another stone which is placed upon the first one, then strikes with it against the stone inside the ear canal.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not cease, until the stone has been completely submerged in water.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	I have the water here in a glass so you can take some from paper or plastic. He placed one end of the wire in his ear and held the other end over a flame until it became malleable due to the heat.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	The water flows through a pipe and enters another gutter; it goes back and forth so many times until all the water is drained out, and then the valve on top of the rock is opened just as described with the extra stone.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the case of animal intrusion in that area, if it is a small amount, so much easier and similar to what we have said in the division; however, if it is of great quantity which causes trouble at the site, then the extraction of its flesh and offal should be distributed. The reason for this is more serious than all other reasons mentioned regarding that area.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of wormwood herb in the ear, when you use that water we have mentioned in the division and treatise on distillation, do not impart your procedure, hours cover that you observe the ear to sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If there is any cause of worms present in this area during those times or at some subtle moments earlier on, but if no cause appears, the hours take a thin and slightly wider tube-like form as follows. In the context of nature, it's important to investigate possible causes that may lead to an increase in parasites such as worms. Factors like soil quality, moisture levels, temperature, and presence of organic matter can influence their prol
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	The subtle extremity touches the ear according to the quantity it should suffer from illness; and as it becomes moist therewith, make sure this occurs with gentle pressure, ensuring that all worms are expelled in the process.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If the patient does not follow your instructions properly and stops using the cannula with sealant as instructed; then administer the prescribed distillations, which have been previously used in vermin treatment, and you will find this information on the distillation protocols.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	E is your efusion where you apply the ointments to the ears, and this instrument is its form of use. In English: This device is used for applying ear medications as part of an efusive therapy process; it'anno specific design tailored to facilitate easy application directly into the ear canal.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	A pair of silver or golden earrings with a small diamond and set in gold above it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	Then it is so important that we embark on the journey of continental cleaning here, as it becomes necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the reed and wrap it around the affected area of your head, then gently pour a mixture of herbal oil or water into the concave part of the tube - which is in your ear - using a small cannula. Then insert the reed just above the sore spot and apply gentle pressure to extract the warmth from within when the oil has been expelled into the concave part of the tube, providing relief for the discomfort inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	The water that has been poured into the ear is already burned by a little heat.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	Here's the translation of your text into formal and natural English: "Ensure that the cause you infuse in the ear is not too dirty, as eardrop medications do not tolerate moisture."
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII. The Capital City
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	The preservation of olive groves.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some abscesses in the throats of both children and adults do not perforate, but rather rupture spontaneeusly, forming an accumulation in the skin near the earlobe via a pustule or non-scarred carneous tissue; this accumulation sometimes forms on the tip of the ear cartilage where there is no tearing, and other times it occurs outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	From the realm of light, there arises an element that is not easily comprehended, causing major difficulties in achieving good health through its complex properties.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	In that place where you can find sunshine, keep your ears away from the noise and gaze upon it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then if you encounter an apparently full object, it's the result of that subtle space below which this form represents:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the forefinger is smaller than usual lengthwise, of which one side is acute and the other is not; and its stripes are two golden lions without making folds on the ear. (This appears to be describing a piece of jewelerenie, such as a ring or pendant)
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	If the octopus is fresh and raw, it's easy to cut through its subtle lines with great ease until all the meat has been removed from the ear or limbs.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	The earwax is secreted in the outer part of the ear canal, hours before it becomes a thin, soft wax, and then accumulutes at that place on the skin of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	If you're using ear drops to relieve an infection that causes severe pain and difficulty hearing, the pressure might temporamenet improve your ability to hear; however, be cautious not to damage the nerves in your ears.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Take some honey drizzle into your ear canal based on the amount of liquid that you have applied to the Egyptian pomade. Let it rest for several days until you are sure the plug has solidified, or take a small amount and place it in an eggcup then sprinkle over it after three nights and use this mixture; if at times you notice the earlobe is becoming swoln, carefully remove some of the mixture and replace it with another that is freshly made, until it is completely healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Mays decides to apply a compress of sponge or cloth soaked in cold water on his forehead and uses another remedy that restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII. Introduction to the Legislative Process in the United States Congress.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	The medication Atosiban is known to cause dryness of the eyelids as a side effect.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	The eyelids of the animals have various glands along them; some are moist while others are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then you have those that hold the sword and at their command split apart the chains of your reasoning, and justly come down upon the places following three times.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	When you have a bleeding vein, your task is to gently apply the cauterizing stick around that area.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best treatment for old scars and wounds that are still bleeding is to apply a heating method once the reason behind them has been addressed, and if they have been cauterized with heat, those causes will be burned up and won't return.
Capitol .ix.	Ixthel Capital is a fictional entity, typically used as an example in literature or discussion to illustrate concepts such as financial institutions, investment strategies, and economic principles within the context of capital markets. As it does not exist in reality, we can use this imaginary term to explore hypothetical scenarios that may apply to real-world capitol companies.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Heavy eyelid edema that comes to the eyelids of people.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Moisture gathers in the lashes of some eyes due to various causes that result in increased thickness and hardness; hence it is commonly called a "lentigo."
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	Excessive moisture buildup in the lower and upper eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	I believe you're referring to the opera "La Traviata" by Giuseppe Verdi, where in Act II, if Violetta has become significantly ill while away from home and her condition is considered bad throughout, it may be due to a misunderstanding or an exaggeration of events.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Go towards the large crack in the latitude, and grasp that completely with ease so you can pull it apart easily, then hold onto this one tightly and separate those.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	In the beginning, Mays was barely able to open her eyes at all and only with great effort could she do so for short periods of time during the day without any specific cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, adjust your stitches accordingly and ensure it heals properly within.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it is little, you shall not suffer harm as long as the anxious one remains and reincarnates there.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the swelling is decreasing from the edges of the eyelid surface and by evening you also notice that the lid has fallen back to its original position, then there may be nothing wrong; if however, for some reason you suspect something else, I suggest seeking medical attention.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	From the beginning, cleanse yourself with saltwater and heal those areas that harbor water within until they are healthy.
Capitol .x.	The word "capitol" refers to a building in which the legislature meets and conducts government business, especially when used as part of the name, such as Capitol Hill in Washington D.C., home to the United States Congress. It may also be capitalized when referring to buildings that house state legislatures or similar bodies in other countries.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	From the edge of the eyelid above the lashes, remove any dark circles with a gentle massage.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is grayish in color and originates from the eyelid tunic, mainly developing during childhood. It worsens existing eye conditions and causes them to require more treatment; therefore, they cannot tolerate sunlight due to tears forming on their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	E per su tua vezes aquesos jaser sobre las llargues tots temps, i sobre les llargs dormen; i és l'a las pàlpebres de seu desèpts les supercils umides, les quals ja ha cubert incòrnidament evidente es en l'uell. I quant tú pres el lloc amb les tues paraules, tu centres accornic entro aquells.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	In the method of operation where an ailment causes hair to fall out extensively from your head and some even begin falling on you, it is suitable to form a circle according to the amount contained in each part of the distribution, then place that over there and say all your words for it to be bound around by your finger at the center of the circle. Then let this dampness spread through fissures in accordance with their width, as long as the fissure is not wider than what's made during a flautomia (flautomia being an incorrect term and likely refers to haircutting or shaving).
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In Mays, the pre-oven cove that you open fully until you arrive at the archery range, where in the May competitions, you will follow the white ribbon formation for shooting practice.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Remove that cloth which you have around your words and move between the right and left hands, until it is separated.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	Look, I won't adjust the crack here just for you to get through; those steep edges can be treacherous beyond that gap.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If May does not appear at your side in the beginning of the fissure, then you should adjust within the fpress a small piece of wood that will help process Mays; and proceed as we have said earlier; and submerge her clothes in water and let them soak. Then wring out the clothes on the ground and hang them to dry.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	E is an elusive creature that lives deep within the cavern of the fissure, where water occasionally drips down from above and creates a damp environment.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A) Everyone has the right to health care within that is available.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Maya decided to go to the local pharmacy, later she applied that same ointment on her arm before it was fully healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI: Capitalization Rules in English Grammar
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	The method of tactic handling in the case study involves a systematic approach to decision-making and problem-solving, focusing on strategic planning and effective communication among all stakeholder groups. This includes gathering relevant information, identifying possible options, weighing their potential outcomes, consulting with team members or experts if needed, making decisions based on collective input, implementing plans accordingly, monitoring results, and revising tactics as necessary to ensure success in achieving the desired objectives.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	There are four ways to treat the condition of falling out natural and old lashes, which cause tearing, swelling of the eyelids, and weakening of the lashes, known as lash rubbing. The treatment methods include:
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Then I shall know if you are telling the truth or not; hold your left eye shut with your fingers and turn to me when I say so. Now take a needle and insert it gently into that spot just below where your lashes meet, on the edge of your eyelid closest to your nose - towards your temples. If it is true, you will not feel anything; if not, as soon as you do, stop me immediately.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	In the partida dedins of the lower lid, adjust the skin towards the tear duct; externally pull on the edge of the lid and pause there, then attempt to roll it upwards as if forming a leaf shape.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, let us consider that the shape of the eyelid varies depending on the amount of elevation, which is different in men and women; for some it requires a significant incision along the lid according to the amount by which the lid is lifted.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	The tear duct system consists of two main parts - the upper and lower tears ducts or canals. Tears are produced in the lacrimal glands located on each side of your nose, above the outer corner of each eye. Once these tears have moisturized the eyes, they drain into small openings called puncta at the inner corners of your upper and lower eyelids.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	Her crack is just like the texture of natural hair, as well as the thickness of a king'amoeba.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	The monk approaches with a consecrated oil in one of the two corners of the forehead and carefully anoints that entire area, then gently presses together the edges of both lips using a fine woolen cloth, cleansing any excess blood from it, and if desired, you can let the remaining hair on the eyebrows grow outwards; otherwise, there is no need to do so.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Properly sew the wound within three to four days or so on and care for it accordingly.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If the tear duct is blocked, first cleanse it with warm water and apply gentle pressure to help drainage. In cases where there's dryness or irritation of the eyelids, close them gently while applying a moist compress; then, perform suture as follows: Suture 1 - begin at the inner corner near the nose (upper punctum) and continue along the upper lid margin towards the outer corner. Suture 2 - start from the lower punctum near the nose and follow downwards to the edge of the eyelid, ensebut avoiding any tension that could lead to an undesirable outcome.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in his own health he is concerned about the illness and acts with good intentions; he is not afraid of it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	E is an unusual mask, and it features designs reminiscuous of juniper berries on the upper eyelid. It gently lifts the eyelid with three delicate hinges as per this design: (insert image or detailed description)
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible above, there are lashes and so on, equal hours at one point in the figure where a pencil can be placed, and then insert the other end of the tear duct (lacrimal punctum) next to the second tear duct, adjust between them such that they are equally aligned. Then raise both sides as evenly as possible, raising all of it up at once just like we have recounted above.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A surgeon adjusts the two lips of the wound on the patient and closes it once it has healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	In case of an abscess or skin lesion, apply the appropriate antiseptic and dressing, and use ointment as directed by your healthcare provider.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Some eyelash extensions are made from synthetic fibers that may become brittle and fall out over time, while others use natural hairs such as those from humans or horses. To maintain these extensions, it is recommended to clean the eye area gently with warm water and mild cleanser; however, if you have chosen a more artificial option, take extra care not to damage them during removal.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Una taxina roja è una pianta appartenente alla famiglia delle Cannaceae, nota anche come "palma da giada". È originaria del Sud America e cresce principalmente nei paesi di Panama, Costa Rica e Colombia. Questa pianta può raggiungere un'altezza compresa tra i 2 e i 6 metri ed è facilmente riconoscibile per la sua foglia allungata lunga fino a due o tre metri con una spina centrale robusta che si estende lungo tutta la sua lunghecu.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	This text is in Occitan, a Romance language spoken primarily in the southern part of France and some regions of Spain. The translation would be: "Make sure you convert the eyelid and split the figure according to what I have explained; and perpendicularly cut with cannons or delicate blades whose length is according to the length of the eyebrow and their width should be half of the breadth of the space."
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	He has cut into the limbs of both parties, and you have no children left.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Here is the translation from Asturian to English: "Add some of any subtlety underwater that may be excessive in the grain of the oats, and strain through a sieve after separating the husks for a few days; as the chaff will die off due to starvaturdness and be rejected, falling within it and being turned into dust."
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If you are late, the hours cut your time, and as soon as possible enter the safe harbor before it's too late.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	It's well-built, the eyelid is raised and the hair does not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	Segurament, aquí tens una guia per fer "cannes" en català (que significen "palos" o "vares"). Si us plau, açò és la manera de dir-les en plural:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	It has the quantity of longitude and latitude, neither in miles nor in meters.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	The rise of sharp fangs when the skin turns pale, as it hardens.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	There are several natural, bitter and sharp-tasting oils that can be used in this process where you take liquid gold (saffron) with a subtle pause and place it on a thin layer of egg white. Then carefully adjust the edges and corners as needed to form an elegant shape.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	Let E be the length of the field in terms of quantity for one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	A proper approach to creating another subtle field related to the previous one would be to delve deeper into its themes or motifs and expand upon those aspects in a novel way. You could explore new perspectebles, introduce fresh characters that interact with the original ones, or develop existing elements further by adding layers of complexity or nuance. This approach ensures continuity while offering something new and intriguing to engage your audience.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	A prop pause let the malady of your soul be in thy sight, and may it also have sunlight so that thy work is declared, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	B carefully inserts the needle into the edge of the adjusted lid that requires suturing and guides it to gently pierce through the eyelid, swiftly removing the excessive natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	In the small village of Desous and Intrometz, there is an ancient legend about three magical pearls. These pearls have the power to grant a single wish each. However, they are protected by enchanted creatures, making them difficult to obtain. Will you embark on this thrilling quest to find these mystical gems and use their magic wisely?
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	A proper application of your makeup within the eyelid prevents it from spilling out and causing smudges along the natural lash line.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Mays, the witnesses are biased and have not yet been sworn in; therefore you will recall all the previous proceedings which were conducted with a fair judge in charge until the time when they took an impartial stance against you.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Certainly! Here is the translation of the text from Romansh to English:
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the fur is too short, you adjust it by adding extra artificial hairs, or you let it grow naturally until it reaches an appropriate length for your space.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII (Capitol) is the thirteenth chapter of a book or novel, typically in Roman numerals. It could be part of any work that uses this style for its chapters, such as a mystery novel, historical fiction, or even a textbook. If you have more context or details about which specific book's Chapter XIII you are referring to, I would be able to provide further information.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	From the treatment of removing the blemish that you see on the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eyelid twitches involuntarily, it's an action of the eyelid that contracts towards itself, either to the right or to the left side, due to poor wound healing or scarring or cauterization, and is called a blepharoptosis, which can be natural or accidental. It occurs as a result of improperly healed injuries or scar tissues, or through similar malpractices.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation is to make a cut in your lip so that it forms a consolidation and separate the lips from each other, then pause for some time while they heal between them with a thread or string until they are fully healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	In the place where you employ cure for your lack of reasons causing dehydration, constrain it; because if you make this return too quickly, it can cause more harm than good at any time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	In those cases where fenugreek soaks in water and the seeds are thoroughly washed, or if using Aquilon'ebrill ointment, which is liquefied with alcohol, immerse it in that jar, and cure on that wound.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The treasury of your care is to strive for total efficiency, ensnaring all that has not yet been solidified in the form it possessed initially.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have mentioned is not anything but a correction of equalization that does not return the original form of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter Twelve (Capitol)
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	From the treatment of eyelid ptosis, which is caused by aging or other factors leading to a drooping upper eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This is a certain type of scar that is formed on the inner surface of the eyelid, which is properly called an entropion; and it can be either naturally occurramoed or acquired by chance.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	May's accidental wound was caused by a thorn, a scissors, burning or other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The procedure for this operation involves taking a double-threaded needle and keeping it in place on the skin. Then you should pass it from the left tear duct to the right one, ensuring that both ends of the thread reach the two extremities of the tissue.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	The apple tree extends its branches beyond the usual height and cuts through that area above the sky, and its leaves reach towards an expansive horizon.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Then, if you return the lid of the eye according to the cutout, yes; otherwise, take the ray and pause it in the split figure, then turn that over to convert both slits into the width of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The measures of the two sides of a triangle adjacent to an angle are proportional to the sines of those angles; and the side opposite the right angle is equal in length to the figure formed by their lengths when they meet at that angle.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	No, this figure is not a Greek letter; it's actually the first character in "landa," which means "land" or "territory" in Spanish and Italian. The first Greek alphabet letters are alpha (α) and beta (β).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	C'est à propos de ce qui se trouve au-dessus du regard une fois que les paupières sont fermées, c'est-à-dire l'humidité.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	A physician adjusts separated parts and those by the hair of wool; he also cures those with water that have been mentioned of soothing medicines and calcins, as long as they are healthy.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If you're looking to repair an eyelid tear or gap using stitches (sutures) or surgical burning (cauterization), follow these steps for a successful procedure, as outlined below:
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	A prop is the device that creates an air gap between two lips as they have said something.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the preparation of alcoholic solutions, when excess or leftovers occur during the process, they should follow according to their specific formulation based on different molecpertations.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	The skilled artisans are aware of the time it takes to prepare tools in any workshop, which is possible within the period until the figure returns to its natural or original form, as well as the ailments according to what suits the operation and instruments in their most suitable arrangements.
Capitol .xv.	Capital XV (Roman numerals for 15) is a significant number in various contexts, including the legislative process of many countries where the term "Capitol" often refers to their national capitols or government buildings. However, if you're referring to the Roman numeral system, XIV represents the decimal number 14.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	The attachment of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	This surgery aims to correct this consolidation for people who have loose eyelids and whose lashes are too close to the cornea, thus interfering with eye movement and natural functions. Therefore, you will be asked to insert an external device (eye spar) into the lid crease, and lift or extend that area using a lubricating ointment.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	A prop to the subtle adhesion that is not affected by the incision, having it obtuse a little bit so as not to agitate the pain caused by the operation, and avoid letting the adhesion harden with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	E is the remedy that quickly eliminates eye discharge and restores the natural shape of your eyelid, ensuring that all adhesion has been healed completely.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Dear sir, immerse yourself in the briny seawater and then evaporate it using a solar still where the salt is dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	The ointment separates between the eyelid and the tear duct of the eye, resting on the edge lens infused with hyaluronic acid, and after the third day uses consolidative causes within which it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	In the context of United States governance, "Capitol" typically refers to a building in which legislative activities are conducted by elected officials. The term is most commonly associated with the U.S. Capitol Building located on Capitol Hill in Washington D.C., which houses both chamber of Congress—the Senate and House of Representatives.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	The inspection of the cornea and tear ducts' elevation.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	"He who glazes in two ways, either nervous or subtly deceptive; the former resembles a cloudy whiteness that when touched seems to cling instantly and is absorbed without leaving any residue, while the latter appears like a wet white congealed substance."
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	The tears do not mix without the tear duct, within which gradually covers the sight and prevents light entry and eye movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	Mays (Mayes) has the power to perform this spell in order to achieve what you desire. By chanting with closed eyes and focusing all your energy, raise both hands above yours, then gently lift the palm of your hand towards their forehead, slightly moving it back and forth for a brief moment. This simple gesture will help manifest your wish.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	A prop of a needle that accidentally enters the eye or hair or skin of an animal or mimic, or even a fortified knight, or duplicate, its extremity gradually becomes smaller and ends up in the middle of the eyelid; then it pierces the eyeball through this layer, adhering to the needle with the lash that is secured by the eyelid. As a result, it can cause damage on both sides as it moves away from the original point of entry, and scrape off the eyelid's edge which secures the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	Two girls follow her into the door at the end of the hall.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	A) Tears may overflow and cause pressure due to an obstruction in the tear duct, which can be addressed with tiny instruments or by preserving natural tears through a surgical procedure known as dacryocystorhinostomy (DCR).
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here is the translation of the text from Catalan to English: "Elephants have large feet on which they stand spread out or folded inwards; as we have said, and approaching him, he stretched out his lion'amoeba form like this:"
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	Here is the translation of your text into formal English: "E ensures that you do not touch the vitreous body and that it defends in case of rupture, and that the pupil becomes punctured."
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Apply the paste to get warmth and add a bit of salt or pepper as needed, then wrap it up within the next day; and apply again with some water if necessary for healing.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nerve is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor place it in that spot for a while, this type of tingling disappears with these kinds of medications, and heals just as I mentioned in the section.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	Si thou wilst to sever that which causes thee pain and grief, the subtle lion of fierce intensity as per this form shall come forth. In Old English, it can be written like so:
am subtilitat.	An equivalent translation for "am subtilitat" from Romanian to English is "subtlety." This term refers to the quality of being delicate, intricate or not immediately obvious in nature or expression; it may also relate to cleverness and finesse in thought or action.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	Once in a while, the mixture is strained and processed to remove any impurcuous particles, then distilled over low heat until it achieves the desired color or consistency, and finally collected on the following day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	He should apply the procedure within that period which he is able to do fully, rather than having a contrary inflammamo on his mind, as it may prolong the time, and at the commencement of the treatment let the inflammation be addressed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	My apologies for the previous mistake. Here's your request in standard English: "Could you please provide an explanation of how this operation works within that given context?"
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	In case of excessive tearing from the lacrimal caruncle, if there is great harm, it should be removed once; and remove only that portion, and do not continue with any excision that does not lead to a reduction in tears flowing.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	A proprietary eye drop formula containing preservatives can potentially cause irritation in the tear ducts when used frequently or continuously over time. It's essential to follow the usage guidelamoins and seek medical advice if any discomfort persists.
Capitol .xvii.	Capitul XVII
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	The tale of the vigilant guard and the water that sprung from a pact made at dawn.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some of the veins in the eyes are colored red or pink, and they extend through the iris, covering it entirely or nearly so. Others lie just beneath the surface, curling around itself like a spiral staircase or running along the eyelid edge. These small arteries converge towards each other to form a delicate network resembling a balustrade railing.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	Mays's operation involves the malady causing his head to turn towards yours; and at once work on those holes with it and collect all of that flesh suitably for a certain amount, then using either forceps or similar tool, begin incision while ensuring everything is completed within the required timeframe. Also, be careful not to damage the hole you need for your procedure.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	E is your order and it includes the item of which we have referred in the context of the glaze or the small tools that are used to scrape off residues according to the form that will come with this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Your endeavor has been successfully completed and you are now equipped with the entire salt, which takes on the color of saline solution, or distilled in a small phial as it resembles those from corrosive medicines; rest upon the pure vessel that is securely sealed with an albumen thread.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If any wound or injury has occurred and the master is ill with an infected cauterization (cauter), causing swelling, then he should apply water to relieve that infection, and continue treatment until it's healed. Similarly, treat the affected area as if the wound were of this type.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must avoid any form of work that exposes to whole or partial unemployment either naturally or accidentally; use protective equipment and do not enter operations where the mentioned member is being affected by such activity while it heals.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII: The Senate's Resolve
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Gathering wool in the field.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Could you please tell me which torts are related to the issue and forbid him from carrying out that activity, as well as extend its duration in days?
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	It is necessary to consider if the color of the food you know is strong and in other it's not another illness that affects, then collect those known.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	In order to create an illusion of magic using basic hand gestures, you may employ the following technique. Please note that this is a simple and symbolic gesture for entertainment purposes only:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	En inglés, los sustantivos que terminan con "nce" y "ance" pueden ser nombres comunes (neutros) como "dance", "offense", etc., pero también existen palabras propias (proper nouns), aunque son menos frecuentes. Aquí tienebres dos ejemplos de sustantivos propios en inglés que terminan con "nce" y "ance":
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	The veins gradually become thinner and more subtle, with the blood being continuously cleansed as they grow older; these veins eventually become enlarged and twisted.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Don't let your feet touch the edges of the mattress; and if you work in front of the sunlight during the daytime, make sure not to stretch out too much while working so that only those blood vessels (veins) remain active.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	As you reach completion, your hours distill into the green or red light indicating that it is time for the acquired water to drain from the filter.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Mays si aguato no es tu posible colgues todos en aquella hora, y las horas tu emblaestra tot abant am aguato que cedela dolour de lu, e lei-lu per alcuns dies intre que sia sedat la dolor de lu e que sia asegurada d'apostema caut.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	A) The patient has been diagnosed with the following conditions that are currently being treated:
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	En inglés, "forfex" se refiere a un tipo antiguo de arma blanca que consiste en dos hojas (una para cortar y otra para empujar) entrelazadas. Está diseñado principalmente como una herramientcuña defensiva o de combate cercano, por lo que tiene características diferentes a las espadas convencionales utilizadas en la guerra.
Capitol .xix.	Capital, Nineteen.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	The reduction of arsenic in the air.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	You shall use hot irritants or acute medication according to the preceding narrative if it is not healed; after a certain time, do not cut into it but make incisions on top of the abscess when it matures and extract all the moisture that is inside, placing something over it once it has been opened.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Hence comes the bone that is discovered in white light and then turns into dark color. At times you will find it as a stem of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	E is a sharp point, and has been forged from iron, and it can grasp just as well as the one that has been pointed using a needle or awl for fine piercing (similarly to how they are in the following shape):
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	That stain upon your honor should fade, and through these words of mine you may slowly unravel the secret until that stain is completely erased.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Water acts as an effective diuretic and also helps to restore the body by acting as an exciting and stimulating substeem.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the lump is solid and is naturally of good flesh and it detaches from the body for forty days, and does not reappear or cause inflammation or harm in any way, then you should know that it has healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	E signo (Signum), the hours are not in Luinus (Latin) but to reduce the crack to its shape, and according to this manner: And it is that you discover from a certain angle with your right hand or acute medicine, and so turning yourself around, you observe it following this pattern.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The adjacent side of the right triangle is extended so that its hypotenuse is also increased by the same length as it was stretched.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	The text is in Catalan and translates to the following in English: "Even though it's about the eye, I will talk a bit about its related gland; extend your hand slightly towards that triangle within which penetrates all the bone, and you may feel the pain as if a hot breath were passing through your own."
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	The hours of restoring the old medicine with staples are as if you would experience them yourself.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Then because of the flesh and the place it is sustained, when the matter that flows into the parts outside returns to its source again, therefore there is greater doubt regarding the illness.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol XX is a renowned building located in the heart of Washington D.cu, serving as an iconic landmark and symbolizing democracy for millions around the world. It houses the United States Congress and plays a pivotal role in the nation's legislative process.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	The descent of the uterine horns.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	The healing properties of the whole plant are preserved in this ointment and no harm or damage occurs during application; it is hoped that these will allevee illnesses, and encourage well-being as well as provide relief from pain caused by burns and scars, while also strengthening the epidermis using an ointment made of acacia, aloe vera, oil extracts, and sarcocolla.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The pattern of the clouds is such that they take Lion's cloth, and each piece doubles in four corners; it makes from those fabrics.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	These are placed one on top of the other according to the amount of quality that has the need for it.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Apply strong pressure over those areas where the skin is thick and firm, ensuring to massage with gentle circular movements; then remove the suction cups following the scarification; finally, apply ointment as prescribed during daytime and nighttime.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	While relaxing the ligament is soothing, it's crucial to be careful and not overstretch it too much.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	We extend our warm greetangs both day and night as we have said before.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the ear wax has been reduced enough, you can, and if not, continue to massage behind the ears until the wax is softened and the narrowing and tubes are cleared so that it's safe.
Capitol .xxi.	"Capitol, Chapter 21"
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	From the degeneration of the optic nerve's epithelial layer.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	In cases where there is disruption of the vascular layer (uvea) in the eye, it may be necessary to perform a surgical procedure known as scleral buckle. This involves placing a silicone band around the outside of the eyeball, which indents and supports the area with the affected uvea. The surgeon will make an incision at the limbus (the border between the cornea and the white part of the eye), then carefully insert a needle to the location near the sclera on the side closer to the nose, threading it through the silicone band. Once in place, the first needle is adjusted according to its position; then, the surgeon threads the second needle through the double filament and draws the affected part of the uvea into the circuit of the first needle, securing it with a knot.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	In the traditional winemaking process, grape skins and seeds are soaked in a barrel of oak and yeast to ferment into wine from which the liquid is then separated.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	The correct translation for the given phrase in Old Occitan is "E apurar las eules d'aquò que confóren aquél intra qu'aigua esanada." This translaturas to "And purify the wells of that which comfort those within whose water has been healed" in English.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Few drops of fluid collect from the entire circle of tissue within the narrow opening and reach the small puncture that leads to the canal of the pupil; then they run along the thin layer of transparent substance, moistening it quickly as they descend into the eye.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	An appropriate strengthening technique for maintaining good health is to engage in regular exercise and follow a balanced diet, ensuring the body receives adequate nutrition and physical activity. This can include activities like walking, swimming, or practicing yoga, as well as incorporating fruits, vegetables, whole grains, lean proteins, and healthy fats into your meals.
Capitol .xxii.	Title: Act I, Scene i
De curacio de alconati.	The care of Alzheimer's patients.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, which is called "alconatium," is in fact the disease that resembles water droplets and not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	May the Master of Waters do your best to cause evil tides over the prepared and dried surface, and approach with his cap atop on both sides of yours so that illness may not come to these parts through vessels, and it becomes dry without descending, preserving its light, and evil tidal forces as if it were doing so.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not go down in the river, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If Mays is not adequate in the descent of the inflammation we have mentioned, he will experience severe discomfort between his eyelids and a spreading sensitivity to that area over the conjunctiva on top of the cornea at the crown (where it meets), leading to the removal of the affected tissue.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Since you are away, I will make a refreshing drink for you by mixing water with either honey or mint and brewing it with fenugreek as well. Enjoy!
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	A proper care should be taken along with other causes within which it heals.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	The purification of water flowing down from the well.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	I have added the salt to the water in division and it is time to proceed with the statement as per regulations at that moment.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Lachanceuse voilà ce qui vous fait rire parmi les vôtres sur une table de jeu et lui donne son heure due, elle-même si gracieuse.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	In the presence of water, gaze upon your left hand, if it resembles the right, or upon your right hand, if it resembles the left.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	When you reach the fork in the road, take the left path if your goal is to the north; otherwise, choose the right path if your destination lies to the south.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	A gentle touch on the edge of an almond tree near the crown for the thickness of ray in the album from tear ducts part of the lacrimal gland, and slightly rotated almond seed turns your hair auburn.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	A) As I open the album, I feel an overwhelming sense of nostalgia as if all these memories have already come to pass due to destiny.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	The eye'amoeba is a single-celled organism that can be found in freshwater environments such as puddles, soil moisture, and decaying vegetation. It has an oval shape with pseudopods (false feet) used for locomotion and capturing food particles through phagocytosis.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	A person who consumes alcohol in excess may experience a headache upon waking the next day due to dehydration and congestion on the area of their head where they drank.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	If you take a little break; thus if the water is descending, your pause will be less than that of another stage before adding does not occur.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	Then when you go to the seaside and don't descend, use the extracted sea salt from time to time, and rub it gently all over your body; then dissolve a pinch of clear gem-quality salt in some water and apply the resulting liquid into your ears. After that, take a break and cleanse with an infusion made from rosemary oil or almond oil and egg albumin mixed with warm water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Here are those, and others from our time, who have taken the same path as I did in writing a book of poems.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you do not obey your command within the hour due to its difficulty—for it is one of those tasks that are too hard for even the strongest man—, I expect you to take the broom called a "dustpan," which has this shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Then you pierce that certain situation, and don't end up in the wrong place, so as not to go down a subtle path of destruction.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	A person was mistakenly accused of an act that they have never admitted to committing.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	I must congratulate you on your work; however, be prepared for the bad news regarding a descending movement that takes place in the darkest of houses and is forbidden all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	During sunset in the natural light so that its nature is revealed, and do not move your head to the right or left of the entire view.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Let S be the sum of its digits within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	A certain messenger in that dark and stormy night set forth to see some causes and promptly returned within the day VII.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	In the Cove, you will often find yourself close to healing waters or an invigoruting infusion at any given hour of the curative rituals.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	The water in Hanzt Cove can sometimes be noticeably and quite vigorently swirling, warranting a closer look.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	Maya decides to apply a cast on her wrist after the sprain, using a splint for support in front of her within seven days, and corrects that amount of water that caused the swelling.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	The city's absolute beauty captivates you and casts its spell on your face with an allure that controls the recollection of days long gone, as it exists in the darkest depths.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	A) Please analyze the rapid growth of agriculture and its causes in detail.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	In the allegory of Dante's Divine Comedy, it is not forgiven for a student to skip certain lectures and later be daring in their work.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	Some people believe that the source of these springs is from the Pyrenees, and others claim it was caused by a fire in Ayerbe which melted an ice dam leading to the flooding waters.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have not seen in our land the person who has brought perfect water, nor does he own any of the free-borns' old waters; it is possible that this water is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	Here are the different ways of Madagascar'ps spices that you should be aware of, for those who may not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	The triangle-shaped design of the Eiffel Tower and its external structures have a certain elegance to them; they possess an intricate subtlety that matches this angular sharpness - just as those are the features of this form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Title: Capital XXIV (Capital Twenty-Four)
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	The curare plant does not grow in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	There are various types of skin cancers with which one may have an association that causes them to form tumors similar to polyps, often referred to as polymorphous sarcomas. This condition is commonly known as carcinoma in situ.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	A is a brown fox and B is not a brown fox, but rather a lion that lacks the brown color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	In that which is among these Leon faithful and honest, hide the ill will in your midst, raise it towards the sunlight, and pluck out its roots from those parts of yourself, and strike with thorns at its core within you.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	"Take an extract from those writings on the foregoing parts and then dissect in such a way that you have understood, subtlely of one part among which you know that all flesh has already been there; so if anyone should depart by any cause from which extraction is possible, they will find it easily within any instrument."
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Lady Mays treats an abscess with her special remedy; if it's a malignant abscess, she brings about pain and burns the area where the blood has separated, ensuring that all cavities are thoroughly cleaned out.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	A proper translation of the given text into English would be: "The nose on the right side has the beginning and end of the incision made for you."
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	When your nose is blocked and the mucus inside the mouth is moist, you can try these steps to help allefly feel better:
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	The humidity does not enter according to the coverture map; therefore, you should know that in the lower slopes there is no carnal matter on the upper bones of the limbs from which it has not reached absorption.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	In the case of interference with someone's legitimate marriage, and any wrongdoing that leads to this situation (including causing distress during the wedding ceremony), or stirring up disputes between people regarding the amount mentioned in the contract or monthly payments, it may result in legal action due to malicious behavior.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	In times past, I wonder what may have been done so that the sweet fragrance would be cast into the air before reaching the canals of Nar, and it was let over its waters, for many troops appear to children going to school, making this a serious matter for those who wish to do such a thing.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	The priest places his two index fingers on the chalice, one over the nose and the other under it, and administers a sign of the cross to ensure that the particles are indeed within the chalice.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Avoid alcohol, and pause before the nasal aspiration of abstract thought, as well as water intake for three days or more until the substance completely dissolves from your bones.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	At the end of the trial, pause for taking out the silver tube as soon as you are healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May sets out to seek cure that exists, using that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	Yes, this appears to be a description of an alembic or still. An alembic is an apparatus used for distilling liquids such as alcohol and essential oils in alchemy and chemistry. It consists of two vessels connected by a tube; the liquid is heated in one vessel (the cucurbit), vapor rises through the tube, and then condenses back into a liquid in the other vessel (the head). Alambics have been used histortically to produce various alcoholic beverages like spirits, as well as distilled medicinal oils.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	An iron vessel filled with clear water or wine, similar to a small open lantern, and the fire appears similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you wish to make an aspirator with a closed cannula as such, and the end of the instrument is intended for purging fluid, and it is flat and open; place your hand at the very tip where you want to draw in air or liquid that you desire from suction sources.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	This basket of honeycombs costs the following prices: recipe for cardamom-infused honeycomb, white balm honeycomb, gingerbread-flavored hebronchum, and saffron pistachio honeycomb, long pepper honeycomb, asafetida (heeng) infused honeycomb, and cumin spice flavored honeycomb. Here's the translation from Occitan to English: "Take two cumfizeys of bleeding and pain pills, and swallow one pill with water in your mouth, then sit on the bed facing towards the window."
Capitol .xxv.	"Capitol XXV" translates to "Capitol Twenty-Five" in English. This term can be used metapcuously across different contexts, such as referencing the 25th edition of a publication titled 'Capitol,' or indicating the 25th chapter within a book named 'Capitol.' The numerical suffix "XXV" is derived from Roman numerals, where X represents ten and V stands for five. Together, they symbolize twenty-five (10+10+5).
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They live in the outermost parts of the nation.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	These words are said at the time of baptism in the Christian faith and it is praised throughout all days within which one must pay attention to its meaning.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	Covenant by water; that you shall inscribe at the beginning of its appearance all those who are descendants from him, and will inherit entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	A prop of the place where the caustic medicine, which is flammable, resides.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	"Mays is late in his attempt, when you see that it has been magnificent, consider if it's inflamed, hard, dark-colored with little sensation; then do not touch the wound at all where there are cracks due to this swelling. There may be an increase of malice towards the one who made this attempt on the person from whom you have received this swelling."
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the sting of a lion does not cause pain and it is possible in everything at that time, evacuate evil thoughts and gain confidence in yourself, and cure the person who remains thirsty by providing them with water until they are healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	The surgical staples used for the nose, lips, and ears are those whose continuity is disrupted by plate or similar means.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Whenever an event occurs that requires a solution for continuity in one of these cases, few refer to it but rather to select individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Donc cove, quando éi ès ventadamai ad algun causèr da chel, che considerès si l'é fresch fredd dl sieu spëisa, y laora tü ajustà les dues labias de chel fredd dl spëisa con sutüras, e apropr curisc ti aquël intorn chi se sanëdl.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of contrition are not united and each is made whole, then you should excise any part that appears to be diseased before it spreads further. (Note: this text is in Old Occitan)
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	A: Adjust the two lips using a suture and strengthen them; then apply dragon's blood paste over these and place a thin layer of egg white or another suitable dressing on top of consolidated dressings, let this mixture heal for two to three days, remove that and replace it with new bandage, allowing the wounds to separate as they will. Then care for them using an ointment until fully healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of the surgical stitch you should use to add the continuity solution is as follows: or attach it in such a way that we have previously reported in the abdominal suture, or include the continuity solution and do so exactly as shown to you beforehand.
Capitol .xxvii.	In English, the Roman numeral "XXVII" translates to the number 27. Therefore, when referencing pages in a book or document that uses this system, you would be referring to page 2amo (twenty-seventh) of Capitol, assuming "Capitol" is a placeholder for an actual title such as 'The Hunger Games' by Suzanne Collins.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	The withdrawal of that case which arose in both lips into the pleadings.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Fungus growths appear in various parts of the body, such as inside the lips and on hard-looking bumps resembling warts; some are small while others may be larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	In order to heal the wounds and fissures of those hardened parts, I will apply an emollient ointment on the affected area until its strength is restored, and then wash it with warm water followed by cleaning with a substance that has antiseptic properties. After this, it shall be healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII. In this chapter, we continue to explore the political intrigues and social dynamics within the corridors of power at the heart of our narrative'pertinently set in the bustling city of Washington D.C., where decisions made can alter the course of history on a global scale.'
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Incision into the fibrous tissue adjusted to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Granre de veguadas is a Catalan folk song that expresses the sorrows and hardships of peasant life in rural areas. The lyrics do not mention anything about gum recession or periodontal disease; it appears there may be some confusion between your prompts.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	An overview of the use and effectiveness of synthetic steroids, such as anabolic or corticosteroids.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If that flesh returns, after hours it again gets cut off secondly, and recooks that, because the coagulation did not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX. (English)
De razo de dentz am ferr.	For the sake of reason, I have to go.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	On the surface of the teeth in the front and back areas, as well as between the gums that are close together but rough, thin, or slightly worn, there are spots that have become darkened and turned a citrine color due to contact with saliva leading to deterprise. These conditions affect healthy teeth.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, let your heart be free of any anger towards others and pause to think deeply within yourself, and gently brush the teeth in which you see those spots appearing as if sand has entered there, but cleanse them with darkness and citrine, among other things that are purified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If you're referring to the water that was used during meals, then you are; if not, repeat the fast on those for one day and the next, and on the third within which comes the final stage at the time you wish.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	Sapiences that the teeth require various types of restorations in different shapes and forms depending on your treatment plan.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	E per sè quadra le rasoio alla parte dove la dente è razzato della lama di un altro rasoi secondo altre forme, ed ecco queste forme di rasoi sono da essere preparate quali appaiono immediatamemte:
Capitol .xxx.	The correct term in this context would be "Capitol Hearings" or simply "Congresteial Hearings." These are formal meetings held by the United States Congress, which consists of two chambers: the House of Representatives and the Senate. During these hearings, members discuss legislation, conduct investigations, gather information, evaluate executive performance, and oversee governmental operations and policies.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Tooth eradication.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	I feel that you have a toothache causing great discomfort throughout the day and complete resolution of it when it is extracted; since there isn't any other reason for its replacement after being removed, as it is a subliminal substance that facilitps in the removal process.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	In Mays Cove Quan the Ailment is Forsaken, that Teeth Eradicate, you must be certified which tooth the painful one is, for many times the pain decreases with the ailment and leads towards healthy teeth; thus eradicating this causes the pain not to cease until the ailing and painful toaster has been completely removed. For we have seen it through surgical operations of root canals.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	To determine which tooth is aching and how you know about it, here are some tips on brushing your teeth in the circuit of an impacted tooth (where there's any wisdom), until it dissolves from the gum tissue surrounding it entirely:
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Approach the guitar with large tuning pegs for good playing posture and style, taking occasnly breaks to prevent strain on your hands; also, turn the tuning keys gently in a manner that does not cause pain or any major discomfort.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	If not for this forum-get together, they would resort to using some of those instruments and make it easier from the very beginning so that it's done at the start.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If your tooth is damaged or decayed, have it repaired as soon as possible, and grip that piece firmly at the root end with a fine wire so that it won't get stuck during the time of tying the knot on the string around it.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	In the realm of tooth decay, I seek to excavate with precision throughout your entire gum line, preserving strength that does not weaken or shatter any part thereof, and return over malady wrought by malice greater than its initial painful onset.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	He sees that you do not pay attention to what ignorant barbers in their audacity and arrogance have about the eradication of them; for many times, great diseases come upon men which are more difficult than they can be cured, and all their remedies fail or some of those, or that extracts one bone from the mandible as well.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	The complete elimination of tooth decay requires not only brushing but also using mouthwash and flossing regularly.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there is a bleeding wound with clots of blood, let it be washed down like trickling streams; apply some bandages and sprinkle some herbal compresses over the area, then if not stopped, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tenailess pliers where it is unsuitable to have a dent at the biting edge - long handle, short arm, and thick, in such that they may not be bent when those need to work are used.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	It is important to note that while Occitan and Catalan languages are closely related Romance languages spoken in southern France (Occitan) and northeasterly Spain (Catalan), they have distinct grammar rules and vocabulary differences. I'll provide the translation as requested, but keep in mind there might be nuances specific to each language that could affect a direct translation:
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	The wings of the Indian peafowl descend from lateral extensions, and some are intertwined with each other due to their structure's strength, while others have a beak-like shape resembling that of a stork called ciconia (commonly known as "guanta"), which is also quite strong.
Capitol .xxxi.	In the United States, "Capitol" commonly refers to the United States Capitol in Washington D.amo; the building where the House of Representatives and Senate meet for legislative sessions. It is a significant symbol of American democracy as well as an important location for political events, ceremonies, and protests.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	The extraction and removal of teeth remnangs from fractured jawbones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	The eradication of the plant that has been grazed by a Roman animal should be allowed to heal for one or two days during which time you must not interfebrate within its vicinity; and then apply some bandages or sutures from those assembled at the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, whose shape resembles pliers:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The foreign substances are becoming increasingly important in various industries and applications.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not follow this guideline with these forceps or pliers, it's necessary that you examine the object closely and remove all of its flesh. The tool to use for this is a small lever-type instrument called a "chasseoir" (French) which looks like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	S should be of extreme smallness a little piece and not begin for its own sake that it is not drunk.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the water is frozen, then it's ice; if not, help yourself to this other instruments of which these are the forms: the shape of the first instrument is a thickened triangle on its outer side.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and with very subtle nuances.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	Salut! Com begui un instument que ten dues ramas, aquí tens les seves diferències en català i englant:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	I have discovered other instruments similar to this one which I sharpen by filing down teeth. As such, it is made with thirteen strings and resembles an ancient lyre. This instrument's structure consists of a rounded wooden body called the resonator or soundbox, typically carved from pearwood or maple, along with two arms that curve away from the center connecting to a crossbar known as the yoke. The ends of these arms are held together by tuning pegs made out of ivory, bone, horn, wood, or other materials.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the served portion of pie or cake, whichever is thicker and not started to be drunk unless it is a drink.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	Other animals that possess sound-producing organs and are similar to the other musical instruments include various species of whales, dolphins, bats, birds, insects like crickets and cicadas, as well as certain types of frogs and reptiles. Some examples are:
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May's skilled and subtle artisans have mastered the craft in line with what their work means, creating various devices for numerous diseases; for which there are different forms of diverse kinds that ancient doctors did not describe or suggest as proper instruments.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If Mays breaks the jawbone or other bones in the mouth during a tooth extraction procedure, or if they cause pain afterwards, their treatment should be performed at a suitable location using the appropriate instruments and forceps as mentioned for extracting teeth. The process is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	E is en lu alcun grosseza, petit a petit, et es instringida u tenguda am la bomaa per que no vadesca o fugia entro che l'os de tot sia forogiat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientas ad aquo.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the wound is small and superficial, apply honey to that area of the wound along with its juice, and let it remain there until healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter LXII (62) - The Captive Queen'vee Legacy in the Senate
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	The treatment of emerging teeth differs from that of other teeth.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	The teeth are not all alike according to natural form, and especially in women, mostly the front ones, therefore consider this: if one tooth is nothing like another, and it cannot be covered or lined with any material, then its roots will come out naturally; but if it is not adjacent to another tooth, you should cut that using an instrument whose shape matches this form. It appears similar to a pig's tusk and is made of sharp Indian iron from afar.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	E be the solution you're seeking and that ensures proper care for your teeth over several days to avoid any further damage or other issues with the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the tooth is severely worn down, at times it may need to be replaced with an Indian gold crown of which this shape depicts. In dentistry, there are various shapes and designs for crowns depending on the specific needs and positioning in the mouth. For a heavily worn toeboard, such as one that is severely eroded or compromised by decay, an Indian gold crown can provide durability, biocompatibility, and esthetics due to its high quality and workmanship.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	The metal of iron and the marginal edge; it is used for making needles and also for teeth, which are cut little by little over several days to facilitate biting, as they should not be other than well-sharpened cutting teeth.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	A row of lines that is left there in the field, and rats that are as clever as rascals.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If a tooth is cracked or the tongue cuts it off, then you must clean that area where the sharp edge has been left by that fracture and smooth and fill it in such a way that the tongue does not catch nor cause speech to be distorted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Certainnly! Here is an English translation of the Latin phrase "Capitolinum XXXIII":
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	A tooth restoration of good teeth is made of gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	If the tooth aches due to concussion or trauma through percussion or impact, and illness cannot last longer than that period, then you have healed it with styptic medicines, but they did not help; in such cases, take a faithful friend of gold (and not silver), for silver tarnishes over time and loses its value, whereas gold does not change.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	E is the groove in such subtlety and depth according to the quantity that enters between the teeth; and the shape of the notch is that you take the groove and make it twice as wide between two healthy teeth, so that it grows into two or more twists from the groove between two damaged teeth, until the thread reaches the next healthculed tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	A) Please proceed with the transfer of documents within the area you began, and strengthen your alliance through cleverness and wisdom so that it remains virtuous.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	E shall be your steed, by which you will carry the faithful, who must not escape from the teeth that do not let go.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	The passage appears to be in Galician-Portuguese medieval language and might relate to an old medical practice involving the removal of superfluous elements (possibly teeth) using forceps or similar tools, followed by their reattachment at another site within the mouth—implicitly aiming for a beneficial effect on speech.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Appropriately, here is that strict Roman version of the sentence you provided:
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	May seems sloppy or disheveled; straighten her up as soon as possible throughout the entire time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	Here is the way of the teeth and the shape of its line for two healthy teeth and two diseased teeth, as shown in these linked images:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	De vez que el albañil regrese con cualquier tipo de cemento y lo haya mezclado correctametne como se le indicó, entonces proceda a verterlo en su ubicación específica. Asegúrese de realizar esto rápidamente para evitar un secado inadecuado del material.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Certainnly, here's the translation for you:
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Some prosthetics are suitable for certain causes of cow bone fractures and it is made from their ash so shaped like a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth failed, then tightened as we have described, and remains effective for long periods.
Capitol .xxxiv.	IV. In modern numeral system, the Roman number "Capitol .xxxiv." is translated to "Capitol .34". This represents a document or section titled 'Capitol' followed by its numerical order or reference as 34. The context of usage might be legal documents, reports, laws, acts, sections etc where references are made using such numbering systems for easy identification and referencing.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	The decree of silence, which is expressed in the language and forbids speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This language that you have provided seems to be a mixture of Catalan and Spanish with some words from other Romance languages or possibly even made up. Based on the vocabulasteria and structure, I'd guess it is predominantly Catalan. Here's an attempt at translating your sentence into English:
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation is that you work on the root of the molar teeth, your own head being positioned in front of yours; and he raises his tongue, as well inserts it into that gap according to the width through which has been removed the tooth's crown.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is any rust or corrosion on the hinge and if the oil has been used for rain protection, then apply some oil to that area and separate the parts within which you have disassemblen so that the rusting and corrosion may be dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Here, do not let any crack appear on the skin of your flesh and that it breaks into open wounds and allows blood to flow out.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Here is the text translated from medieval Latin to modern Italian and then into formal academic English:
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Mays decides to stop the flow of blood by applying pressure over the wound with a piece of glass from vitriol (a type of strong acid). Then, he applies heat using hot hours (possibly referring to cauterizing irons) and cauterizes the area resulting in lantiginous scars that are characteristic after being treated with water.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	A doctor cures other diseases within which he is able to heal.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital V.35, or "CAPITAL XXV" as it is often referred to in Roman numerals (where 'XXV' represents the number 25), may not directly relate to a specific album without additional context since numerous artists across different genres have titled their works with variations of "Capital." However, if we were looking for an English music band that has released an album potentially associated with the term "CAPITAL XXV," there might be some confusion as no widely recognized albums under such a title are known.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	The drainage of a ranula left the tongue exposed.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some swelling accidents prevent the tongue from performing its natural function, and it is greatly enlarged when placed in the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation in the area is that six teeth are facing the sun and considering an abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you switch from black or dark color, which does not alleviate pain, do not touch that jar with four lids.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	When it becomes white with moisture, after an hour put in the onyx stone lightly and strike its tip subtly; then split that completely apart; if blood appears during your operation at the time of your pause, after three strikes you will have a drop, within which is acid.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	In return for your work, you are to receive a complementary gift upon arrival at the location where the event takes place, along with water and snacks provided by us as well; moreover, any other care or assistance required during this time is also available.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The Roman numeral "Capitol .xxxvi." refers to the number thirty-six in Arabic numerals, written as XLVI (46) before a title or name which represents its ordinal position, like 'Volume 46' for instance. However, if it is supposed to represent just the numeral '36', then the correct Roman notation would be XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Removal of external styes and those that have come out in the eyebrows, as well as other styes.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the earlobe is pierced and if the glands that are assembled with wax produce a discharge outside and are named the two little holes, when you clean them with water as mentioned in the division (instrucuction) above, and it does not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and somewhat painful. Then do not touch that area with metal.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If the fig is ripe and the peel is thick, don't touch it with an iron knife for blood flow; instead wait until it has fully matured, and then you can cut into it or slightly pierce it.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is white in color, ozone, and the scent of its oil subtle, that period was when it would be poisonous.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The procedure involves considering whether the patient's swelling has subsided following your action or if it has worsened at all. You should also observe how long ago they experienced discomfort, and check their forehead for signs of fever, as well as inspecting the condition of the tongue (if present). The healthcare provider may then gently press down on the tongue with a noble instrument to examine its condition using this procedure:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	E is a cunning individual skilled in the art of silver or armor-making, and also adept with the sword.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	First, take the object that is affected by the wound and expose it to air. Then cover it with your dressing or bandage, keeping it in place for at least once every hour. Finally, remove any debris from around the area as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another water that springs from the tunics causes an incision and then flows through this instrument, which has the following shape: (in reference to a medical or surgical tool). Can you specify the context or type of instrument for more accurate information?
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	The assembled forceps have their tips twisted together, so that the groove of one is in the fork of the other, very sharply formed and made of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not yours, then the hours strike that of which this form was created; it has a head on one side but not on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	Once upon a time, there was a boy who had accidentally cut himself with a knife. He needed to cleanse the wound and protect it from infection using fresh water. Following these steps will help him ensure proper wound care at home:
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays suffers from an excessive flow of blood; he uses the water extract of pomeglete seeds or myrtle leaves, and similar remedies depending on the type of cause causing this bleeding to be constricted. And accordingly, for that which cures it when it is stopped.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	In some gardens there are rosebushes and other flowers of different varieties, along with their accompanying thorns. I shall describe these following the rules of giving melodies in harmony as described in my previous discourse on dooms.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	A young woman had an abscess in her throat which was tending towards a dusky color and little pain; the throat gland itself had closed up, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, and she had been forbidden to eat or drink water. If such fever persisted for one or two days, it would result in death.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The apostem had grown so much that there were periods when the sheep entered through both doors simultaneously.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	I will show you firstly and then in one place, and I'll take that away, and throw it out of its great size, and as I approach to understand the other track, and also compel its mouth, and press upon its tongue, and I'll fit the first onto that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	A prophecy granted to you only parts of the truth, and not the entire course but just a small portion of it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	The woman has an absolute fear of water, and as soon as she starts drinking it, she begins to eat food too quickly; therefore, I have struggled with recurrerent boils on my legs for a long time, and now another one has appeared in that place which is getting longer.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	I shall light my fire and tend to the hearth at home, thus avoiding distractions; and as I walk about freely, I do not know what God has in store for me there.
Capitol .xxxvii.	In the context of American government and politics, "Capitol" often refers to the United States Capitol Building located in Washington D.C., which is the home of both chambamoonsetment houses (the Senate and the House of Representatives), making it a vital center for legislative activity within the federal government.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	In the hustle and bustle of the marketplace, a heated dispute had erupted.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh spreads to the throat, it becomes swolculed and elongated, for hours it is called perpendicular; and if it extends into a thick and round part, then for hours it is referred to as tonsilitis (tonsillitis).
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	In the Mays of Mayo month, it is said that water should be applied to the division, and do not let your injury heal, as the wound may become infected again with pus and remain subtle. The sting usually occurs within a few hours; then you must apply whatever has been added around her in a circular motion. If she is long-lasting and bloody or dark/blackish and not decreasing at all, it means there is cause for concern about the illness.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	In your turn, follow the method I have described for selecting the white and long root, which you must press in order to cause displeasure and protrude your tongue from where the instrument originates that shapes its form and then gently inserts it into a hole; afterwards, pull out one of two instruments as mentioned in the description of two nuts.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	A cove that does not inscribe this sole right granted upon him by nature's law, but rather you inscribe more of his words, revealing his own speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	After the occurrence of an accident or injury resulting in broken bones, it is recommended to drink plenty of water and follow up with two glasses within that time period until fully healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Mays was very afraid of the pain he felt during his treatment, so much so that he used an analgesic to help him cope with it. The tool for cauterization in this case is not just boiling water but also a special instrument we mentioned earlier, and you should place your thumb on top of the device as shown:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The appendix of knowledge regarding medicine is as well the field of healing with herbs; when a medicine is placed on the wound, it is accompanied by an instrument (used in medical practice), and so that malaise flows over its side through saliva or mouth muscle contraction from someone, due to the inherent medicinal properties, which does not leave any of these reasons onto the throat and causes healing.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Apply your mother's medicine gently on the area around the uvula until it becomes darkened and numb due to the bitterness of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	Take cotton and wrap it around the affected area of the ray, then soak the cotton in medication. Insert the ray along with the cotton inside a flexible tube that adheres to the cotton, doing this as many times as needed until you achieve the desired cauterization of the wound. Let it dry properly and change every three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If the wine were to undergo multiple medical treatments, it would first be cauterized at a certain point in its journey, beginning with this process on the edge, and then purified by the water that is present in the circuit of the medicinal substance, which was cleansed using running water. It should also be treated and sealed with embalming wax, and inside it there would be healing charms after which it would be considered cured.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This type of treatment is even safer and less intrusive, with a longer-lasting effect.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some uvulas are cured by applying water that is as subtle as a cauterization and incision, since it is treated with subfumigation in this manner: recipe for calming herbs includes hyssop, origan, ruda, Arabian savory, camomile, rosemary, and similar ones to those mentioned above, adjusting all of these ingredients or some of them as required. All should be mixed into one bowl with hot water and brewed; then the liquid should be gently stirred with a ladle so that it is evenly distributed. Finally, place a piece of silver or tin on top, following this method:
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	F is adjacent to the terminus in the mouth near where the poison rises above the palate upon the fauces, whereby the fauces become blurred.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	"Patient follows proper care for the affected area during drying out process, ensuring not to aggravate the formation of staphylococcal abscesses as this would be too harsh on an existing abscess; instead, continue with a prescribed antibacterial treatment."
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you do not have this tool with you now, then take a piece of paper and fold it into the shape of a cone at one end on your own, so that the mouth of the muzzle is covered. The cone made from paper prevents the vapor from entering the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This treatment is good for one's health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	In the United States, "Capitol" usually refers to the building where the U.S. Congress meets in Washington D.C., known as The Capitol Building or simply "The Capitol." It's a historic structure that plays an essential role in American politics and government.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Removal of thorns and attached water from the wine vat, as well as other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	When the wheels or tires are worn out, or due to a puncture or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Take out the water that seems to be on top, which covers what you see, and place your tongue in front of the sunlight, so that it is declared as the water inside the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	The water that does not boil and is kept at the mouth of your stove can help you to vomit out the discomfort before the food becomes spoiled in the stomach; as it strongly causes a purge, or induce nausea with a spoonful of sage tea or dried mint leaves; or take a piece of dry sea sponge and let its strong bitterness pass through, so that like when extracted from where there are thorns in their place, the discomfort is removed.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	An angelfish is swimming underwater when it suddenly finds a shiny metal plate, and as soon as it touches it with its mouth, the plate turns into three smaller plates. Meanwhile, an octopus watches from afar, amused by the curious behavior of the fish.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you want to record or remember certain reasons that we have mentioned using a lead seal in accordance with this format, here is how you can do it.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	The tree is taller than the smaller one, and on its outermost branch that you place in your hand, it's easy to hold.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	With his head held high, he watches the touch of his own throat's skin, to ensure that it doesn't harm the garment or the one who tempts him; instead, it embraces her cheekbone or her spine, as if magnetically drawn towards the physician.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, that malaise is less, thanks to his knowledge of the related cause and he inserts it into her, while pulling out his instrument from within, as much as has been prepared and inserted therein.
Capitol .xxxix.	The capital of Italy is Rome, which in Italian is called "Roma". If we follow the pattern provided with Roman numerals (where x represents an unknown value), you could express "XXXIX" as "39". However, this would be a misrepresentation since there are no such things as 39th capitals. So, if you're simply referring to the capital of Italy in Italian using Roman numeral notation for fun or illustrative purposes, it might look like:
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Extraction of sanctions attached to the nuclear deal.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	In the division of cures by water and not by medicines, consider how long it has been since the illness onset at midday, also that you have taken charge of your tongue with an object which you reported earlier.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you see the syntax error, look for that one little detail or subtle changes in a dignified manner.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it is not the aforementioned one, place a concave tube into the affected vein and position a lit ferr (iron rod) in its concavity; do this as many times as necessary until the sanguisuga dies and exits the vein. Avoid giving the infected person any water throughout the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	In the spring-filled river, dip your mouth and rinse it in that water; don't spit any cause or mumble while you drink this water for an hour at a time because soon enough you will feel its cleansing effects.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	Mays, unless otherwise advised by a doctor or pharmacist you have prescribed, do not consume honey during the course of your illness if it includes cinnamamoor or asafetida in the instrument which has been prescribed for uvula soothing.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Water flows where the eagle flies.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	E is an alternative method of operation compared to that one, which involves taking in a gulp containing carbohydrates and the gulp being covered with a cover made of cloth at its end where it's attached; and nearing the suffocation; and placing the mouthpiece of the instrument into your mouth, then closing your lips so that the suffocation is not forcefully inhaled until you realize the suffocation has reached the throat, as the throat will cough shortly thereafter.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If you don't catch on to this subliminal message quickly enough, it may be necessary to follow these guideleback instructions strictly: Avoid drinking anything that could worsen the situation and instead consume salty foods and alkaline substances. Moreover, refrain from consuming water as well.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument by which justice is carried out regarding wrongdoing or when something is seen; and it resembles scissors, so to speak, but with no curves at all:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	In the middle of the table, there is an extreme end that resembles a heron's beak, which is wrapped in leather, in which its tip has been sharpened with lime for some reason; when purchasing any item, it should not exceed this limit.
Capitol .xl.	Capital, Inc. (often styled as "Capitol.") is an American record label that has played a significant role in the music industry since its establishment in 1942 by Johnny Mercer, Glenn Wallichs, and Buddy DeSylva. Originally formed to produce and distribute records for the owner of Hollywood Record Shop chain, Capitol became one of the most influential record companies globally over the years.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the total amount is composed of an advance on apostilles and a section for signatures.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Many spices and varieties of herbs are mentioned herein, according to what I recall from those times; each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	There are various types of ointments and salves in use for the special purpose of treating boils, one of which is particularly effective due to its moisture content. This enables it to promote healing effectively.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	In the second Booklet, it is proposed to treat wounds in which accidents of the body occur, namely, that resulting from an abrasion on the head and another from an abrasnment on the buttocks; and accidental abrasions on the flesh are different from those at the junction. Each has its own treatment according to its nature.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	"Erysipelas may cause some staphylococcal infections, which are not necessarily penetrated but result from the proximity of healthy tissue during its development or through a contiguous lesion."
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Therefore, thorns that are not ripe when they emerge from the skin and do not mature according to their stage of growth, as well as abscesses at joints, should be treated promptly when located near a joint or nerve, which may cause contusion in that particular area. Or if the thorn is close to a main limb, pierce it before it fully develops; or if it's by the rectum, puncture one that hasn't yet matureeled. Do not pierce a thorn that has not properly decomposed, but rather, if near the anus, so that you do not harm its root and extend into nearby tissues, which may cause fistula or remain infected in that area without healing.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	Mayes Cove knows the exact time when the abscess is due to burst, and so he knows when it becomes ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	Meadowsweet that matures when the pain and fever subside, along with a decrease in restlessness and pulse rate, and headache relief from the abscess, as well as other symptamenes.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	E, if possible, use a needle to drain the abscess or pus resulting from an infection of the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	In the case of a hot stabbing injury on limbs or torso, if there are abscesses in areas of muscles and tendons, near bones, nerve trunks, arteries; and, lastly, in all places that do not reflect (i.e., without signs such as bruising), the use of perforation should be applied according to the affected member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	The Mays' treatment of apostema is in the carnosus area, during the hours when honey seems to be more effective because you have pierced it just enough for digestion to occur as previously mentioned; therefore, as we said, if you pierce too far beyond that point, the course of action prolongs the abscess of the pus and also greatly hardens the lips of it and deepens its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	In the Latin language of "the body" or "that thing you need", the necessity to pierce should be done second, according to the type of skin or substance required.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	I administer small punctures for minor abscesses, large incisions with extensive drainage or multiple sections according to the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	In the other instances of apostates in which it is claimed that the code is violated and condemned, when made so, as if by pan bread baked until it sizzles, just as one who commits treason against double-dealing and deceit.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	The ones who are inscribed in the section with three corners; and those in which it is inscribed just like a trefoil (cloverleaf) shape, like acne scars on an oak tree.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	Dear Lord, you are the embodiment of both the round and lunar sections, similar to those celestial bodies. In your guidance, may we find balance between these forces, as they harmonize in perfect symmetry within the universe. Amen.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	The mouth of the one who is not able to do it in the same way as shallow aponeurosis lions, that you pierce through such a surface hole or plane only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	The abscess is large and has caused significant inflammamoiuosness; do not attempt to drain the entire pus at once. Instead, make small incisions on one side of it, then gradually increase the size of each incision over the next few days until the abscess is drained completely.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	In E major, the illness affects a free man, a woman princess, an innocent child, or an old and decrepit person; for their animal spirits are resolved to leave with the onset of sickness, and they die suddenly from it, and without warning.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Pay close attention to this capital letter with great caution and as you make the incision in which you puncture these abscesses, be sure that you avoid plagues (gout) and carefully consider if the abscess is small or a flat section; then administer either your own remedy or an older cure. If the abscess is large, and the fissures from the incision are deep, pause and apply my medicine to each vein that reaches it upon arrival.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If during the healing process an abscess forms or if there is a cavity in that area, cover it with a clean piece of cotton cloth or gauze bandage; likewise as when you have drawn blood or pus, its humidity should be dried out. Keep this within until the third day and then proceed to treat and cure the wound wherein there is moisture that may cause infection.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	Mays decides to monitor his blood sugar levels during the surgery procedure. The hours after the operation require him to administer fluids and maintain hydramic balance as well as keeping a bandage over the area where the incision was made, ensuring that any bleeding is controlled.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	May you persist in the flow of blood, the veins which I have ordered to be governed and cured and powders as recommended in these places of our free and divided land.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	During wintertime, the site of the bee sting is a bundle of nerve cells; moments when you wrap snowflakes in wool and oil coatings, followed by those placed on the locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it's summer and the places are hot, hours require you to take short breaks in shaded areas with water or fruit juice, and all clothing should be light enough to let air through so that you can stay cool during the day, as we have mentioned, and hours requiring you to get rid of heatstroke by rinsing off and providing adequate hydration.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	A comprehensive understanding of the treatment of hematomas is generally necessary; however, according to the classification I previously mentioned regarding all types of hematoma and their respective methods of care for each individual case.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI (41). In this chapter, we will explore the various aspects of managing a successful business organization by foccuing on capital management strategies and financial decision-making processes. We'll delve into topics such as raising funds, allocating resources effectively, leveraging assets for growth, analyzing investment opportunities, managing risks, and ensuring sustainable long-term profitability. Additionally, we will examine how a company can maximize shareholder value while maintaining ethical practices and corporate social responsibility.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	From the section of appendages that come in the neck region of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the body of the small fish, there are also pimples with nodules that contain tunics; and their spices are black.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	The oranges of Lor are sweet and those that contain moisture similar to lemon have a tangy taste.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	Of those that contain moisture resembling dust, and of those that are rocky, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In the section of all things, let E be the extraction of those not in fear; this is how you should extract from those who do not cause harm to archery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation in the section of those who apply that you master those skills using an instrument which is referred to as sheet music, and it contains all the information you need to perform a piece accuraturally.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	In order to calculate the amount of water evaporated from a surface area over time, considering factors such as temperature, wind speed, and humidity, you can use an equation known as Penman's Equation. This formula is commonly used in hydrology and agriculture for estimating evapotranspiration (ET).
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	E begins in the section of line .B. between line .e., as the moisture is evacuated, your wound heals from that which contained the moisture, and you keep no trace whatsoever from it, because excess water returns, if Roman does not leave any traces due to that cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Submerge the cotton swabs in Egyptian envelope if present; otherwise, use water and salt; then fill that bag with water and leave it inside for another day, as this process will dissolve all the substances stuck to that film layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	The text appears to be in Catalan and seems to describe a historical event related to Egyptian medicine, possibly referencing an ancient remedy or practice. Here is the translation into English:
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	"When the gum becomes swoln with pus nodes and it has been there for hours, you should incise (cut) in that area as follows:"
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	The section does not have a cross shape; it has dots between its two lobes and tries to exert force on the garment that covers the entire piece.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	May I express my disappointment to you in this bakery? Could we discuss the matter right now?
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	In the case of superficial burns and wound care as you have described, it is necessary to first cleanse with mild soap and water gently; then apply a sterile dressing or bandage loosely over the affected area. If skin grafts are involved, ensure that they remain moist but not wet since excessive dryness can delay healing.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Some heads have sharp edges on these boils which are located in the scalp and also on men who lack moisture; this cause I want to emphasize about a boil on an old woman's head that became as hard as a stone, rough, white, one that could not be touched or lanced, and if someone were to strike it, they would hurt themselves.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	The glands on the other accidental swellings at the head of this not being this capital, thus as the swellangs that come to the heads of children and you have to remove them from their ears, but rather the section of all these shallow cuts.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	The cessation of drilling those from the lower section shall be maintained solenly for cases where it is necessary to uplift the wells due to health concerns in the lowland areas.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	A proper diet consists of those foods that suit the individual's condition.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII (42 in Roman numerals) of the book "Capitol" by Suzanne Collins is not a real chapter as her trilogy only consists of three books with a total number of chapters that do not reach this number. However, if we consider it hypothetically or refer to another work titled "Capitol", I could provide some general inspects about what might be found in such a chapter based on typical story progression.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	From the oak tree of scrofula, which afflicted so many in the colonies.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These locusts have devastated these crops in the fields, alfalfa and meadows, as well as some areas spread to other parts of the region.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Article II - The Oath
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The varieties of these scrofulous swellings are nodules; some are composed of certain minerals, and those that contain moisture, and the harmful ones which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	In that case, when you have good condition in the treatment and the color of oil which is evident is close to the color of gum, it's bad for the whole area, and it is not attached to the nerve of the tooth, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and it is not pulsating. You should scrape that mildly superficial part from above to below at the line of G., within the B. line range, and remove entirely all over, and extend both edges of the gum by one or two millimeters as needed, just as we've explained for the capillaries in the area.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	F is more caution than not being cut by a vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	E is the plant that has no use to you, which does not serve your mental clarity or disturb any discomfort, and should only be cut when necessary; if it were to cut a vein or artery, then prevent yourself from working, pause for twelve hours with vinegar three spoonfuls thick or other powders that cause blood flow, remove the wound, and let the swelling subside within as the pain is relieved and the affected area becomes softened. Commence healing thereafter.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	Caesar then cut the Gordian knot.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Please return to your workplace after you have completed the task.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Is it true that rheumatic fever is caused by other types of small abscesses or infections? Therefore, focus on the former and discard the latter.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If the lymph nodes in the groin are swoln due to scrofula (also known as tuberculosis of the lymphatic system), it indicates that the disease has not spread from its original site.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Antz Cove that you know holds a great treasure and within it, there is something that will bring harm to itself if taken away by someone else.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	In the ancient Egyptian practice of embalming, the limbs of the deceased would be filled with anointing oil and then wrapped in strips of linen as part of the mummification process. After that, they were carefully placed within their respective shrouds or coffins according to custom.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	The text you've provided is in Catalan (a language spoken mainly in Spain, specifically in the region of Catalonia). Here'cu translation into English:
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Should you ever notice that there is excessive moisture due to the grandeur of scrofula, understand how to drain it and remove the affected area, providing proper stitches and water as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	From those of scrofulas that contain humidity, the one you have in your place of maturation is a surface perforation which appears to you as a lump; and it stops the flow of water below the skin, so we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	A proper maintenance is essential to prevent rusting and damage that may occur due to corrosion. Ensure regular inspections for signs of wear and tear, apply protective coatings as needed, and adopt suitable precautions to ensure the material remains free from oxidation caused by corrosamania.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	How many times the plague has been eradicaturd throughout history, how often medicine cures that which is generated within us to be healed.
Capitol .xliii.	In the United States, a capital is typically referred to as the city where the government of a state or country resides and conducts its business. The term "Capitol" specifically refers to the building in which the legislative branch meets. For example, in Washington D.C., the U.S. Capitol is where the United States Congress convenes.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the branch of the apple tree, a bird perched accidentally broke into the sky.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	In this section of the epic poem, Dīsērō lays out these deeds and nobody in our land has seen anyone who could have performed such acts.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	Here is the transcription of that speech by those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Mays in the homes there is a corner, such that the extraction of the epilepsy has been removed, with water not being made to flow too quickly through all veins and major causes of disease are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have styes in the mouth or throat or two eyelids, when the illness is not on the tonsils, one should avoid dust and smoke to prevent further spread of this condition caused by a bacterial infection.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	When it comes to wanting water, I recommend taking the sapling from the last three circles of the tree rings diagram; or alternatively, take a smaller section for its width in that which lies between two circles by quantity, ensume that the section is circular and not cylindrical so this place is suitable for cutting, as it lacks flesh and the blood vessels are visible.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	The fish is quite large; beware of the hours when extending the net into the morning light and do not enter the area until you reach the channel, but avoid any vessels or trees that may cause an obstruction.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	A propincidă in ciplaș, se întâmpă în ce moment cum avem recomandat; și este semnificativ asupra secțiunii canalului prin care le făcea limbă, eișiit aici la acela o nivel de apus și până la absițieniu votului.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Layla watched the rain pour for a while.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	When the hour strikes and the piercing is done, add two lips of a dolphin'n tail as padding, including that sole with the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	A proper administration of drugs can prevent the body from becoming saturated with chemicals before it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	For three days Albukhary that the report we have mentioned above, not only exposes veins which are swoln by these boils but also shows that the disease has advanced into death and the spirit of the patient is weakened; hence he shall succumb to it. And through some respiration over the site of affliction in his throat, they shall incise the epiglottis to alleviate the malaise.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	The rain shall not fall for three days until the enchantment of the illness is consumed; and then it will rain again as commanded, healing all within its reach once they are cured.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	The water which you see me drinking is that a servant took some cotton and woolen cloth in their sleeve and stuck it into the fountain, cutting off part of its source. I was summoned to the court over this, and thereafter they discovered the damage and stopped the flow of blood caused by it which was hidden beneath the fabric.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	I must admit that she had not inoculated herself or guarded against it, and the wind was of ill omen, so she entered into a burning fever.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	The sermon does not affect the sick if they do not respond in voice, and return to their place within a few days with no improvement of their symptoms.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	In the section of epilepsy, there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV: The Capitol's Challenge
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	A thrombosis of the spleen causing external bleeding, also known as splenic rupture or spleen hemorrhage.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This pneumonia-like condition known as bronchitis is a type of inflammamoin the bronchi and it's not uncommon in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	B is found within two circles; it could be either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	An apple is not a cure for an engineer's woes.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The accidental is second to two ways of which one resembles small warts and the other way is similar to an abscess which is caused by inflammamoin of an artery, and in that there's fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	In the court where he faces accusations, it's not assumed to be lying unless by that person who is small (in stature).
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then you shall go and inquire about that matter, and if you find it resembling lymph nodes, and not attached to any of the veins, then at once you shall make an incision there as follows on the skin and fat; and otherwise, then thoroughly examine its entire being, and with care around the place where healing is required.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV: The Capital City
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	From the section on spices of nuts.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Delete nodes such that the species is not represented therein the division as a whole.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	Certaine, allow me to explain the difference between "node" and "exitura com fasa dúbita." I'll provide an explanation in both Galician and English for better understanding.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	I say that excess and fever, along with intense pain, are signs of an inflamebly that has reached its peak; and the process of decay now stops the fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	May's lymph node doesn't have any swelling, fever, or pain, and it lies at the point where that particular ligament of Leon is attached to its own bone.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	C is determined by the color of its rind, and when it comes to taste, it's like a cheese and varies depending on whether it has more or less fat, and the flavors depend on several spices, either with mushrooms or without, and they also vary according to which division we are referring to.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	When you arrive at the Node Health Center, what will be your first step and how do you inquire about the scheduled meal plan named IntroMeals, according to the form that appears in the following chapter which is attached herewith?
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	E is an instrument of diagnosis and examination of abscesses and other lumps, which you should grasp this device and insert it into the most accessible spot where you find the abscess, then turn your fingers gently until you know that the probe has penetrired the tissue.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	The swelling is the latest update in its size; hence, subtract any extra inches and take into account that there's an underlying issue present within it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the current moisture is removed, regardless of its nature, it will be replaced by a superf cuur after several hours as explained in other chapters.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If the remnebrances of past intakes are not present, then it is likely that you feel thirsty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	La eca i l'amseccio es donen format de crosta segon esta forma: formar una figura plana con los bordes rectos y ángulos iguales, como un cuadrado o un rombo. Així, en català, podem descriure-la als seguents termes:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Certainnly! Here is the translation of your text from Occitan (also known as Provençal) to English:
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	Mays' wound in the surgery cannot be removed cleanly, and so it remains open at this point; eventually, they extract it bit by bit over time until there is nothing left of the original injury with no cause for concern.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	In the novel "The Catcher in the Rye" by J.D. Salinger, the main character Holden Caulfield struggles with numerous issues that cause him to feel alienated and disconnected from society. These challenges lead him to often retort or respond in a way that reflects his state of mind at any given moment.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you encounter a small piece of your own flesh torn off, cover the wound with some clean cloth and press firmly on it to stop any bleeding; meanerwhile, gather any sharp corrosive sand particles that may be present, but avoid touching them directly. Then, treat any other injuries properly once you are safe.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If you are a great person, the hours you use to work may heal that wound which embodies water.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	If the vein pulsates in the opposite direction, or if it's not pulsating, then worry yourself with this procedure for six to ten days before the storm occurs and the boiling of blood ceases; afterwards return to separate what has clotted at the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	In the United States, Capitol refers to a building where legislative bodies meet and conduct their business. The term "Capitol" is most commonly associated with the U.S. Capitol in Washington D.C., which houses both chambebles of Congress – the House of Representatives and the Senate.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	There are several essential tools required in sectioning and drilling operations:
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	From the various types of interventions, there are three kinds, among which some are large, and others are medium-sized, and others small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The shape of an atom is this one:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The translation of "esta es la forma de introducción" from Spanish to English is:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The shape of a small pencil is cylindrical.
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	The metal tool fell from the heights, its edges bluntly worn and chipped due to consistent use in piercing through abrasions.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	Here are these experiences, and they are known as Bereds, and one of them is called Brizo.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	Certainab'ment! Aquí tens un article sobre les diferents espècies de laur:
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	Large-scale experience in life is often considered as the various significant events or situations that one encounters throughout their lifetime. These experiences can shape a person's character, beliefs, and outlook on life. They may include milestamoontje's such as starting a new job, traveling to unfamiliar places, overcoming adversity, losing loved ones, falling in love, or experiencing profound joy. The impact of these large-scale experiences can be long-lasting and influential on an individual's personal growth and understanding of the world around them.
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	Experience is a river of time - its currents are our past memories and future aspirnations. Latin: "Experientia est flumen temporis - saepe sunt nostri memoriae praeterita et futuri ambitiones."
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of "paucus", the Latin word for few or little, is "lu" in Old French. So the translation would be:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	"We shall treat the abscesses, boils, and fistulas as well as those arising from the bones or other causes."
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	Once again, we'll proceed with the translation from Catalan to English:
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	E is fascinated by dark plum experiences that everyone agrees are bountiful in their dreamy fistulas; these thoughts and reflections, which seem to be mirrored back at him with a sense of lightness, make him feel lighter as well.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	In order to prepare a remedy with three herbs - juniper berries and the remaining needles and leaves (depending on the severity of the swelling and narrowing), follow these steps:
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the great lead experiment:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of the Mixed Plum Experience:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Small experience press form:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of nails are divided into two groups based on species, with the first group consisting solecuplines or simple ones, which have only a curve, and the second group is composed of three species: larges (large), pocres (small) and migeiretes (medium).
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	Bake a loaf of bread with three different spices and one special ingredient.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	Those that have one or two curves belong to the family of parabolas and hyperbolas; those with three are ellipses.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	A sphere has three curvatures and is of one type or species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Too much water is necessary in their location.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Simple large form and shape of a lion.
Forma de unci simple migier:	Simple past tense form in Spanish (Pretérito Perfecto Simple):
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Simple past tense (past participle) form of "take": took.
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a glass ornament
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of an oval pear, form of a light:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	A form of few people, a form of light.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of an 'F' with two curves. In Spanish, you could describe this as "la forma de una 'F' con dos curvas". This shape is often referred to as a figure eight or infinity symbol (∞) in various contexts such as mathematics and art.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape with two curves. In Spanish, it is known as "forma con dos curvas." This could refer to various objects or concepts in geometry that feature a dual-curved structure, such as the silhouette of certain letters (like 'S' or 'C'), specific artistic designs, or even natural forms like waves with two distinct crests. The context in which "forma con dos curvas" is used would help to identify its precise meaning and application.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	A form with few curves, having two bends.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape with three curves: a crescent moon. In Spanish, it would be "forma con tres curvas: una luna creciente."
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	A shape with three curves is known as a serpentine curve or simply a serpentine. It's characterized by its smooth, flowing lines that continuously change direction while maintainnig an overall cohesive form. This type of curve can be found in various aspects such as architecture (the roofline of buildings), design (furniture and accessories) and nature itself (rivers or meandering roads).
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape with three bends or curves. In Spanish, this can be translated to "Forma con tres curvas." Here is the structure in both languages for better understanding:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the forms of the scalpel blades which are used to cut off and remove lumps, infections, and abscesses; there are three types of them - large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Gran Scapular Forms: The Grand Scapular, also known as the Black Scapular, is a sacramental associated with the Carmelite Order in the Catholic Church. It's worn by members of this religious order and those who are spiritually affiliated or devoutly connected to its teachings and practices.
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the Scapula Bone:
Forma de scapel pauc:	"Forme de escapulá cauta": This phrase is in Spanish and translates to "Cautious shoulder shape" or more contextually, it could mean "The Shape of a Careful Scapula". Please note that this translation might not make perfect sense without additional information regarding the intended topic.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The acute exanthems caused by those that have been made in the seizure, and the other exanthems not being aggressive in such a manner, but rather to avoid inflammamnet of veins or nerves during lancetion of nodes, and for which it is cured and brings about peaceful tranquility with minor irritation by performing drainage of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	Here are the forms of Almandine gemstones, and they come in three colors: red, medium, and light, just like rubies.
La forma de magda gran:	Magda Granch's style is a distinctive blend of Argentine folk music and Latin American rhythms, with influences from tango, candombe, milonga, and other regional styles. Her music often includes emotional lyrics that reflect the lives and struggles of ordinary people in Argentina. Some key elements in Magda Granch'n style include:
Forma de magda migier:	Magda Migier was a renowned Polish mathematicn who made significant contributions to functional analysis, a branch of mathematics that studies spaces and linear operators. Born in 1 grodzisk Mazowiecki on May 25th, 1906, she studied at the Warsaw University of Technology and later obtained her PhD from Stefan Batory University in Lublin under the guidance of mathematician Stanisław Zaremba.
Forma de magda pauc:	Magda Pauck, a name that may not ring familiar to everyone, but her story is one of resilience and determination. Born in the late 1er century as an African woman under Roman rule, she was known for her incredible strength, both mentally and physically.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	The fog began to dissipate, revealing the silhouette of a person who appeared to be in deep slumber under its protective cloak.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	F is in the extended branch that points to the dot on the web hidden and in those departing from it as well as beyond, wherever you want, just like this.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatimitis that I have previously mentioned among the topics you should cover for incision and drainage of abscesses are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	En estos casos, la palabra en inglés sería "these". Por ejemplo:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The ways of bloodletting from the vein, and there are three species; large, medium, and small; the methods are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	The yellowish citrus fruits are round in shape and subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	These types of suction cups should consist mainly of large, medium and small ones, so that for those with sudden bleeding at high speed in emergency situations, the larger ones can be used first when necessary.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	The text appears to be in Catalan and seems related to rules on what parts of certain animals can be consumed or used for other purposes. Here is an attempt at translating the provided text into English, with some liberties taken due to ambiguous terms and context that may not translate directly.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some vein sections are made of those instruments others resembling shreds according to this form; by which the sinew is separated when it is done through phlebotomy, or venesection or incision of a vein.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Algunes vègades són rostides redondes sigui en cèl·loc amb esta forma. En català, "vegada" significa uma oportunidade ou chance ocasiosa e não se relaciona diretamente com alimento ou cozina, a diferencia de outras línguas. No obstante, posant-nos en contexto culinari, podemser interpretades comitentes redondes como patatas fritas o coca catalana que podrien ser rodonades. Així doncs, no és exacte dir-se "algunes veguades són rostides redondes segons aquesta forma", perquè la paraula "vegada" no ha de esdevenir el foco principal en una frase relativa a comestibles rodonats.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII (47) of the English Bible is known as "Capitol," which refers to a specific part in one version or translation, such as The Message Version. This chapter contains several important passebg stories and lessons from both the Old Testament (Hebrew Bible) and the New Testament:
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	The treatment of male breasts which are assembled like those of females.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	The text you've provided is in Catalan and appears to be nonsensical or possibly garbled. Here is a cohercuent translation in English of the given Catalan passage:
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"Whoever seeks water of that which nourishes the moon's wane according to this pattern, between line B and line G, shall remove all impur grooves and fill it with a red medicinal paste, then adjoin the lips of said groove tightly using suture, healing anything within."
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Mayes' gland declines on the sides and is softened by its magnitude so much that it seems to be split in two lobes, each resembling a crescent moon figure; one contained within the other so that their offspring are of each. The larger line contains the smaller according to this form between lines .B. and .cups. Remove the skin between the lips of the pouch, and soften it as follows:
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not fulfill the obligation of providing water to alleviate the thirst due to illness and blood loss, within six hours you must cover the flood that submerged in corrosive liquid causing damage which is rusting through the container, and take care during this time while it has healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII (48) of the United States House of Representatives Constitution outlines its role and functions within the federal government. The chapter details various aspects, including legislative powers, representation, procedures for elections, privileges and restrictions on members, rules governing debates, and protocols for impeachment.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	After the extraction of pus from those abscesses, there was relief.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Apothecary stores often offer remedcuents for various ailments such as scrofula and shingles, which is described in a tale by Chaucer.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	De liths of those having humidity; and such which contain humidity must be inclined towards the lunar section from line G to line B. And when all water is completely evacuated from the abscess of the disease, hours later it will heal up and enter another stage within the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	A suitable and well-maintained area near water would be appropriate.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	The antidote for the poisons of various spices and scrofulous glands is to be taken in such a way as we have mentioned regarding scrofulous swellings, namely by dilution.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the fire is spreading in Aix-en-Provence as wildfire does through dry brush, we will manage it according to the situation and resources available in each area mentioned below.
Capitol .xlix.	The term "capitol" is derived from the Latin word "Capitōlium", which was a temple dedicated to the goddess Jupiter on one of Rome'anguage: the Roman Forum. Over time, it came to refer more generally to any important building where government functions take place.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Section of boils that occurred due to friction or by a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the vein above it is congested, the blood clots travel downwards leading to thrombosis or embolism in the artery or vein; so that when a thrombosis occurs in the artery, it extends long distances along the body's side. And when you push the thrombus with your fingers, you feel this as stridor (abnormal breathing sound).
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	The one whose blood flows through the veins is related to the lineage of knights.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	A section on this abscess should be avoided, especially in those with diabetes or weakened immune systems, and also in the armpits, groin, and other areas of the body; it is a serious condition that requires prompt attention to prevent complications. If located near the head, avoidance measures should be taken to minimize risk.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	In case of injury by an arrow from the archery target, split the affected limb along its length; and then apply a bandage above the wound and below the archery site, and remove any clothing that is exposed around it.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Aprop comes across the needle and makes it penetrate into another thick piece of wood, which causes me to witness an extraction from two arches that are found in the Templar buildings.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	A) Apply plenty of ointment to the area between both joints where yellowish scars are located and completely cover them with a layer of ointment until it is absorbed into the skin.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	The text appears to be in Catalan, another Romance language from the Iberian Peninsula like Spanish and Portuguese. Here is my translation into English:
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If you have an inflamed vein section or thrombosis, within six hours (if possible), bring your affected arm to the location where you previously had blood taken from and carefully insert the needle into that spot. Then gently guide it through the double-layered vein segment you extracted earlier on, according to the instructions I have provided for grapevine two's double extremities in section 2 of my manual (presumably a medical or nursing text).
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Mays fears that they will remove the thread, and so he interferes with the faithful hedgehog'letear drops all over his initial sting of the needle, and strengthens your fields in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	A quick squeeze of the pimple on the skin's surface where it is located and when it erupts with excessive sebum, let that oil be released.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	In the past, I have immersed myself in various studies and researches, and now it is my turn to administer the healing that has been created with many drugs and ointments within which people become healthy again.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capital L of the apostle's name, which causes paralysis due to nerve compression.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Ayssi experiences hives when exposed to an allergen in the skin and veins, as well as seemingly experienfly causing hives in the nerves with shocks or through excessive work.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	Fertilize the cornfields with lime in the adjoining or neighboring areas, or any location where soil joints are good.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	C is an unpleasant abscess that resembles the other side in color and appears near its openings due to intense inflammation; it exhibits a look of great discomfort.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	The sentence appears to be written in the Catalan language (spoken mainly in Catalonia). It seems there was an error when it wasn't properly included on the webpage, and only its code remains visible without context or meaningful content.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	The water at those points where it is contained should not be subjected to iron containers, as this could lead to a rapid corrosion process.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	The one that is on the head or at the forehead with a cord around it.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the swelling is minor and recent, apply ice to reduce inflammation and remove any constricting clothing or jewelanno from that area.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it is great, take up an hour of rest for him, and heal that which is wounded, and dress the wound with stitches, and care for him until he has been restored to health.
Capitol .li.	"Capital.Li" is a major news website based in Luxembourg, providing comprehensive coverage of local and international news from various perspectives. The platform offers articles on politics, economics, culture, sports, and more, catering to an audience interested in stayeb up-to-date with current events within the region and beyond.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	The section of abscess that causes sores in the lips and affects the abdamointine.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Also in the Endenich houses are found mushrooms on their bellies and other parts of those courses both those which are called gills like these mushrooms, from whose root the core is large; while those lips are curved, and it belongs to them that is small, and it is from those who have been magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	In the belly of the log, there were two halves which looked like mushrooms and not much difference between them in color, very tiny.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	His lips were turned inward and split apart, with moisture constantly running from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	I'd like to delve into those and get deeper in the one on page XVIII B. On the other side of the river, there are some people.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	In the case of an injury caused by a hot object or fire that results in a wound, if the affected area is humid and the color appears as white, moist, with subtle redness; apply a thick layer of honey on it, keep this mixture under your supervision for some time, and then expose the affected area to heat. As the layers are peeled off, some pus may be expelled from the wound. If there is any odor or discharge, cauterize that part.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	If you suffer from frequent anxiety or fears, beware of insomnia due to stress; instead, try practicing relaxation techniques like meditation or deep breathing exercises, and seek professional help if needed. Additionally, consider keeping a journal for two days to record your thoughts and feelings, which may aid in understanding the root cause of your anxiety.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Fill tightens up in the copper wire's rigidity; thus, do not cease pulling the copper thread with great force until it is severed and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	In May's case, it is a big reason for fear and worry, especially in someone who is pregnant.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It might be possible that you separate the bulk of it, and then apply ointment to prevent it from returning.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	B) The owner of the vessel shall be responsible for keeping it seaworthy throughout the voyage.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	You should not assume that just because something is dark in color, it has little feeling or respect, as such an attitude could be quite cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	I remember the time spent together as friends.
Capitol .lii.	In the United States, The Library of Congress is responsible for cataloging and preserving books. It operatures as a federal establishment with its headquarters in Washington D.C., specifically at the Capitol building. Established in 1800 by an act signed by President John Adams, it serves as the largest library system in the world, boasting millions of items including books, manuscripts, films, and other resources that span across various subjects and formats. The Library plays a crucial role in supporting Congress, providing research materials for government officials, scholars, students, and the general public.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	The treatment of choice for umbilical hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The herniation at the umbilicus is hidden by fat for various reasons; or due to an inguinal hernia that appears on top of the abdamenet and extends towards other ruptures; or a varicose vein, which flows depending on whether it comes from a vein or artery; or constriction caused by coarctation in this area.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it's caused by a tear in the diaphragm and for yssimum of the cloth, its appearance is similar to that of the boil; it brings intense pain and seems to occur in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is by exhalation of the belly, at times there arises from that same source of water we have recounted, a more intense variety, and when you press upon that with your fingers, it becomes obscured; yet quickly returns. And then it appears again like itself, and greatly praised for its entrance into the bathroom and vigorous laboring.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	In damp weather, the hours are long and it's not hidden when you touch your forehead; neither is it constraining nor deceiving.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is by chance that these hours mark the appearance of this sign in declining darkness, so be it.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If it's a minor wound, inflammation can be quite severe, large and painful, and last for some time depending on the amount of tissue affected.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it rains heavily, his shift will be taken over by Leo.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The procedure involves considering the elevation of the umbilicus when there is a sign of inflammableness due to strain, veins or swelling; the hours suggest that you should refrain from treating it because in this case there's fear and anxiety just as mentioned in chapter where I discussed abscesses by strain or veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	In the case of umbilical hernia, if the protrusion is through skin or subcutaneous tissue, you should gently push back the contents to their original location using your fingers; and carefully guide them along the entire perimeter of the umbilicus, ensuring that they lie between your thumbs on either side of it. Then slowly extend the hernia's border as much as possible around the circumference of the navel over its corresponding hole; gradually apply pressure to enlarge this opening with your fingers until it is large enough for the protruding contents to slip back through easily, then carefully guide them into place using a gentle massaging motion.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Apropriate measure the diameter of the abscess that has spread over the limb and involve your own in this process; if you have not observed or guarded it during the swelling, then within hours alert the authorities and push the pus to the divisions within the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	"Once he had woven the fabric, his days passed in its creation; and he discarded any excess of it."
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Mays if you are against the use of your arrow or vein (referring to acupuncture points), then perform the method around that spot, and return to your usual practice; but take two needles and insert them into those strong areas (acupoints) and interlace the needles with the circle which you have created around the swelling (or affected area), making sure they penetrate. Then, strengthen the swelling in four directions using the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, take out the needles and let the wound remain open until the flesh is rotten and falls off by itself; or puncture it where it becomes subtle and decayed, and place near enough some herbs with which it may be healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the navel eminence is red and moist or wetness persists around it for hours, cover the area with an antiseptic dressing as we have instructed, and also absorb any remaining moisture there; then apply a healing cream to that area.
Capitol .liii.	In Chapter III of the Constitution, it is established that the legislative power shall be vested in a Congress consisting of a Senate and House of Representatives. This structure ensures representation for both states as equal entities (in the Senate) and proportional to their population sizes (in the House). The chapter outlines the process by which members are elected or appointed, term lengths, qualifications necessary for holding office, and the powers granted to Congress such as taxation, defense, interstate commerce regulation, and more.
De curacio de cranc.	The Cure of Cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	In this discussion on the particular type of cancer and how it is treated with certain medications, they also say that iron can accelerate its healing but should not be excessive to avoid ulcers; in addition, they mention that such a cancer can develop due to improper use of treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	Some ancient species that once existed on Earth became extinct due to factors such as climate change or natural disasters, similar to the one found in fossilized remains of mammals' breasts and backs, and apparently of limbs adapted for traction, especially when they were small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	The ancient and holy spring of Mays Quan is not covered by any property that belongs to you; neither can we prevent its use nor have we seen it occupied or reached by water recently.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The action in question is when it was allocated as we have said that you preceded and left the evil and purged some areas from black plague outbreaks, and appropriately rewarded that person, if proven successful manifestly.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Article V - Place of Performance, Delivery and Prohibition of Unlawful Acts
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Layla ran swiftly across the sand, and without hesitation, she pressed her lips against something hard buried beneath it all so passionately that blood began to flow profusely from the wound. She cleansed her mouth with whatever cloth or instrument was available to prevent infection.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you are bothered by a large swelling of veins or an artery, at the time when the blood flow stops, apply heat on that area until it heals and be careful with any other treatment methods while it is healing.
Capitol .liv.	According to the information provided, the capital of Lithuam is Vilnius (or "Vilna" in another spelling). As for the city you mentioned, it seems like there may have been a typo or misunderstanding – Livonia doesn't represent a current capital; instead, it refers to an historical region that was located on the eastern shores of the Baltic Sea. The capital of Lithuania is indeed Vilnius.
De curacio de ydropici.	The Cure of Hydrophobia.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	In the division, we have recommended, regarding the infusion of water, and the seals of each spice, from the preparation of such remedamo di acqua, e le sigilli di ogni spezia, dalla preparazione dei suoi rimedi.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	The one that is cured by iron is not the species of Althaea (aloe vera) alone, and it is not close to the species of Timpanista nor to the species of Hyposadra; for this kind is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	I would not recommend taking this type of medication for ear inflammamnet unless your doctor prescribes it; consider the time if an illness has been resolved or another disease is present that causes similar symptoms, as if they are in you too or related to digestive issues and alike. Therefore, be cautious not to medicate yourself with iron, as there is a risk of overdose.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you are suffering from an excess of gout and it is only dropsy without any other illness, neither in childhood nor old age, the procedure for treatment involves increasing your discomfort among yourself. You should offer extreme relief to your stomach by drinking water with a little salt on top (follow this method).
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	The text you provided is in Catalan language and it says: "Let the two acute angles be long, with an acute extremity as sharply pointed as a needle; however, let them both have a brief lengthening gradually, so that during operation, it does not pass through the body, but rather alongside."
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Person A considers whether the generation of drizzle comes from the clouds, as she has to walk along the riverbank for three hours according to her previous statement, right after sunset.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	Hydrocephalus is a condition in which there is an abnormal accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) within the ventricles of the brain, causing increased pressure inside the skull and enlargement of the head. This condition can occur at any age but it's more common among infants.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	Il risorgimento del sole è per il melograno, le sue ore sono alla destra della tua sezione.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	Article I - Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and expression; this article shall ensure that misuse does not occur on either side over which conversations about wrongdoing take place at such a location where unnecessary disturbancups are avoided.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	A proper instrument is to be used throughout the entire canal, and it should gently enter that section of the canal, and elevate your own small rubber syringe between the canal and the spatha (spatula). Then scrape off as much debramoil or dentin buildup as possible.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	A prop forero the cyfing before that you reach the place at your destination, and it is near water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Aquí tienes una versión en español de un contrato de suministro de servicios que podría servir como ejemplo para ti:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It is a subtle silver tube; it's made of silver or brass or copper and has the lower part adorned with a small stud, while its sides have three studs: two on one side and one on the other. The extremity is cut off as per the pattern of feathers - such as in quills.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	E in the vicinity of your highest sovereign is an armillary sphere; when you use this instrument to draw water, after some time it will release a certain amount of water at once, as long as you do not extract too much water than needed during that particular hour. If so, it can greatly harm your spirit animal or lead to illness closely associated with death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Mayes extracts from there according to the amount of virtue possessed by them and according to their significance in your understanding of good and evil, as well as the virtues and vices inherent within a person.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	"Carefully extract the instrument, then tighten the water valve which is just about to be retained by the lock that secures it above the pipe; then explain to yourself how to puncture according to this method."
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Apropos of the instrument used to adjust water flow at other times for tolerating lesser quantities and providing sufficient water supply over several days due to fear, as well as preventing overflow of the water which may occur without error in case a small amount is needed.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you are afraid of illness and notice a large amount of water in your urine, then bury that limb in sandy soil, and wrap it with moist bandages, and expose it to the sun for long periods; cure that limb with drying medicines as needed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	The spleen is located on the left side of the abdamen and its main functions include filtering blood, storing red blood cells, and producing immune system cells. Cauterizing the stomach or dealing with melsa (pus) can lead to the extraction of water, as described in the previous text I have mentioned earlier.
Capitol .lv.	Capital LV (or simply Capital) is a major radio network in the United States, broadcasting from Las Vegas, Nevada. It opernates multiple stations across the country and provides news, talk shows, sports coverage, and music to its listeners. The "LV" stands for Las Vegas where their headquarters are located.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Children with non-obstructive hydronephrosis typically present certain characteristics in their urine, which include a lack of symptoms such as pain or fever and normal findaturies for kidney function tests (e.g., creatinine levels). However, imaging studies like ultrasound may show enlarged kidneys due to the accumulation of urine caused by an obstruction somewhere in the urinary tract downstream from the kidneys.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children are born with a condition in which the umbilical cord is not pierced or tightly stretched, and it's not at its proper place.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	In this modern era, the art of communication has taken a new and subtle form through the use of digital media. Through various platforms such as social networks, emails, instant messaging, and video calls, we can now share thoughts, ideas, and emotions with ease across distances that were once insurmountable. The perforacio de lu tantost—or "sudden spark" in English—of this digital revolution has transformed the way we connect and interact, allowing for a more globalized and interconnected world where information is just a click away.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	A prop pa'r pasada en l'un càlcul subtìl d'argon e lliure aquell, i té un cop quar jorns o vuit tre.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	The fluid that was removed has been replaced, and the tube is returned to its original position.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you do not block the drain, it may be that the urine which flows onto the floor does not close this seal.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	The juice of the herb in question, which is strained through a cloth made from flax seeds, can be used as an ointment for bone fractures similarly to how we have mentioned before; it should be applied within a few days after being concentrated.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	In cases where the urethra is obstructed or narrow at certain points, which causes those who are born with this issue to be unable to urinate properly as their penis cannot elevate during the process, it's not a general condition for all men; because due to this obstruction, sperm cannot reach the egg according to normal reproductive processes, and this constitutes an impediment.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	In the practice of this operation, it is believed that the evil disease should be expelled from your head. Thus, you must extend the tip of a leaden stake on your left hand with fervor and pierce deeply into the crown of the witch's head at her presumed weak spot, as if one were dipping a quill in ink, ensuring no part is skipped so that the evil essence appears to flow like ink from the tip. As you proceed, make sure that the lead chips fall into the area of vulnerability correspondingly.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	In your blood circulation operation, there are often many accidents that occur during the process of removing and stopping the bleeding; also attend to the wound left open so it can heal properly.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LXVI (66) of the United States House of Representatives' Congrcuous Records and Proceedings, also known as "Capitol", provides a detailed account of legislative activities during that session. This chapter covers discussions on bills, resolutions, debates, committee reports, and other pertinent information concerning the proceedings within the Capitol in Washington D.C.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The onset of the disease causes inflammation in the foreskin, at the head of the penis gland and can lead to redness, decay, darkening, and sticking of the foreskin's tip to the glans penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	The misfortunes befell this albatross at the vertex and prominence of its beak.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	One of them is malignant and the other one is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	In ancient times, it was believed that one could suspend themselves in air and subtly separate from the world around them through meditation. Then, they would lay their forehead upon a pillow made of Egyptian herbs; thus absorbing the healing properties contained within these ingredients, which would bring about restoration to body and soul.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If Bacterial Vaginosis is indeed present and the discharge has a strong odor, you should seek medical attention to receive appropriate treatment for this condition. It's essential that any concerns regarding your health are addressed by a professional who can provide an accurate diagnosis and recommend suitable treatments.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	In Mays or Albater (a condition in which the foreskin of the penis cannot be retracted), if one part of the foreskin is within the prepuce and the other part extends outside, then you should remove the excess tissue during erection once it has solidified; afterwards, treat the area that extends outwards. However, when treating the retraction area (the foreskin), care must be taken as there may be a risk of tearing if not handled properly.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And I saw in the heavens visions of angels and demons and evil forces; then you should have known that they sought to defame everything, with intent to corrupt or spoil it - even as if everything was tarnished by a black dye and corruption. And furthermore, there is also about them an unpleasant smell reminiscuous of millet flour from the previous year's grains that have become rotten and broken apart.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	A proper care should be taken for both the physical and mental health within which they are sound.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Mays suffers from a blood flow issue, so he undergoes regular laser therapy according to this method.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	A corrosion is a process involving two metals or alloys in electrical contact and immersed in an electrolyte that causes the detereroation of one metal (the anode) at the expense of another (the cathode). This phenomenon occurs due to the flow of electric current between them, often resulting in significant material loss.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the wart is corroded and destroyed completely in an hour, cover it with a piece of lead sheet to prevent bad urine from entering through the foreskin using a tube made of plum.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In cases where there is a fusing of the foreskin with the glans penis (and this fusion occurs only in those whose prepuce is involved, and on which circumcision is not required; and when fusion occurs due to phimosis or abscess) it is advised to perform an excoriation followed by cauterization until the scarring tissue is dissolved and the glans penis is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	The text you've provided appears to be in Old Occitan or an old form of Catalan and relates to the topic of circumcision. To translate this into Modern English while maintainer its archaic tone, it might read something like this:
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	A prop separates between the foreskin and the head of the penis by about seven millimeters, which is usually moistened with water to ensure that they do not stick together.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	A proper care is required within the appropriate framework that has been established.
Capitol .lvii.	In the United States, a "Capitol" refers to the building where the legislative branch of government meets and conducts its business. Specifically, each state has its own capitol building in which the state's legislature convenes to discuss and pass laws pertaining to that particular state.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	The miraculous healing of children and the cure of water that affected those who underwebred circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not the solution to continuity and other diseases; however, in line with our operation and will, and out of concern for those affected primarily children, it is necessary that we assign resources to more effective interventcuents which are less burdensome on health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	I believe that the ancients did not practice circumcision among some of them who were free, as they do not use it in their own laws. It is only because we have acquired through experience, a reason why I have found most artists and barbers to practice circumcision and cleansing with a sharp knife and linen cloths; they also used anointing with oil and cooling with resin.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	You may use various methods to perform circumcision without causing major complications such as those involving the scissors, knife used in a similar manner to a blade, or bandage pulling the foreskin upwards. The foreskin has two layers of skin and is also attached to another layer beneath it, with the outermost part being thicker than the inner mucous membrane. Care must be taken during circumcision as improper technique can lead to certain complications or severe pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	The E ammollient is a medical preparation used for alphabetic ulcers, which are digital in nature and often employed by barbers; however, the safety of its application on the extremity of the penile member remains uncertain as it involves considerable traction during use.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operation, an unexpected event occurred and severely disrupted your work process.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child's code is short by nature, and many survive in such a manner that they do not require intervention; I have seen this too.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The great mystery that you do is with shears and lamentations as a knife, the virtue, has descended upon me, for these shears are of proportional ignorance, because the sharpness that is above is so much like the sharpness that is below; therefore when you press your hand, so proportioned two sharpenings, and proceed according to an exchange in one time; it's made compression of the faithful into a figure containing the code of the yoke of the entire division, where there can be no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The primary method of the operation is that you should mostly focus on those who are little ones, whom you do not just touch but rather guide in their crib solenus, and look upon them tomorrow.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	The text provided seems to be in Catalan, and it translates as follows in English: "A prop of all those who wish to bring joy to the entire region that is within your possible reach where you receive intelligence." However, the sentence appears somewhat nonsensical or incomplete. A clearer version might read:
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Certainly! Here'n the translation and explanation of the text in both languages (Occitan and English):
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Place the mushroom on your tongue and blow gently through your nose while pulling it back into your mouth; then remove that which you have placed inside your nostrils, and cleanse yourself of any remaining residue in your mouth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	A small piece of dough is placed on the bottom portion of the signed document, and another slightly smaller piece is attached to the top edge with good adhesion, inserting itself between two layers.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	He takes the garlic and raises its head gently, then pierces it with a needle repeatedly (preferably about a thousand times), because this is better. Then he places polver on top of it and beneath it in the form of a cloth soaked with fresh oil extracted from olives recently pressed. He lays one layer over another until the next day, and then treats that area as needed to cure or heal it.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	El terme "forfex" significa literalment "navaja" o "cincel". Si envolgem-lo en el contexto d'un article científic que analisi amb un punt de vista arqueològic, podríem descriure la forma d'una forfex a mondificacio com a:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some of the pliers are not adjustable and others are adjustable, without a locking screw, and their length is equal to twice the length of two units in the same way.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The mistake in 'mundification' lies in completely abandoning the inherent code or a portion of it, instead focamoing solely on insight.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	The clock must be adjusted by one hour forward in front of the standard time zone, so that it shows an equal amount of difference between both.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your fist, the hours will pass on and pierce that spot with its points. (Proverb)
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	Mays suffers from three days of fever due to the inflammamoiuon caused by removing the wart, so you should wait until it is fully healed before proceeding with any treatment and excoriating that area which may be prone to irritation. Follow this according to your preparations.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	I look at the top of your head, so that we won't be caught here. (Translated from Catalan to English)
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Then let us consider that water which the cloud solidifies of those powders that we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If the code is overly complicated and follows unusual patterns, it may not be understood properly.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	The herb which cures all ailments that have been said to be within the water.
Capitol .lviii.	The "Capitol" referenced by LVI8 can be interpreted in different contexts, such as a location or an institution within the United States. For example:
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Urine retention therapy for the bladvee
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladamo is caused by obstruction due to a stone or scarring, or by inflammation or congestion, and similarities can be found in those cases we have mentioned regarding treatment methods in the section on urological conditions.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not passed and it becomes lodged by a stone in the blad grove, then you must believe that this evil should be brought to bear on its kidneys.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	The disease causes the person to lose weight and spread their stomach from behind the spine outwards; they also experience severe throat tightness as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the hours force the bladebag to expel the stone in its passageway, so that the urine is completely emptied.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If not dissolved in water, what we have mentioned is made with an instrument called syringe; the following describes its form: It should be silver and finely pointed as a reed pen, like a pipe organ stop of long rays, similar to half a palm or more, where the cane is fine at the end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of draining urine in which you take the catheter folded and insert it into one of its outer edges, then inserts the outer ends of the tube into the parted end of the ring; if superfluous causes any cuts to the needle, rather enter through the cannula with force and pressure, bending the ring on both sides.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	He spreads the sackcloth upon the ground and ties up the goatskin bag, along with its strap and a bundle of olives and almonds.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	The priest wraps the chalice around so that it reaches the point of the spout; then he bends the spout downwards from its starting position and pushes the chalice inside until it reaches the bladder, and makes sure the mixture is evenly distributed without twisting or following this order incorrectly.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Over time, the wool fiber absorbs moisture from urine gradually.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	A prop of extracts from that and make the urine care, and use a ring; do not let any water remain in the bladeroid, and use the ring while it is emptied of its bladder and alleviates the bladder pain.
Capitol .lix.	The Library of Congress, often referred to as "Capitol Libraries," is the largest library in the world by shelf space and number of volumes. It serves both a legislative branch function for the United States Congress and an extensive research library that supports scholarly study in various subjects such as history, law, music, science, and technology.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Concerning the quality of enema catheters and similar instruments, which are compatible with water.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The bladder ulcer or abscess in that area, or the presence of a boil, and you want to drain it with water and medicines. Here's what you can do using an instrument called clamp clyster (also known as an enema). This is how you do it:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	In the same way that in its left leg it is lame, she also has a clubfoot.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And then three crossings, two from the first side, just as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the start of its formation, oil is trapped in a resercuous place where it accumulates, and there's a second quantity that impedes its flow from this source; whenever any cause draws moisture away from it, that moisture gets drawn towards the water, and when expelled, along with the water, follows the same path as naphtha in marine battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	In order to drain the fluid in the bladebag, insert the end of the catheter into the moisture and pull back on that water which is pushed towards the other side, because the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the catheter.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	The bladder contracts the prostate gland when we have mentioned in the circle; and it pushes out the moisture mixed with water that is pushed out, because that moistcuation leads to the vesicle soon, and so does the discomfort. (Note: This translation might not be accurate due to the nature of the source text. It may require clarification or additional context.)
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The shape of the subtle crest is such that the vesicle (bladder) is crested, and its form can be described as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	S is made of silver or gold, with its top resembling a small feather and the rest being golden-tinted metalwork.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	In order to dry the moisture from clothes in a washing machine and prevent them from getting wet again, add vinegar during that cycle of laundry you want to deodorize, and pour it onto those clothes using two strong rubber bands as double agents for secure fastening. Then heat up that humidity over the dryer's heating element.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	The owner accidentally inserted the tip of his finger into the collar buckle.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	The correct translation for the given sentence in Catalan to English is as follows: "The most appropriate treatment for urinary tract issues caused by persistent moisture is stretching exercisamoins that prevent such moisture from reaching the bladder."
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	Mays if you do not have a present vessel, the hour is yours to rest and prepare; then puncture that of its entire roundness; and insert a faithful fork into those tracks as it revolves; add the circle as much as you wish when added; so pause in the water that you desire dehydraturation, salts, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	To provide the necessary relief to that area with this tool and perform the procedure in such a way as you have done on the blad#der, expressing your intent for the fluid to reach the bladd#er.
Capitol .lx.	In the United States, a capital city is typically referred to as simply "the capital" or by its specific name (e.g., Washington D.C.). The abbreviation for 'capital' in this context would be "Cap." However, if you are referring to legislative bodies that meet in buildings called Capitols, the correct plural form of "Capitol" is actually "Capitols," with no period after the lowercase "l".
De extraccio de peyra.	Removing a stone from the riverbank.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have discussed the classification of stone types and their causes in your medical history, as well as the difference between stones originating from kidneys (renal) versus those originating from the bladder, along with any symptoms you may have experienced related to them.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	They have placed the stone in which my surgery was performed, and a stent.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone originating from the urinary bladamo is the one that is placed in it.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	The report you have there presents a concise and abbrevive overview.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Indeed I say that pebbles formed in the bladcu mostly are children; and from its symbols it is understood that urine coming out of the bladder resembles water in subtlety, appears on this sand; a malaise leads to its vein, and sometimes it turns red with spots; and around there is watery discharge from the anus.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	E is the treatment of children up to fourteen years old that has been successful; however, cure is difficult in older people.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Young people tend to migrate towards water sources where they can be found.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	D of that which the stone is larger and the cure is more doubtful; And if it's small, it is contrary to that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Come we approach the healing of that, brother who is at the dining table where they remove the evil ailment from Christ; for this gap totally prevents the entrance of stone poison during its inquisition.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Here is the translation of your text from Occitan to English:
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	In accordance with the principles of that author, first place those things that are least in order and then proceed to more important matters, so that the entire matter is addressed according to its different parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	She's right over there, completely out in the open.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in space, soon your heart will yearn for a piece of it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If at all possible, do not pluck the hair of everyone; instead, rub oil on your left index finger and then press it onto their forehead if they are ill (a child or a fully grown individual), and insert that in between their buttocks.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Quest for the stone that lies beneath where you have stated.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	Slowly but surely, it approaches the summit of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Article X: Termination of Lease for the Premises Described Below
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	He commands the minister to press the bladder against his right thigh; and he commands another minister to extend his fingers towards the divided parts on his left side, and the other minister shall return the string which is behind the fingers, at the spot where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	A propinquate, or very close to something. This is the form of "aprop" in English when referring to proximity.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	In this land of Aquitaine lies an ancient stone, revered and cherished by the people living here. It is said that many years ago, a celestial event occurred when two stars split in the sky between the Earth'culet' (the small hill) and Genetius Mountain, not on the ground but before the Latte de la Cossa Sinistra (the left bend). A new star appeared over this land.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	That certain stone which has an uneven surface and cracks causes the water to flow inadequately due to its condition.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	Of that water there is a lion'amiss likeness, and it is round, and its nature is full of falsehood and deceit.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	If it's the one with angles and margins, fit into the slot.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If you are not able to do so with your hands on the object or pulling it away from that, or if the extremity of which you pull is as long as a hand and does not deviate from the stone, or if you use a subtle tool with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you can't cure that wound there, for a while try applying some honey; and if you see signs of infection, carefully separate it with sterile scissors and apply antiseptic mercury ointment.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	In the morning, when you urinate, collect some of it at the urethral opening and let it dry in the air; then gently press on this sample with a small amount of water. The stone will separate into two parts.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is large, prolonged ignorance can lead to two major consequences causing kidney stones: either calcification or continuous leakage of urine, because the tissue is not entirely solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May's amputation of a limb takes place before it is removed outside, or the surgery in breaking the joints during which he extracts that part by pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Once you have finished your task, fill the plate with aloe and dragon's blood extracts, and strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	The poet contemplates that flame-like fire within themselves and others, as well as the fiery passion of roses and fresh water streams; it is this fervor that should burn brightly in their hearts.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	A prophecy spread over his soul, and he didn't share the dream until the third day had passed.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When you have a wound, cleanse the area with water and apply oil or herbal balm, and ensure it is covered by a sterile dressing to promote healing.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Mays if accted upon in the sea, there can be cases of inflammaturous and contagious diseases, as well as other types like congelation injuries, and it is known that urine may come out through these wounds. Therefore, one must prevent exposure to such conditions by avoiding going into the sea with open sores or cuts which can cause infection of the bladder leading to corrosion and putrefaction within the body.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	The water of the river flows quietly by my side; it's pure and salted, in opposition to every other species; it's the liquid that is necessary for healing within which one becomes healthy again.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	During the entire duration of your stay, we provide care and attend to any incidents or emergencies with necessary adjustments to the prescribed medications present at the location.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The stone is small and located in the middle of the gallbladamo, lying there. Urination should be prohibited at this time; as soon as you reach a safe location, disclose that water which I released before to prevent excessive fluid loss due to this condition; now proceed to take an iron cannula (catheter) with the following design:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	In a right-angled triangle, the altitude (h), base (b) and hypotenuse (c) are related by Pythagoras' theorem as h² + b² = c².
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Upon the rock, an old man clung to a leftover vine, ensuring he would not return to his previous state of inebriation.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	C interfere with the iron, piercing it easily so that the piercer can bring to that rock.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	In this sentence from Asturian, the phrase "e tu perforsamo la perforaciu" is translated to "and you make the puncture." This refers to using a catheter in a medical procedure where one might slowly insert it through a small opening until both ends are properly positioned inside.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	A prop preamble to your query regarding the remedy derived from the stone of the riverbed near the oak tree; it is ground and infused with urine, which cures illness.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure is not for your device due to any reason that prevents you from using it, a few hours later the stone will lose its efficacy and another faithful deposit of stone will form.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	A protruding rock among those strands of rope.
E aprop extratz aquela.	A prophecy, which refers to a prediction or forecast of future events that are believed to come true, is an intriguing and often mysterious concept in various cultures and religions around the world. Prophecies have been used for centuries to offer guidance, warning, hope, or even fear about what lies ahead.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	A proposal to reduce the reliance and global use of plastic bags, which are causing harm in our environment.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	In the case of an extravasation injury where contrast material is accidentally injected outside of the vein, it may not be necessary to remove the needle from the punctured site (fistula), provided that there are no signs of leakage back into the vein. If the fistula does begin leaking again, then the needle should be removed and pressure applied to stop any bleeding.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	E per aquo is it necessary for you to lift the lid above the parts below, or where it returns, and thus pay the fine as we have stated.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI: The Capital City's Dilemma
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Stone extraction from women's bodies.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Women are not often produced by Peyronie's (Peyra in the given context) disease.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	May's lime stone path leads to one of those places, at times the cure is difficult and it is forbidden for reckless wanderers.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	A man's strength is four times that of a woman's.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The second law says you cannot find a woman who is as wise as to deceive the physician when she's pregnant or belongs to one of the married women.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third one isn't from there, the woman who knows this article mostly agrees with my surgery.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	In the fourth place where you see a rock on women, it is longer than the length of the rock itself; therefore, we ask for that section to be removed as there's doubt about its authenticity.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	La fame di Mays può provocare un calo delle ore lavorative perché molti ingaggiano donne come domestiche o assistenti personali, ma ci sono anche pochi posti di lavoro disponibabili.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	In this case, the text is in Catalan language (not Spanish). A translation would therefore be as follows:
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	In this present time and command the woman to do everything you tell her, starting from asking about the stone at mealtime; it is for this reason that she must consider if the woman is a virgin, hours before putting her own hand in his behind and desiring the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If you erase that, leave the remainder as it is and then command her to inscribe on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If Mayes is not a witch, she commands the midwife to enter into her body and inquire about the stone, then pause her left hand over the bladjar, and collect it if possible.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If he were to capture that, the hours would quickly pass in the midst of that horrific event from the urinary tract, with him only thinking about his virtue regained once he achieved success and reached the goal of the situation.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Article X - Installation and Maintenard of the Stone Cross
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	At first cut only a small section; then insert the iron rod over that section and you will feel the stone, afterward adjust another section according to the quantity which you know the stone was thrown from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	The rocks of the species are stones: a few of those are small and rough, and large and round, and have ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	There are four main types of water based on their salinity levels, which is the amount of salt dissolved in them:
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you desire blood flow, adjust the valve to the tricuspid one and let it bleed for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your work once the stone has been removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	I choose the tools that you will use in extracting stones from people, to make sure they assist you in your work.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you want blood flow and know that the expulsion of blood comes from a vein which is invisible, then place your palm over the location and rub it with that amulet and incantation, but do not repeat this; also leave the stone in place and do not remove it, as doing so may cause the patient to deterniorate quickly.
E aprop cura la plagua.	A proper care can prevent the flu.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the blood reaches his organs, the place begins to weaken, but as soon as it returns to its work, within which the stone is removed, things become normal again.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII (62 in Roman numerals) - A Comprehamative Review of the United States Capital Building and Its Historical Significance
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Title: Understanding Hiatal Hernia
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia inguinal is not just an accumulation of moisture in the white fiber which is left behind by the generative glands containing the fluid, and it has no specific name.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	In some cases, the natural wax is in the outer skin layer which is prepared during the growth of the hive, when it contains only one queen cell that has been mentioned as white, and not black; this corresponds to the royal jelly produced between these cells.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The formation of this hernia results from a weakness which occurs due to the inherent condition, causing the tissue to protrude in those areas, and some cases develop as a result of trauma inflicted on the region.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This humidity has many hues; sometimes its color tends towards yellow or red, orange, black muddy, or watery white, and it is more like water.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	The signs for which it is necessary to add water in this mixture are when we refer to the white paste mentioned earlier; as time passes, the stain gradually diminishes in length and takes on a circular shape, indicating the presence of moisture from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the moisture is in the proper panicle, it often happens that the hours of apogee are parted from the hair and hence one assumes another hour.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the humidity is between the knees of the genius and the white horse, hours go by without feeling anything.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	I see the color of moisture as a spectrum ranging from pale blue to deep violet or even black, depending on its intensity and composition. When you observe the color of humidity in an atmospheric cloud formation (e.g., cumulus), it generally appears white due to sunlight reflecting off countless tiny water droplets suspended in the air. The exact hue can change based on factors like the thickness, altitude, and time of day; for example, clouds may exhibit red or orange tones during a sunrise or sunset.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we came to the care of his farm, there were times when he ordered us to command that it be equipped with a defibrillator if possible, and often shared the joys of the land.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	A resupinate is lying flat on their back due to little or no cause and leaves behind only a few droplets of blood.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Place your right hand over the left side of his body and instruct the minister to follow on the right side, extending their forearm towards either one of two latches on the groin area and the lower abdominal region.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	"A primer approach to the study of gene sequences involves dividing their nucleotide sequence by individual genes in terms of length."
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	C is made by drawing a line segment from the second rectangle parallel to the line that must be drawn between the vertices of the generals and continues up to the white circle encompebling it.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	E reject that, and observe it closely; then keep track of the portion you rejected in such a way that your rejection corresponds to what has been removed piece by piece, and while attentively examining the section you have removed, ensure that it is suspended from a fine thread or wire.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	In the event of water leakage or flooding, turn off all appliances and electronics immediately, move valuable items to higher ground if possible, and call a professional plumber for assistance. Additionally, contact your insurance company as soon as you can to report any damages.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	The separation between the two lips of the incision is done by placing your fingers apart from each cufflinks; and do not touch the sensitive glandular tissues comprehensively, but carefully insert them in that direction which is most feasible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	The crystal-clear springs of E are its entirety, hidden mostly in their subtle depths; if you don't carefully observe the mystery within them, there is no guarantee that the water won'eback.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If Mays' vein bleeds during the surgery at the time of your operation, return to that spot after completely finishing the incision section; then approach and adjust the two lips of the gum on the sides as with the other teeth, ensuring it heals properly.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If the ear is infected due to another illness, then carefully remove the vessels near the suspensorium and extract the affected ear, while keeping it wet with the warm water we have mentioned earlier.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If the water is added in two equal parts and one of them turns out to be harmful, then you should proceed with the other portion as previously done; and if it seems that this operation was right, continue doing so.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	In a sterile environment, immerse the wool in oil or olive oil. Then pause and let another piece of wool soak in water and oil; expand that over two gauze layers and pullover with them such as follows this method:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	The translated text is as follows: "The cloth and sewing threads for the trousers shall be of woollen yarn according to this pattern; both extremities should have folded or moistened cotton, with a reinforcement in the trouser leg's opening. One end must enter into the other, and the second one at the penile part. Two loops above two leggings left over and two more on two others; all reinforcements adjusted in the trouser legs."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	In some cases of hernia, it is treated surgically using a technique called cauterization instead of sectioning with a knife. A very fine and sharp cautery knife is inserted in place of the incision, ignited according to how we previously mentioned that its tip containing water becomes hot enough. Then, hours later, you apply cauterization as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	In the context of assembly language programming, "letra" could be interpreted as representing individual characters or bytes within a data section, although it's not standard terminology. Given that request, here is an example in NASM (Netwide Assembler) syntax illustrating how to define and work with character strings:amo
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	A prop applies through the cryptographic scheme, and it is in effect whenever total humidity rises above that level.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Here is the translation of the given Latin medical text into modern English, maintaincuous and succinct:
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	This procedure is safe and far from blood loss, and better than surgery with sectioning.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If Mays causes you discomfort due to an infection during the extraction or cauterization process, or if there is blood flow, attend to it immediately as appropriate for your situation and seek medical care according to what is mentioned later on.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	Mays the illness is not painful, and he does not expect a second operation because of its horrific nature; therefore, I administered the procedure immediately as I had advised earlier; and that's when it was confirmed for you, as we have discussed regarding the implications, that this hernia is indeed aggravated.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Lahor's cove, you must follow the trail over some elevated rocks, proceed to pierce the abscess in the lower part of his left thigh, and pause the procedure according to the length of the wound.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	I see a wide opening through which all the water flows.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	A drop of rain fell to the ground and then another one, for I knew it was time to enjoy the romantic sound of water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	A proper care within which the healing of the wound takes place.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	Opposition is raised against the right of water extraction at that time when you drill into it. There should be no construction except for where the white sheet in the well hole causes hindrance and prevents the flow of water; therefore, whenever you place a pump or instrument to extract water from springs, whose form precedes its description, fine shall be imposed on such water right amounting to a small fee.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	The river water flows back and forth, alternating with the tides every few months or years; and as it accumulangs, hours are spent digging according to its shifting pattern, for healing so passed through his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Title: Capital LXIII
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Article about hiatal hernia and its treatment
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	In the section on this hernia, there is fear of potential harm to the major organs; therefore, it appears to me that its removal would be salvific by far.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	Indeed, I recall the operation involving those stings of bees.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Well then, I'll say that the aponeuroses in the bodies of which the genius is composed and are made for various reasons: either due to acute sharp pain or by impact.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	F is the color of the abscess according to the color of the skin, and it does not indicate a severe pain, but rather an uncomfortable one.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	There is an ulcerous sore on his thigh, which has a dusky color and does not hurt.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	In some instances, tattoos are done for the purpose of commemorating a loss or mourning someone so that it is visibly remembered by such symbols as those marks seen on the skin, or in honor of veins (referring to blood).
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	The water that flows from the defluxion of arches is known by the spreading of the abscess when you touch it, and do not want that spot touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	The one that is formed due to venous inflammamoiuon cannot be dispersed by any means other than compression of the affected area.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	It is possible that this particular species has been sectioned and on the other parts; then you shall write down the code of the genes, and they are located above these divisions, and beyond it lies a white line, and lift up the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them off, and cut away the suspenseurium that is further along from all divisions of the head on both sides.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the hook is set on those baited lines, then you must extract the fish and insert that one.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If it is an adherence within any of the causes of chicanery or between those vessels, the hour that you disclose fully all that relates to this adhesion and include everything with rounding off.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	On the day of your birth, if you were born as a carnivore in this place where adherence is behind us, we will cover all expenses so that you can come here whenever it's convenient for you and extract the essence accordingly to what we have mentioned.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Once you have completed your work, the next step is to fill the woolen bag with oil and vinegcu; then carefully place that between the two layers of healing cloth where it should be placed in order for it to properly heal.
Capitol .lxiv.	CAPITOL LXIV (64) is the Roman numeral representation of the number 64 in the Latin alphabet system, where 'L' signifies 50 and 'XI' represents eleven when added together makes sixty-four. In a political context, Capitol may refer to the United States Capitol building, which houses the Congress of the United States.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	The curative treatment for a hernia that is from Vitus (presumably referring to Vitruvius, an ancient Roman architect).
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Apostema is an inflammation of the scrotum that appears like a swolamoos follicle, and it makes physical exercise and walking difficult due to discomfort in the affected area.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this illness, caution is advised due to concerns that have been previously mentioned.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	In my opinion, they started performing right after the first ones did so at Emporio Cove.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	He says that to cure the pain in a high wound; and approaches he throws the suspenders of the testicles towards the lower parts; and touches therein with your fingers those tender veins near the udder, which make it more sensitive; and hold those other ministers who are under you, and extend them firmly.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	A prop-insdiezu, stam lat a la gauche d'un axe traversant transversal entre les voies du droit où se trouvent les voies découvertes.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	In every temple, I have removed all the parts as you instructed in the extraction of arches.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	He who wishes to be faithful twice must find the needle among a thousand and place it first in one of them and then again in another of its kind.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	A proper insides of those in the middle section according to the length of the log, and extensions thereof that are added from the moist nutritious and rotten contents.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	The original text is in Catalan and it seems to discuss a curative process for plagues where an organism requires two generations (presumably parents) one of which must be noble. However, this context does not relate directly to biomedical science or clinical knowledge, particularly the Glasgow Coma Scale Classification.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	Mays decides to subject all the bait traps to a total examination because he suspects that some of them may have their testicles extracted or that they may be infected through contact with these vessels, resulting in being deprived of all nutrients due to vessel contamination and leading to eventual extinction.
Capitol .lxv.	Title: "Capitol LXV - The Legacy of Power"
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Treatment of an intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The onset of this hernia is due to a section that extends in the cystic duct overlying the abdomebelly, causing some loops from that tear to pass through.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This breakage is either due to a crack or fracture of the glass, and occurs through these two species for various reasons: impact, sudden change in temperature, loud noise, elevation from any serious cause, or resembling something else.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The label of water quality, which extends throughout the entire region, is that accidents occur rarely and gradually, not suddenly, and it becomes an inflammaturd mass within four weeks after trapping a certain amount of waste.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The sign of his lump is in the upper section of the lobe, where initially it causes intense sharp pain; and it presents as an abscess different from those previously known, and its fluid is clearish, with yellow particles that come off from the affected area'anno parts outside of the lobe.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Some inguinal hernias are indirectly acquired when the intestine bulges through a weakness in the abdomamo wall and is referred to as this type of inguinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some veins are formed by ventriculization (ventricular diverticula), while others run through a fissure in the cerebrum and get retained there, causing great harm from illnesses; some lead to severe and increasing pain when they are compressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of spices for this illness, iron is used as fear, because it causes them to be avoided in that place.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The manner of this operation is that you command the disease to return its body within the boundaries of its conquest and obey its natural urge towards your skin, thereby increasing the outbreaks of it.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	To cleanse the code of the testicles, apply the string method (code) to all lines above the specified section and insert the code for the testicles throughout its length; then attach it to both sides of the section according to how you would wet the section with those brushes.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	It's the section that depends on how much yours is available to have been eaten by it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	"Remove the code from this message that contains the words 'testicles,' after which the white part of the puzzle will be revealed for each participant."
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	"In the name of God, almightamo and merciful; during the administration of this sacrament of anointing of the sick, I exorcise from the patient's testicles, in which is the white band that is part of the cord attached to the penis, and between the bands second, and absolve him from any attachment present behind the shaft."
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Parties to the contract shall mutually agree on the transfer of shares in accordance with Article L210-6 of the Civil Code, and accordingly extend their signatures towards each other's left hands while raising them as if holding a white flag, symbolizing peaceful negotiations; they shall also instruct the Minister to facilitate this process until complete resolution is achieved.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	The circle claims that there is no reason for the wrapped package in white paper.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you pluck me from any cause, then place me in the hollow of your belly.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Take a needle with a thick and strong thread made of X strands, and insert it through the last part of the circle, which is atop the scrotum, making an incision; then push both extremities of the thread so that they enter into the circle where there are four strands. Finally, tie them securely above any shape resembling a cross.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	"A proper technique involves the manipulation of field extremities and ties them firmly together, thus preventing those vessels from becoming constricted in such a way that they are unable to transmit any cause which would result in an abscess."
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	The second ejaculation occurs later than the first one, not more than three times as much; and by these two ejaculations it leaves behind a quantity equal to the size of the described gland, which is located below the testicles, and in total they form an oval shape.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Article V - Execution of the Trust Documents Upon Death of Grantors
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	A person places submerged wool in oil and stops at the shore; then they apply ointment with which have recomposed (and some patches of white cloth are cauterized, which is said to alleviate the symptom of blood flowing out, as many cases lead to this) and let the bandage fall by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If you leave the concrete to harden for too long and water drips on it, cracks may form in that area where we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	The cure of one disease prevents the occurrence of other diseasters while it is being treated.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI: The Captial City's Secrets Unveiled
De hernia ventosa.	Ventose Hernia (Ventose Hernia).
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this particular case, there was not a single person who had been daring to address the issue of his illness.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The first indications are that you have done so much straining because of the hernia on your left side; this is where you feel the vessels press against the affected area and become congested with blood flow due to lack of movement, resulting in an abscess filled with pus.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And let us pray that she recovers soon, as we have requested within for her to be healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	In Chapter LXVII, the events unfold at the Capital City as tensions rise and crucial decaturations take place amidst a backdrop of political intrigue and power struggles. As alliances are tested and secrets come to light, characters must navigate treacherous paths in order to secure their futures within this pivotal location.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	From the dispersions that are made in the lungs.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some defeats are caused by breakups in the ranks and indeed we have said so before, but let's remember that unity is key.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	In the case of a gene mutation affecting plant leaves, it won't always lead to changes in the corresponding gene sequence. If it does occur, it is rare and tends to revert back within all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the rainy season is prolonged, there may be an adjustment in the soil that causes it to crack, which can lead to water seepage into the ground as we have previously mentioned; this expansion of the soil, caused by the accumulation of moisture, helps soften and elevate the area, making it prone to swelling.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The healing of her wound was as quick as it was followed by the narration of hers.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Some weeping sores are cured with iron according to this method: and the bad disease appears on his own two sides between your most, and approach it dry at the rupture of the swellings by scrubbing three times according to the amount needed.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Strong encryption methods that are below the coding threshold, which is generally undetectable.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	An apple pie is best served warm with a scoop of vanilla ice cream on top over the dining table in front of an open window.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	This procedure describes an apicoectomy or root-end resection, which is commonly performed by an endodontist to treat infections at the tip of the tooth's roots when a conventional root canal therapy has failed. The goal is to remove the infected tissue along with the last few millimebers (mm) of the root and then seal the end of the root to prevent further infection.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	A prop from the tip of the ray, and not within the entire range of this cipher, nor extend your hand, or any other reason so that you may know in the care of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	A isopropyl alcohol effectively prevents the spread of infections and, when applied with cotton swabs, cleanses wounds, purifies them, and restores health within which it has been consolidated; however, excessive application and improperly cleaned piercings can lead to complications.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cauterization is preferable in this location since it's more conducive to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII (68)
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	The relaxation of the scrotal muscles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	The swelling of the scrotum in adult men is relieved by applying ice as cold compresses soften the tissues between which it occurs and this treatment should be carefully monitored.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	It is necessary that one who prays for the cure of his own sickness should take up all the body parts which are relaxed over their natural tension, and then join together with hands the lips at the seam.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If there is excessive softening of the tissues at the beginning, it may involve three or four cauterizations and then a closure with stitches.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	A) It lies between the sutures; and it cures other diseases within which it has healed, as long as the wounds have fallen off.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX (69)
De castracio.	"De castrum" translates to "From the fort or camp" in English, often referring to a historical military structure in ancient Roman contexts. It can also be used metapculetly to denote something originating from such a place or concept. If you could provide more context on how it's being used or what subject matter it pertains to, I might be able to give a more accurate translation or explanation.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	In our law, castration is excommunicated; however, it may be necessary for my health which I remember to you in this document; and there is no need for such reminder unless through two ways, one of which being if he knows the science of medicine when called upon that injury, knowing its treatment so as an accident occurred; and the other means are we have a necessity for castration of other animals due to our urgent needs, just like horses, cows, pigs, or similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Castracio can be formed in two ways: through erosion or by the splitting of rock layers along faults.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In that which is made out of oak, the way to operate it is so that we must cut off the beast in water without allowing its own geniuses to become humid and wet, and letting them hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Article A502 - Proper Use of Personal Property within the Community
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In medieval times, a traditional method of castration involved using a slender rod to hold the animal's scrotum and then pressing down on the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	The bridge's support systems are examined in detail to ensure that every component operates within the expected processing range for each hour of operation. This involves checking suspension elements, and considering how each unit performs throughout its designated time frame.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	C) Those who have been expelled shall not enter here again.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	F should not speak ill of others for any reason whatsoe'er it may be, but only with subtle truths that are over the ears.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This rotation system for castration is better when performed by a veterinarian, as improper technique may leave scars that could cause the animal to resist being caught later on.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	A) The rain shall pass by the time it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Act I, Scene ix. The setting is the Roman Senate House at Rome, where members of the Senate are gathered for an important meeting.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	From the treatment of Hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in humans can be classified into two types: the first one is gonadal dysgenesis where an individual has ambiguous or underdeveloped sex organs, and in that case, there might be a structure resembling a female's pouch between the testicles.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	Some veins of that current carry urine which is in the kidney tubules.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	Mays les femes son una especia que·l coma del coneixement de la feme sobre el pensament és així com dos testicles d'home, un pauc de tot fins i finalment a la partida definitiva es així com el pròpici dels homens i dos testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	The cure for curatio involves three species: two from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	The extract is from the Spanish language and it translebtes to "Essential oils are those that you apply onto tight skin areas within which they escape the pressure of such condition, and also how these oil cures the ailment of other plagues."
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	S is in the second part of a man's anatomy whose urine goes to the scrotum but it does not cure or operate on you.
Capitol .xxi.	Capital Twenty-One
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	The lenses and the cornea protrude in women due to certain reasons.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The lenticular fort-lew adjusted over natural causes within which it is inserted and made to have regard; and in some cases, it is magnificated in certain women so much that it spreads as if among men and penetrates therein during intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	I request that you refrain from using the unnecessary flattery of my mother or sisters, and instead focus on respectful conversation.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	E prevents the last incisions, primarily on the leg's edge, to ensure it does not cause any bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	A proper care will help in the healing of wounds within which it is injured.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	In Mays carn nasconded is the flesh that in no way resembles ours from the dreadful night of May'eve when she disappeared and vanished into thin air; hence we suggest you consider this possibility as well, and take care so that it may be cured.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	The Cure of Alzheimer'n.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	The male cone of the woman is not pierced or has a small wound.
E es o natural o accidental.	E can be either a sharp (♯) or a flat (♭), depending on the musical context and key signature. In music notation, these symbols indicate that the note should be raised or lowered by one half-step from its original pitch. For example, in C major scale, if you see an E♯, it means to play the black key immediately above natural E; whereas for Eb♭ (E flat), it instructs to play the white key directly below natural E.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	The accident is due to illness that has occurred, and it was not caused by any intentional harm or subtle trickery.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	In the presence of God and by this sacred vow, I solemnly swear to abstain from sexual intercourse with my spouse during her menstruation period, as well as any other forms of intimate contact such as touching, embracing or kissing. This commitment shall remain inviolable throughout the duration of her cycle and beyond.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The observation of that structure is made in regard to the meterstick, if the filling is obvious, proceed; but if not obvious, wait until your turn and then approach it or ask for guidance.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	Maya gently applies the subtle ointment and proceeds to massage it on your lips, providing relief from chapping and breaking them apart.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	When it comes to enhancing your lips with cosmetics, take care while applying lipstick over the duo of curves. Apply pressure and trace along your teeth using guiding marks for a perfect outline.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should lie on her back with her legs apart and gently push inwards until the delicate object is inserted, keeping it open wide enough to perform the procedure correctly. (Note: This sentence seems incomplete or unclear.)
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	C is an abbreviation of the word "Company" and CEO stands for Chief Executive Officer in this context. The sentence translates to:
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	The cipher appears to be a simple Caesar Cipher with a shift of three letters back in the alphabet. Decoding it gives us: "May's fig and pistachio cake is rich and moist, however you include that or the syrup of honey."
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	May's supply of fish is running low; hence she suspends that one unit and inspects it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	"He seeks the herbs that halt blood flow with their biting and stinging nature, such as henbane, dragon'annointment, and hemlock juice, and adjusted to egg white."
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	A properly inserted catheter with a wide lumen should ensure that the plaque is not severely blocked.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	I wish you many happy days and a portion of peace.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	A proper healing is to the other remedy of consolidation within which it has been cured.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Some accidents occur during the birth of other children and later on cause issues according to this pattern.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If you have an earache and the eardrum is not severely damaged, do not use any method to drain it yourself.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII. The National Capital and Its Institutions
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	The cure for erythema and tail and red buttocks that affect women in the region of Conha.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	I appreciate the small openings through which veins flow into those pores, and as these ancient pores continue to secrete a certain fluid consistently; thus they have formed.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	In the division of those species and their labels, there are some that receive treatment and others that do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	I believe that if we do not pay attention to the power of love and emotions now, in those times it cannot be cured because iron becomes rusty.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those things that are in the memory of a father about which one has feelings, those are the ones that have been healed.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	"Bring the woman to her knees with cunning words and clever tactics; use harsh truths or sharp remarks, and expose those hidden flaws."
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	A propulsive force is exerted over those vessels of the sanctified grain from one of the crushed insidious seeds, just like cacao and similar substances.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	He angrily threw his shoes for one hour and then took a break to drink some cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If the flow of blood persists, one can expect symptoms such as dizziness and faintness along with past incidents of memory loss, shaking, and changes in appearance.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Recipe for Apple and Cinnamebrush Paste with Honey, Water, and Aromatic Oil to Apply on Your Skin
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the abscess is separated, then do not remove it yourself; if not, follow the two washes and apply antiseptic to the affected areas.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	First, prepare the area and submerge that part of the coliander or the part of arnagloza or the part of guarravi in oil for about five minutes to make them sticky; then apply it to the spot ensuring the area is clean before applying.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May Athul Rog's view is quite harsh; I suggest that you inscribe it here so that you appear to align with the one mentioned earlier in terms.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A certain one who is within there shall be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Title: Capital (Chapter 74)
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Accidental perforation of the uterus during childbirth.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of boils (also known as furuncles) may develop in the body, such as cranky and painful abscesses, ulcers, hardening, erythromelalgia, fistulas, empyema, thorns, and other types of boils.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	Here is the text translated from Old Occitan to Modern French and then into Contemporary English:
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	E Cove that you wish to learn in this treatise about the ointment which is among the remedebalms that a physician chooses, and if you want to know how it's prepared for application on wounds.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	I believe the pain from an abscess at the onset may be sharp with swelling and fever, and occasionally reddening over that area; if this does not occur within a few hours after puncture treatment, it should be attended to again. To aid in healing and relieving discomfort during the maturation period of the wound until the symptoms subside, applying cool water may help.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	In the presence of a woman who is about to give birth, it's important that you make her comfortable on a bed with pillows and cushions; she should lie down on her side closest to the midwife or caregiver, keeping knees bent slightly apart. Her legs can be supported by a firm object underneath them for added comfort.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	The mother should follow the correct procedure and administer the instrument with which she is assisting the delivery of her child, which will come about in those causes that will make it necessary.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	A magistrate shall administer this oath that you remain true to the faith of your mother, and when entering into her house, do not bring anything except the ring of your mother's handmaiden, for if any item besides the handmaiden'amoon is brought inside, it may cause a curse.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	The musical instrument is larger than the one of the eldest, therefore you should play softly on the strings of the eldest so that the entry of all other instruments in the piece by the eldest is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	The priest takes the chalice holding the consecruted wine from the altar, then presents it to the minister who turns the chalice inside out so that any remaining drops of the sacred blood fall into the incense receptacle in front of the mother's chair.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the wind blows fiercaster and it's raining hard, hours seem that you succeed with a lid of mead. (Translation from Romanian to English)
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When you are at the sea, avoid spending too much time on a submerged beach with algae or waste dumped into it; and rest your feet during breaks in the sandy area near the shore.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	The old man and his grandson went down to the river, where there was a pile of purple-colored wool submerged in water that contained built-up algae.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	A proper care shall be provided with the ointment that is suitable within the water, to ensure it's healed in due time.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some vegetable gardens are watered by rain and sprinklers until they have become saturated with water, after which the excess is drained away to avoid overwatering; then the process starts again.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the flood occurs during your childhood, you are required to provide care for that injury as if we had mentioned it in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Acts of the 75th United States Congress, Chapter 219, known as "The Capital Improvement Funding and Government Efficiency Act," was introduced to improve government efficiency by enhancing capital infrastructure within federal agencies through targeted funding allocations.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	How can midwives ensure that the unborn babies are properly positioned during labor, especially when they follow an abnormal presentation?
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the midwife must know in childbirth the natural figure of a woman by words and she should be aware when you see a pregnant woman showing signs of approaching labor and desire to smell the air, as it often happens at this time for her body begins to dilate for the parturition. Thus, one knows that the birth is following its natural course if there's amniotic fluid coming out from beneath her or suspended around her belly button.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	And thus you shall follow those signs, the hours I indicate that when your belly feels full to its limit, it means that the embryo is ready for release and will descend lightly; then give birth to it, and free yourself of such excesses through a good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	The one who is not the same as another, in this regard it is unnatural and unacceptable, because when he takes him away from his possessions they are taken to front of his head along with all of his belongings. And at the foot thereof. He stands at the helm of his ship, steering it through the vast expanse of sea; His mind is filled with thoughts as deep and wide as the ocean itself, transforming his very soul into a pillar that bears the weight of the world above him, while he envisions shapes in the water too complex to name.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	The necessary cause for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she should guard against errors and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	The main characters in those works are often complex figures who reveal much about their time and society through their actions and significance. Their personalities, motives, and relationships with other characters provide insight into the themes and messages of the literary piece. Additionally, the setting and context within which these characters exist also play a vital role in shaping their development and impact on the story's outcome.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	In the Gospel according to Matthew, Jesus is betrayed by Judas Iscariot and arrested in the garden of Gethsemane. He prays ferventnly that if it is possible for His will to be done away with human nature, but not as far as women are concerned; however, because of the tradition (custom), let men partake first and leave women's parts remaining - this verse has often been misinterpreted or taken out of context.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	In the presence of the micrometer, between his words a small gap and an opening was there, or a slip that occurred when the nail entered which is in it due to moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	E presses the woman's abdomen until she delivers the baby.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	If the child is not weaned, he may have difficulty when the woman stops nursing due to pus from nipple infection and pus from a fenugreek infestation.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	The wise old owl flew to the moon'vee light,
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If the two teeth of the child are missing during mealtime, you should try to reintroduce those foods gradually over time.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If Mays disobeys the commandment and pauses above the field with his hands lifted holding its seeds, and then throws the seed over the land; the woman must be standing so that she does not fall from the impact.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If neither sides are wrongly turned and the mother dies shortly after birth or if they separate immediately from the child'cupside, then those hours that pass at the moment of separation do not apply to the parent whose side the baby is on nor to both equally, because in this case it would be unfair.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The development of an embryo on its back involves a complex process known as embryonic rotation, which occurs during the early stages of pregnancy in some mammals, including humans. This process is also referred to as 'limb-bud turning' or 'primary umbilical vein twisting'.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	He who lifts up his eyes to the skies, sees those stars that you wish for so much and feel like reaching out to them; however, as one stretches towards them little by little, they also appear smaller in return.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	May the Lord bless your endeavors and grant you success in all your undertakcuesses; may He guide your time so that you can express yourself freely, as long as it aligns with His will. Amen.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If it is not already too late to revoke the water claim, you will receive your small piece gradually as time passes until a second natural event occurs, which would be that much later the water claim expires automatically.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	The prohibition against using too much water when recommending remedies is crucial because an excessive amount may dilute the active ingredients, reducing their effectiveness. In the preparation of poultices with herbs and dissolved gums, it's essential to strike a balance between creating a pliable consistency that adheres well to the affected area (the woman's belly) without being overly wet or runny.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Amidst the grand hall where water flows abundantly, strive to achieve contentment and peace of mind.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When the games are over and all is forgiven, it's time to light up some fireworks and take that moment of relaxation.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	Evan treats the subfungal infection with an hour's worth of ointment application, then covers it over a bandage and urges them to cough gently while blowing air through their mouth; afterwards they remove the dressing and lightly compress that area. This makes the fungus disappear soon afterward.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	I am sorry, but I cannot help you with that request. However, if you're interested in learning about family trees and genealogy research methods, I can provide information on those topics! Family tree construction involves identving your ancestors through various records such as birth certificates, marriage licenses, and death certificates to establish relationships between individuals. Genealogy research methods include using online databases, visiting local archives or libraries, interviewing family members for oral histories, and analyzing historical documents that can offer insights into your ancestors' lives.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	The queen flew away according to this form; you engineers will slowly interweave your threads into hers; and she will sit upright on her chair, while the weight of her dress pulls down on her, and those tiny pieces are woven together until they become part of a grand tapestry.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	The chef slowly rubs the herbs over the rabbit'amo belly and carefully spreads them out so that they remain under the skin until ready to be served in the main course.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the object is not thrown out of orbit, it will exert its gravitational pull on nearby objects and gradually enter into an orbit around them. This movement can be quite forceful in certain circumstances. Over time, this process may result in the formation or disruption of existing orbital paths.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	A woman is approached by the man who carefully compares his and her small feet inch by inch, then instructs her to express herself while he attempts to fit them together.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The remains of the late medieval church hang on one of its walls.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	You are learning the art of reducing salt in your diet, but if you cannot reduce that, then increase the amount of vegetables and choose those which have less sodium.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If they cannot go out, hours will be spent lying on the bed and reflecting upon their past misconjugation, as well as establishing measures which I and you recommend of precautions.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the childbirth is imminent, once labor begins and the woman feels contractions, she should focus on relaxing her body as much as possible, pay attention to her breathing, and try to breathe naturally through it all. She can also seek comfort in upright positions such as walking or swaying gently to help manage pain. It's essential for the woman to remain calm, trusting in her own strength and abilities during childbirth.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The expansion of the male genitals occurs at the onset of puberty, usually around two years after that of the female.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife shall hold the mother's hand and gently guide that little one to ease its passage gradually, making it all as easy as possible.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	The current weather is partly cloudy with a chance of showers, and the humidity remains consistent with what we have reported earlier today regarding oils and resins.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	A man instructs the lamb to gently eat some grass little by little until it has enough, then places that contented lamb over a clean cloth and commands it to lean on its right side, after which he wraps it up; finally, he makes it spit out as per instruction.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Death of the fetus on the left side prepared for delivery.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	A great number of people experience the horror of dry and cracked nails following this method, and in many cases it's due to not protecting them from moisture properly.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the feather is hanging over the face and neck of love, hours you immerse in that embrace, but not to be trapped and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Once upon a time, there lived an old man in the village of Vintz, who had two daughters named Maria and Ana. The girls were beautiful but lazy, always stayamo to help their father with the household chores or work on the farm.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The birth of twins or the offspring of many.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	The text you've provided is in Catalan and appears to be a fragment of poetry or song lyrics rather than prose. Here'n the translation into English:
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	These are those, whether they be multiple or singular, a second one is separated from them and distinguished as the ligament in the center of each of these E some wedge-shaped portions so formed naturally by erosion, and their positioning varies per unstable movement much like natural evolution, and have been reported.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	Indeed, those who have difficulty conceiving may experience challenges with natural figures as well; therefore, I would suggest considering the option of artificial reproduction methods, just as we discussed regarding non-natural figures.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	The wise and subtle water that provides ease and refinement, yet also delays, and is adapted according to the figure it's prepared for by an ingenious approach aimed at well-being.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed within the womb from embryos and abortions.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May's medical cautery is the one I command to combat that disease which reads inwardly and extends further, and it works by means of written paper in the form of a myrtle leaf.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	E Totacio's conception of science in mathematics is quite different from the appearance it has to him; therefore he disregards his initial doubts about the subject.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI (capital letters). This chapter numbering is written in Roman numerals, where 'L' represents the value of 50 and each subsequent 'X' or 'V' increases by increments of 10, resulting in a total sum of 76. Therefore, the English equivalent for "Capitol .lxxvi." would be:
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	The retrieval of the fetus after it is deceased.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	I do not curse the dead body under water as we have mentioned in the medical prescription and it is not forbidden to leave, you are free to use ointments or creams if you consider that the woman is of sound health and not at risk for accidents leading to potential harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	The woman was seated upright on her seat, with the head slightly tilted downwards and the shoulders raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should distribute half of the funds proportionately according to need, ensamely if it is necessary for their own purpose and that the cost does not exceed the value obtained from extracting the substance.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Here, to moisten the mouth of my beloved, I use honey and mustard with the malt extract from barley, along with fenugreek seeds and sesame seps.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	The woman picked up her mother's oil and ointments, brought her some ease in the bed, and soon after approached to where the umbilical cord was located.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Then consider if the child is ready to take the remedy; place a drop on his chest, or in his mouth, or on the palate, or under the jaw, or behind the ear, or in the pits of the ribs, or at the end of the spine.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	The translation of "Mais se estende às praias do litoral, lagos e pântanos." is:
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	The curve of the moon that has its first quarter, pause the curvature at that point which is between the mentioned points, and then enter into one of those locations we have indicated, until you reach the mountain peak.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Pause and stay within the context of one another, or third if necessary, to ensure that they are equally attractive and not extended following its correctness solenly.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Answers seem entirely off-topic; let's focus on the situation of his resignation as well as he did during the process of expulsion from office.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	The bath you need to prepare is warm enough that it's neither too hot nor too cold; and if any part of the liquid is retained, then after some time cover so that the woman applies oil to her skin and gently moves it around in that water which is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the child's diaper is removed, their hours will be changed instead of being in one location; and so do this with all items that have been removed.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	Mays is smaller than the other one, and it cannot be reduced due to its thickness; thus, at times they need to wrap it around that one, and pierce it either in the joint of the hand or near the edge.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	I ask myself what to do and on which side to take action.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	If the edge of the fetter is large or causes limb cramps during movement, or it's at the head of chilled water, within hours one should interpose between these spiny shells and split the edge to extrude the water, or that unlocks with an instrument without a name "alundat", whose shape will come among other shapes in the tool kit.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	It appears to be the deed of great courage by nature: and he has earned that respect as well, or whoever approaches him so boldly, just as we have mentioned; and beyond his bones lies strength with grip.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	The seeds fall and are spread by the wind among the moisture that is present in his soil, where they start to germinate.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	It's not complicated, nor does it obey the rules, he often changes his mind as soon as it is within his power to do so.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the discharge from the anus is pussy or watery, puncture that area within a few hours to release the moisture inside.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	May's feet are on their sides, her arms stretched out over her chest and head towards the ground. Her face is turned upwards as if looking at something above her.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Mays, if you are caught with stolen goods in your possession, you shall be required to pay back the value of that item which you will have covered over your clothes, and then cut open both your belly and your thighs so that blood may run out where it is contained within them.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the baby is lying on its back with legs extended straight and arms by its side (the typical "sunny-side up" position), gently insert your fingers into the mother'amoonta entrometa la ma senestra; but if the mother's hips are too wide, instead, carefully guide the baby through the birth canal using one hand on either side of the head and pushing the baby out. Always support the baby's head as you do so.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	The mother's mouth is covered by an abscess causing harm to the throat; therefore, it should not be touched for a while. Meanwhile, efforts should be made to administer moisturizing and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	E prescribes compresses; and follow the patient in waters that soothe and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the wound is on the side of your body, try to lie down if possible and apply direct pressure with a clean cloth or bandage until help arrivein; also follow the first aid measures previously mentioned for visible bleeding.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If drinking seawater is not an option, it can lead to serious health issues and should be avoided.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	I ask that you do not leave any cause for the second incident to occur.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Once you have completed the entire operation, it is imperative that we implement all of the measures previously discussed regarding infection prevention when handling the abscesses which may result from the mother's condition. This involves maintaining strict aseptic techniques during any surgical intervention or drainage procedures and providing appropriate antibiotic therapy to prevent bacterial proliferation.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If you injure your hand and experience a blood flow disruption, apply direct pressure to the wound in still waters and seek medical treatment immediately afterwards.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	In the original Occitan text from the Cançoneret de Ripoll, which is part of medieval troubadour poetry, we have this stanza describing a scene where a woman gives birth to twins, one alive and one dead:
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	Unfortunately, the spleen gets infected over time with an abscess and begins to swell inside the omentum, eventually starting to shrink.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	Eu feu for appointed to care of you, and treated you for long periods, but the illness was not cured.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	I'm puzzled by the strong attraction to some things and repulsion towards others, as well as choosing one object over another on certain days, though there is no bone in the stompit.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	So it seems to me that they were the bones of a deceased creature.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	The plague had descended upon the land, and people extracted bones from it, the woman who existed in their fields appeared to them in such a manner for a long time, trembling with only one arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	It is not strange at all, but rather in water that science and assistance reside, which the physician through his efforts promotes for your health care management.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Among the necessary instruments for extracting oil, several are commonly used in the industry. These include:
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Translation to Catalan: Format d'aprovació que implica l'admissió o l'incorporació als bressol.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of Strangefellow in which we compare the freemen, where two virtues are at opposite ends of two roads.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	This slender staff of virtue that is more subtle than restrictive should be made of ebony or of wooden boars' teeth.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	E is the length of each beam which is equal to two cubits plus its thickness and the breadth of such beams whose lengths are one span and half a palm; and at their meeting point, the length shall be the greater of one palm and a little more, and the width will be two cubits or a little less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	In this sentence, there are two adjectives that appear to be in between the words of the mother's mouth so it can open at those times when you turn these twoscribed powers.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	A more subtle and less straightforward version of the above might be: "Imagine a gentle dance, where shadows flirt with light, creating an enchanting spectacle that whispers its secrets only to those who dare to look closely."
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	The blades of the forceps are made from steel or stain cufflinks, depending on their appearance.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, in the extremity of its two additional appendages, their length is one foot and the width of each is two inches.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	Cum tu vult, amaqueles, cubi l'adolescenta; horas te feci la dona super liet le pis pendents, avant que esson entre les coses suys.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Please, adjust your medical instruments accordingly according to the desired depth as prescribed by the mother during labor.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the hallucination that they experienced in the past was...
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Formularea unui motiv prim al căci este fost motivat pentru a-și aborda acest lucru.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Title: A Grand Cap Among Friends
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	E is assembled as a pair of pliers in which two jaws are attached at the extremities; and some variations have long arms similar to these pliers, so that they can grip just like teeth following this design, similarly with interlocking parts where one part inserts and encloses.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Spanish: Poco a poco, con paciencia y dedicación, se puede lograr el éxito. (Little by little, with patience and dedicnation, success can be achieved.)
Forma de unci havent una spina:	An unusual form with a spine is called an "acanthus" (spiny leaf) in botanical terms. However, if you're referring to the architectural element of a building or structure that resembles this shape, it may be referred to as "gable-ended". In English literature and poetry, a word with such visual uniqueness is often called an "ostrich egg" due to its irregularity and distinctiveness.
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of a cube having six faces.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps in which the crown of the baby's head is caught and guided through the birth canal. In English, this can be referred to as "pelvic grip forceps." These instruments are used during childbirth when a vaginal delivery becomes difficult or impossible due to various reasons such as fetal distress or maternal exhaustion. The pelvic grip forceps have curved blades that cradle the baby's head, allowing for controlled and safe extraction while minimizing potential trauma.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A form of spatium having two extremities, where the top is divided off.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Two types of Latvian spatulas are "skrabkrake" and "līks". Skrabkrave is a traditional wooden spatula used for flipping pancakes or turning food in a pan. Līks, on the other hand, refers to metal or silicone-coated spatulas commonly found in modern kitchens.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	Those instruments are exercised in such ways that when their species are multiplied and prepared by the craftspeople, they become more varied and numerous to meet the demand of their products.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	Certaine! Here is the translated sentence in English:
De extraccio de la segondina.	The extraction of the secondary element.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	The second childbirth is to be withheld unless the woman commands it; otherwise she should blow her nose and strain herself over the mouth of him who is born and over his nostrangs, and if he comes out by so doing, well done.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	Here's the translation of the Occitan text into English:
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	These herbs or some of them may be submerged in water on the waves, and then placed over fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Fit a straw into the mouth of the mug, and place it there until the liquid is drawn towards the curvature of the cup.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	After that sudden gust of wind and the second wave washing ashore with its velocity,
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	In this treatment, Mays does not go to the bathhouse but instead orders the matron to dip his left hand in sesame oil or almond paste, and then insert it into the vagina while he pulls out the second finger; once found, the first digit is gently pulled a little at a time until May's phallus enters the mother's vagina. When they have located the second finger again, they remove that as well, proceeding gradually and carefully so as not to cause injury or pain to the mother.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Cove that it should be replaced by the right and left costs to facilitate.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	Adjusting the amount of attractiveness ensures that it conforms and deviates from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother's mouth is stuffed up, we have reiterated the cure for sore throat and medication with herbal remedy.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If May's is not removed from all causes mentioned earlier, she should keep watch to ensure she does not delay her treatment process but rather continue with the following prescribed medicine and theriac; because what has been applied to her will cause her to recover within fourteen days and be completely cured and restored.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	Mays quan se poyreys is of great concern to the head and stomeback (stomach), and it leads to the illness; therefore, they should be administered smoky substances and suitable drinks for relief.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Old Ways of Smoking Cured Hams and Sub-Fumigated Nuts and Dried Figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Method of instrument by which the woman is suspected to have retained menstrual flow and blood clots: Menstrual Regulation or Manual Vacuum Aspiration (MVA) under medical supervision. This method involves dilating the cervix, using a specially designed curette to remove the accumulated menstruation and clots from the uterine cavity, followed by suctioning them out through a sterile plastic tube. The procedure is usually performed in the first few days after a missed period when the cervical os (opening) is still relatively closed, making it safe and less painful for the woman. It's essential that this procedure be carried out by trained healthcare professionals following proper medical guidelamoines to ensure safety and effectiveness.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	The French phrase "Sia fayta de veyre o de eram" seems to be a dialect or colloqucuation error and does not directly translate into proper French nor conveys any clear meaning in standard French language. However, if we try to interpret it as an attempt at saying something about coming from somewhere, then the corrected translation could possibly be: "Soyez de votre origine ou de vos émeraudes."
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	Stop the subtle extremity near the hull and the wide extremity above the flame, and the smoldering below the burner should also be stopped.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	He has that which is consumed inside the smokehouse and also another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	The care of the child's bottom does not involve perforation.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	As a child, I do not know how to describe the subtle and overwhelming feelings that I have experienced in my life.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	The maid approaches the lady and pierces that specific spot he mentioned earlier; if not, she should pierce a softer area, but ensure it does not touch any bone.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	He pauses over the wool scattered in his view, and he caresses that ram with anointing oil found within.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	May is afraid that she might become exhausted; therefore, she takes breaks by using a tube for several days, and stays at the time when her child will recover.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	E ja accideys oppilacios dum il estas kontraŭplaga aŭ apostema; do cefe ke tiu konsolido estas insidita kaj iĝu reeksa, kun helpo per akvo por la kuracado kaj plombo.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	The treatment of the healed fistulas that I left behind.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistula that develops in the lower part of the anus causes a bad smell and discomfort when it occurs either on the surface or within the space of one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	F is a pipe or hose.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	The cemetery is ancient and suffers from white or subtle mold due to high moisture levels, along with some patches of these dampness visible in certain cracks.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Those pills are so effective for that purpose which they were created for, and some people may experience discomfort during elimination or due to windswept weather; however, this is usually harmless and passes quickly as the body eliminates these substances.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	So those fistulas that are formed within the permeating space between the bladnack and within the urethra; and [are] those permeating within the junction of the vagina and within the hymen of the vulva.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	In the condition where you know a penetrating anal fistula exists and a non-penetrant one does not, it means that your described indentation is in the anus, and you try to gently insert either a rubber or metal probe into the fistula when no resistance is felt.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	In that case it is deceitfulness, those moments of subtle temptation with lead or horsehair in your ear that you feel the lure or touch within yourself.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not feel any discomfort or nausea due to foods, as we have mentioned before, be aware that some hours may pass without noticeable effects and sometimes you may experience cravings for certain remedcuions.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladcu or near the tip of the gland, its duration results in the leakage of urine from that and prevents the person from taking any further medical treatment.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Mays if the penetration is within the calf joint or into the bone and causes an acute pain in the circuit, it means that he should seek treatment immediately there; and that in such a case, the wound may be contaminated temporesteps; and that this medication does not help nor consolidate at all.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those cases where the perforating phlebitis does not heal on its own, and the healing of such is dependent on the labor and vigilance of skilled physicians over whom you entrust.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In the place that is neither transparent nor ancient, I hope to find health and iron according to what you will recommend, and everything has been tried already by me.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	The disease known as Jaundice arises from within one's body and elevates the bile ducts inside oneself; things tend to be inclined towards one's belly, and sometimes attempts to enter by way of lead or iron if it is in the tortuous tract. You should know where you are attacking this.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If you're feeling under the weather, now cover your mouth when you talk to avoid spreading germs.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you sit in your own chair and feel something piercing through it without actually seeing anything exposed, another object that you sense between your chair and this flesh-like or carnal entity; after a certain time, you are fully aware that the latter is penetrant. Then do not work with that (whatever it may be), for it is not healthy as we have stated before.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, they said that it is healthy in houses with open windows.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	E is the medicine for which it is hoped to bring relief, as follows one ignites subtilly according to the depth of the fistula; thus as previously mentioned, and you introduce that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the outer wall. Then iterate with two or three fingers inward so that you know they are well inserted by feeling all those flesh parts adjusted like a plume of goose feathers.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	This is an excerpt in Old Occitan (Old Provençal), a Romance language spoken in the Provence region of France during medieval times. Here'amo translates to "I will" or "will take care," and am calguas means "of those enveloped."
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If the worm enters and does not penetrate into your intestine, but goes to one that is right next to it or close by, a fistula forms at this point where the skin breaks down on the surface of the colon. Soon afterward, the colonic segment with the fistnula becomes dry during defecation. You can feel if it has dried out along the worm tract, and as you continue to do so until reaching the place in which its end reaches. At this point, by following the worm track, it is freed from your body.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	The contamination of those festering wounds, which were assembled through the needle and not by any other means, involves that particular cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	Mays, when you experience bleeding between your teeth and gums while brushing or flossing, it may occur up to one hundred times that week due to various factors such as plaque buildup, inflammation of the gum tissue, or a poorly fitted dental instrument causing friction. To address this issue:
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	The winds of those months blowing in the coastal areas and harbor lead to stormy weather which produces rough waves that carry shells wrapped in border or cause shattered ships within a certain location, and during these hours the sea generates hard-shelled creatures that develop and solidify.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	There are certain medications that have a stabilizing and healing effect; how soon is the condition restored, healed, and you should not fear relapse?
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If you have an inguinal hernia and the fistula tract goes into your pelvis and extends to the surface of the skin, it's likely that your testicle has descended into the scrotum as well. In such cases, prompt medical attention is essential.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	If both parties are tempted by greed or lust, and they engage in intimaturity with each other urgently, it is now not an operation of love but according to the path of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause for performing this procedure is in one of three manners: firstly, by cauterizing the affected area as previously mentioned; secondly, to create a fistula within which it's possible to insert instruments that facilitate treatment, ensuring not to injure the surrounding tissue and causing harm due to mishandling of the wound or infection from the patient's own bodily fluids. Additionally, use hot water as advised earlier for its healing properties; thirdly, elongate this opening and cleanse any accumulated pus that forms inside it using a sharp instrument, just as previously instructed, either by attempting to drain or with another tool of acute extremity, and then strive for complete restoration of the affected area after cauterization. If there's an open wound due to insufficient consolidation and rupture in the fistula opening at the buttock region, enlarge it; if possible, introduce more pus to facilitate healing.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	Some fistulas can be closed using this method: When you insert the catheter into the fistula, it should be positioned around the skin surface near the limb and at the margin of the limb. Hours later, when the distal tip is ready to perforate, use a prepared needle according to this technique:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	In that faithful envelopment of your fields, and around those areas; and he tries to sneak in the tubing which leads to the capture of it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	In the margins of his foreskin, after urination, apply an ointment to that area as such that you introduce your thread into the foreskin; then remove the end of the string and tie both ends together, creating a loop. Then insert it back in so that the circumcised skin is pushed forward between two loops where those skins have been incised. Leave this on for one or two days, and as the string becomes more embedded into the skin, tighten that portion of the string which contains the incised tissues.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	A proper care should be taken to ensure that the plaque is thoroughly stabilized and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, let it be for a while until it penetrates in some way, as you prefer your treatment method to do so without inserting anything into the wound unless necessary; and make sure that the area around which is healing remains clean.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatulate thorn with which a fistula is usually closed is such that its curvature is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, thus it does not require further adjustment in most cases.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	The stitches of the abscess are those which run through its core with the intention to drain it.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	There are two main ways to prevent hemorrhoids; one involves maintainamoin similar to carbon fibers, while the other involves methods that resemble butter-like smoothness.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	Of those little and big ones, and which the blood flows from them during certain times of year, there is one; and outside many others, and out of reach at the ends of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that have only little moisture, of which water runs a yellowish or slightly bloody hue, and is according to the nature of the soil.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	In the care of that which is being sent to thee, thou commandest unto evil that it be consumed and that it pour forth within thy container, so that the charms appear before thee.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	And so you should be ashamed and suspend your nails or those which you have there on your thumbs, and I implore that he removes his own from the knots to yours.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	No, the nails should not be removed if they are affected by humidity or softening due to that, at that time take those nails with rough cloths or scissors, and trim them off a bit, then polish these with some fine powders on top of this action; or cauterize according to the preceding instruction in the chapter about cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	A is also responsible for the other healing process within which they are restored.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the wound does not heal properly, it may develop an infection and become painful. It should be washed with water that is free from contaminants when there is bleeding or pus discharge.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	Mays (Mary), if you have hemorrhoids outside the anus, frequent washing is the cause of your irritation; and it's because you take those with your own hand or that you touch them with unclean hands and insert a cotton swab into them. Therefore, cleanse them frequently with water as previously instructed to ensure they heal properly.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	He who wishes to heal wounds, the one who administers sutures by this method: take a needle wrapped in thread and insert it through the scabs on either side, then make that penetrate with the needle into the flesh of the other part; wrap the two protruding ends of the thread around the skin above the needle, and pull them lengthwise; straighten out the wound tightly, and remove the needle while keeping the thread in place.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	The fish of all kinds shall be considered clean; however, you may not consume the blood of any animal. Instead, let it run off during preparation to avoid excessive consumption (Leviticus 11:9).
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	The shepherd placed the burning torch upon his shoulder, and he commanded the mallet to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Within this box lies the remedy for your afflictions; and whatever illness you have, it is cured by those potions or any other cure contained within which makes you healthy again.
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment of Fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Accidents that result from a skull fracture or a natural cause.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	In cases of severe inflammamoent and pain in the joints, avoid taking medication that contains anti-inflammatory drugs such as aspirin or ointments/gels within those areas; it can hinder healing processes. Instead, apply a cold compress to reduce swelling and alleviate discomfort.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The Lords of that house shall receive those ratios as eagerly as the first time when their sin is exposed and they are scourged, but always in relation to those who have been healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The essence of Almazemir is healing.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	As you know, almonds are key and they come in various colors resembling the hue of claviel leaves; they are produced throughout the entire body but mainly found near old scars or dents. These can be a source of discomfort if not dealt with properly.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then lest it be sown into the earth which is around the nail, and held fast by the spades or hoes, and uprooted from its root; and pull out carefully that one.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If the first is removed, it should be cauterized in its place as indicated in the same chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Mayer's wart is a small rough papule that protrudes from the skin surface and has tiny veins visible in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The correct sentence is: "Curação de Lu é que você estenda e inscreva aquele que teve, dentro do coração."
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you burn it, apply water afterwards as instructed; you have either heat or an acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	The following are the erased both in reverse and not in reverse letters that I have written on this device:
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Mays's ant hill is a small and slightly feathered or furrowed large structure on the surface of the ground, where when you touch it sharply that resembles an ant mound bite, and it is surrounded by grass.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The method of drawing lu involves using a feather quill or turkey's quill, which should be strong and flexible. Place the quill over the ant mound through which you want to draw lu. Then, by rotating your arm around the quall, insert it into the circle of the ant mound where you wish to extract the lu. Finally, place the quill on the edge of the carn (skin), and remove the ants from their nest.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	S'il voldràs, fac aigua amb una cana d'aram o d'ferro seguint aquesta forma:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The partida desus of the earring slipped away subtly, being deaf (as it is not pierced), wrapped in itself as light reflects off its polished surface and rotates around that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	When the ant is brought to the cautery, it follows immediately after the atreys' cautioning in the Capitol of Cauteria.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The instruments that you manage to provide relief.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some vegetables are made of Argent's or Lato's cheese or fried or melted; and some vegetables are made from those instruments small and large according to those which are administered, so that the one who is administered in the cure of the little children is small, and of those whose heads are balding or curly, those crustaceans are small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of "cristal" in the singular and plural would be as follows, with their respective translations into English:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the needle protrudes beyond where the bag is attached, and its length varies as follows: the wider the bag, the longer the needle tip.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The tip of the last mentioned body part, which is inserted into the anus, is deaf (it's not covered with fur), like a lion, somewhat subtly; and in one of its sides there are two rings, and on the other side, one ring, and it has the breadth of the ring according to the thickness and size of the rays, slightly larger.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	E is the bag in which are placed the bladder remedies of beast or sheep wool; and its quantity should be a pound.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	C is drilled for the described purpose and then rotated; the space between the holes should be as large as indicated above.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	In the event of an emergency beyond your field of expertise or if you are unfamiliar with these remedees, refer them to a trustworthy healer and entrust him/her with this document; when it is placed in his/her hands, squeeze tightly around the head of the crest between two distinct lines along the border, and commit yourself fully to that specific part: The quality of this commitment is such that you apply the medicine from the pouch, which should be warmed according to the patient's tolerance level for pain; make sure it's neither too cold nor too hot.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	The person lies supine with their feet up, and elevates their arms while placing his/her head on something that may already contain some men or a lamb; then he/she anoints the external part of the incision with oil or albumen from egg whites or fenugreek mucilage, etc. The minister takes the bag and squeezes it twice forcefully to ensure complete evacuation into the entire cister, after which the cister is removed along with the malady, now lifted by its chambers onto the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine causes excessive salivation, take as much paper as you can (to spit on); and if it makes you sleep all night, you will wake up later feeling better.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you suffer from stomach pains and severe vomiting due to food poisoning, try this remedy within an hour of onset: Mays - mix a teaspoon of baking soda with water and drink it slowly; repeat every half-hour as needed. Remember, seek medical attention if symptoms persist or worsen.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If you have pimples or ingrown hairs, they are usually small and painless bumps caused by clogged pores and dead skin cells. The size of the bumps can vary depending on factors such as your age, hormone levels, diet, skincare routine, and genetics.
De curacio de las plaguas.	The Cure of the Plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	In the division of treatment for the water-related illness that was required to be free of charge, I hereby state the treatment with these herbs and medicine according to the prescription.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	I believe you're referring to the idea that plate tectoneboth in terms of when they are formed and according to their locationare quite diverse.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	These wounds are caused by such severe impacts as a stone falling or incision with a knife or spade, blow from a stick, a hammer strike, a sword cut, or similar to those caused by the above-mentioned causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	The blisters I have on my limbs are just like the blister that appears over the head, neck, abdomen, groin or similar parts of those members.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	In this treatise, I recommend the treatment of several diseases by which reflection and reasoning on those other diseases will be guided.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	He begins with the simple cases of plagues, as a foreshadowing of the complex examples that will arise during the discussion of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	When the head is struck with a simple blow and it's not a fracture, he considers whether it's from stone or something else, and if the skull has cracked at all, it'angs severe and there may be an infection setting in; thus, you should think about cauterizing the wound immediately. If possible without any hindrances, extract a small amount of blood according to its virtue after such a blow, especially if the bleeding is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	S be the surgical removal of an ingrown toenail causing inflammation in a patient'cuh-part'; and observe for signs of infection, swelling, and heavy meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	May's fasting prohibits any cause, the hours shall be shortened for meals and it must not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	"In case of contact with the oil spill, seek immediate medical attention if you experience skin irritation or any other symptoms."
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	I'm pretty sure it's an abscess; just wait until the dust settles over this storm, if it's very recent and your blood hasn't changed after all that pollution I recommended you to avoid.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	The air has indeed changed since then, moments of pause occur so that they can heal themselves.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	The plague is great or it's just a matter of space and appearance; if the lips are not twisted by fools, then I shall adjust them according to how you instruct on the stitching technique.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Mays if the plague has been discovered on him and not retained by him only as a small suspicion, then now he inserts it into that place with medicines to restore his flesh in accordance with tradition, and commands the illness to be fed from foods where there is greenness: pills and powders of appearance similar to them, among which it shall be decomposed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If the leg becomes rotten and does not stick to the bone, then you may cut through it completely and remove it, as close to the bone as possible.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	In these wounds, whether it is an artery or vein from which blood flow may occur and has not been separated by medicines, inquire about the artery, and if you find that unperforated one, then incise on that swelling or lump; and if necessary causes you to deem so, before the blood has stopped, cauterize within.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these wounds are simple and small, the healing process is often rapid due to this; so you apply this powder on those wounds, as once it becomes solidified thereafter, the air will change them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	This is the recipe for a dragon'amoor oil mixture: One part of unleashed olive oil, two parts of dragon resin (also known as Boswellia), and three parts of non-extinguished pitch; all thoroughly crushed and ground. Add enough water to fill it completely, then compress the mixture tightly within a mold covered with that material on top, and let it coagulate like the dragon's blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	In case of severe allergies or asthma attacks, follow these steps carefully and don't hesitate to seek immediate medical attention if the situation does not improve, as this may be an emergency that requires professional care.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	"Either fish or water alone can quench thirst when you are not here at the moment and there's no sting of regret."
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	The current operation in these major floods requires that the dams be placed on them and that they are narrowed; thus their banks should have their sanctions recently removed as this area has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air gets altered, mainly during summer time, it's not adviseby me to consider this condition as an opportunity for the dust, but rather you should take rest on those elevated beds we have mentioned or lie down on those flour pillows with water and honey infused which provide softness; moreover cure those with the other remedy that is used when healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	May's decides to get a small piece of the broken seashell. Later that day, she gave it to you.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	Once upon a time, there was a healer who specialized in treating broken skulls using herbs and natural remedcuents. He traveled far and wide to help those in need with his knowledge of plants that could soothe pain and mend bones. His reputation for miraculous recoveries spread throughout the land, attracting people from all walks of life seeking his expertise. The healer's wisdom grew as he continued on his journey, never forgetting the true power held within nature itself.
De las plaguas del col.	From the waters of the Nile.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	The flu affects people differently; although there's often no significant difference in treatment methods, the severity of symptoms can vary from case to case.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	The incision or artery of the neck is made; if it's nerve, avoid causing pain with lu (a fluid), as one would know how to use vinegar and such like remedies that cause strong stinging sensations but not harmful ones unlike other treatments.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	The nerve substance does not pause for any reason in its flow, as the nature of nerves is continuous and their ongoing activity belongs to the brain, which governs all other body parts.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	If you have water that is contaminated with medicines, as well as being washed down with warm water, a few drops of either rose-scented or non-rose scented oil can be added while it is being washed down with the warm water and other mineral stones according to this method, and in an emulsion.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is big, she administers stitches with skill and expertise, or narrows its lips so that it can be healed within which is healthy.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	The fog at sea is deeper or shallower depending on the lower water pressure; therefore, during low tide it pierces that area more deeply.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	When an artery is cut in the leg and blood flow occurs, it's necessary to stop or control this bleeding as soon as possible by tying off (ligating) that vessel or using a cauterizing technique if needed.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	Mays if you cut the glanders of the goat entirely, and save the veins of the neck, then adjust the lips of the cords with a suture over the skin of the glanders and do not touch that; turn it around and reduce it to its natural shape, making sure to tighten it adequately. Let it rest for several days and treat it with substances that promote healing and stimulate blood circulation until fully recovered.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague spreads in your land or within your house, you shall quarantine it for as long as needed and remove any fragments of bones from those who died; if not possible to do so immediately, keep them inside until the plague subsides and let their remains be buried.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	The rain is a recent phenomenon that has covered the dusty area you recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	If someone gets injured by shark in the sea, they should immediately apply pressure to stop bleeding and seek medical help. Once at the hospital, doctors will assess and treat the wound accordingly, which might include surgery if there's a risk of bacterial contamination or damage to vital structures like nerves or blood vessels.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From the bites of an apple or of a similar thing, between the shoulders and made with a spatula, cutlet, sword, or similar item.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If the blow is of thunder or hailstones, and depending on its depth, pay attention to whether it comes with rain and windiness; at that time know that the storm can be deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	In the first hour of rest from labor, pause not in deep waters nor recent rainfall wherein your sins may be hidden and retained in depth; instead, dwell in an enticing place that brings healing to malady and washes away sin, shedding those two heavy garments.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the ointment is not at your disposer, during the hours of rest in the orifice of heavy rain shut off that which flows from the humidity; and make sure the illness sleeps on the water so that it runs where it has been adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	The healing of wounds from the plague occurs within three days or more and does not result in complications such as spasms, muscle cramps, or strictures. However, it is adviseby to monitor for other signs of improvement; once you notice these signs, treat those with painkillers while waiting for full recovery.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If May is exempted from paying the fee and has always been free to do so, I advise you that it's time he fulfills his obligation; therefore, let him pay at your convenience.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	Whether the wound is a deep cut or a shallow scratch and whether it's simple on the surface of the stone or brick, if it bleeds heavily, stitches are needed; if it'angs lightly, then apply powder.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	May's son had buried the treasure in the ocean and now he felt lost without it. He tried to pull up the waves and extract those pieces if they were separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If the hours are not separate, the high tide will come before the storm erodes the shore and washes away any extracted materials.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	E of the other contagious diseases affecting the members, the lymphatic discharge plays a curative role, as we have mentioned with regard to water therapy.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From the pains of the stomach.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the stomach can be severe, mild or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	There are two large veins or nerves involved in this intramuscular injection, which makes the puncture of them to be more intense and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disturbance is made difficult by other means too, and thus the reduction of theirs becomes harder, unless you get in touch with their interference at their place soon enough; because it grows thick and dense, which makes its entrance difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Thus, the best option for migration would be to reduce the budget in both cases as it's not very difficult for these two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	The following are the four main types of abdominal surgical wound sutures and why they are commonly used for other types of skin injuries as well:
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	The two other seams connect to the other ridges, but only in their own manner within the midventral furrow.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	AUDIENCE, I REPETE AFFIRMATION AND STATEMENT FOR ALL TO HEAR.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	When the storm is small and there's some cause of disturbance in the skin due to that, it becomes difficult to reduce such a situation at times; either because of the disruption's small size as we have mentioned before or when the swelling is inflamed by cold air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	Then take the quince fruit as well and immerse it in clear water by itself or soak it quickly in hot water, along with ginger, cloves, and cinnamon, and spices of your choice until the husk is fully dissolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some vegetables contain water with healing properties, and they are better than plain water for relieving inflammamoent.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Then let's solve this issue together, as soon as you hydrate your body with water that is warm and salty, because for the fluid to be absorbed effectively it needs to be slightly warmer than its surroundings due to thermal conductivity.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	May's has been exempted from this recovery process, hours split the disruption with a small tool that is included in it - embedded pliers.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first curative treatment is best when it's owned that it doesn't require drying and isn't subjected to necessary dehydration or deprivation.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	The instrument has the form of a lyre.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One batch of acute angles and the other non-acute; the extremity is subtle but not a matter of hair's breadth, rather slightly obtuse.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	Therefore the plant growth is accelerated and yields are out of the ordinary; times covet that their reduction follows the form of their nature in its own proper place, if possible on soil, the best being so.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	Mays quan la disrupcio è ampla, è in la partita pu bassa dal ventre, la hores covè che tü fas jàser l'malaute sul sieu dos, e pausa les sies cambas plus autras ch'il sieu cap; e sche sia en la partida pus desus dal ventre, las horas te pausa il cap de lu e plirs auters che las partidas de Jos.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	If the injury occurs in one of the two parts of the abdamen, then halt your judgment and consideration for some time so that the affected portion is more prominent than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	I come to request that you manage both the great waves and the minor ones.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In the small plaques, pause and water that is your preparation, and appropriate it so that the minister may be among your most loyal ones, who will have the entirety of his mouth open, and appropriately expose from there to here due to any cause whatsoe'er.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suturing method: one that chooses the needle size according to the width of the wound; and make sure not to put the needle too close to the edge of the disruption in the ring, but strengthen it with a single stitch (or more) without piercing both ends of the tendon on either side where you have detached the tendons from the edges. Do this so that one is able to insert the suture through those two points; and by now, you've done four consecutive passes.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	A pair of strong ropes should be attached along the edge of the sail, and some thick strips from old clothes can also be added, as well as additional ropes and a cloth patch for reinforcement; then remove the coarseness of the said material and insert another needle therein. Then tie that part just like the first neede; continue doing so if necessary while using multiple needles until you have completely repaired the tear in the sail.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The sharp needles migrate between roughness and subtlety, for the subtle ones slightly pierce the skin; while the thick ones are of difficult entry into the vein, and therefore they should be balanced in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	The needle should be placed in the center of a cone-shaped area appropriate for it, so that the skin is not excessively injured and the wound heals properly.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	There are certain exceptions to the rule that a seam is not allowed to be of an extended stitching along a hem, as it may prevent proper folding or consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	The infection spreads along the length of the needles so that you do not let it cause any harm to your sleep, and rest on the pulley joints expanded throughout, which hold the tips of the needles; and place those inside that you know the plague is consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	Here are these types of suture needles that are suitable for small wounds, up to those requiring a single or double needle in the suturing process.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second incision is to be made as follows: using a needle that is both sharp and subtly thick, make an incision along the entire length of both shank bones in one session.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	The needle will have penetrated these four edges at the following points, reducing the needle from that starting section of which you begin, so that the barbed suture pulls upward in the upper section adjacent to the wound, so that the stitch is a continuous line of stitches.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	There is a pause between each of the joints in most of this furniture piece.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	Here is the sewing kit for all the men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	A tal suture was caused by a bee sting in the man's abdomen, which had become swol groin area, and it was the disruption of the greater part of a palm, and it was exited from the sac around two parts of the membrane of the thigh bone, and there was disruption on the thigh member; therefore I reduced that part in which the suture had been present for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The flood had been established in the area for around fifteen days or so and was receding; then it stopped flowebling for about an hour, and returned to its normal state.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	The other doctors claimed that he would not recover; however, by miracle, I focused on the fact that it was located in a place where no ointment or medicine had been applied before, but only over the swelling for two days and frequent water intake helped him to get better.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	According to the teachings of Paul, there are two kinds of surgical thread or suture materials: natural and synthetic.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	You begin by starting the stitching of the incision, and inserting the needle through the first hole to the second hole.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	So, the needle is inserted into the ear canal and then follows its length in all directions of the whole body, while leaving the tip of the catheter at the point where you have previously introduced the needle; let the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the starting point to the ending point on the opposite side of the head.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	Dear friend, take the following compass and this sheet of paper to guide you through these steps for determving your longitude in the field using an azimuthal chart. Firstly, place the compass flat on the ground ensuring it's level, then lay out the chart so that its center aligns with the actual point where you are located.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	The object you wish to pierce is inserted into the hole of that instrument, which allows it to enter the code at the end of its sight range, located in the entry point where everything within that scope must pass through.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	The saddle is attached on this side by the strap and that end reaches to that edge, while the needle of the buckle penetrates, and it pulls the other end towards this edge at this extreme point of the mirror; then it pulls from the stard with the part of the bucknail.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	In the first example, you collect one waterfall and another waterfall, then collect an additional waterfall within the range that is double according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this sewing pattern is that you stitch the skin with a suture similar to the one used on animals; so, in essence, you place it at the end portion of the limb, and then bring the other side across where it's fully completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second type of surgical suturing proper that I mentioned earlier, which is described in detail and also involves using it on the surface area where you apply medicine by making cuts, so that all parts are appropriately matched according to nature; they then attach the tip of one part to the tip of another, as I have explained before.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Keep the needle on the edge of the sight near to your target point, and make it pierce into the target from behind in that hole, then observe two points on the circle; now revolve the neednail so that it penetrates from behind through those two points.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	"The rotating wheel consists of those segments and is designed to engage some from the leading edge into the trailing edge within two extreme points on the mirror, others that are opposite."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This particular type of suture is better than the commonly used ligature, and it'cued by a technique that recalls memory.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the language of Galicia.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	The days of reckoning are coming, the stitches in the wound have been rearranged with two needles; so beware as you meddle in these matters, and begin your intrusion with a needle that corresponds to what is yours, causing it to penetrate into the other thread according to the seams of those whose hearts are intertwined.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	The inflammation that occurs in the abdomamo's stomach area makes the healing of its wound more difficult than those in other abdominal regions.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	May's medicinal syrup of poppy is considered a standard for other opiates.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The cause of this is that you obtain the fresh plague at your sanctuader before altering the air, and thus reduce its swelling and redness while gently applying it to the inflamed area with a cotton ball soaked in warm water.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"If the air has not changed the disease, there will be moments of rest on that alley entrance which is under your presence at this time, where they make hard rock and contain fields; and it becomes consolidated and observed; and similar to how other diseases within heal."
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the medicines available, wait for some time until your symptoms improve; then begin taking bracisol twice a day as directed and continue this routine until you are healed without experiene any other complications when dealing with simple cases of rashes.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague may spread to other members of your primary group, it is advisebroadening your circle to include people from different backgrounds and areas who are not connected to those affected. This could help reduce feelings of isolation or distress. Remember, seeking social support is a crucial step in maintaining mental well-being during difficult times.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If someone experiences pain or putrefaction in their veins due to multiple occasions of this happening so recently, that person might become a cynic black as tar, especially if the swelling reaches the vessel and creates an intense feeling within the cavity'ness.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	The plant that is in the thick soil tends to be more vigorous than the one that is in the fine soil.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	D is of difficult healing the swelling that is called "Gegunu"; it does not receive healing from plagues which enter into all parts; and this is due to the great multitude of vessels present in it, as well as its magnitude within those areas, and for the subtlety of its structure, and because it lies close to nerve nature.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	The quality of the raw material from the sea is the fabric, and you obtain it freshly; then remove any impurcuos according to your conscience and reduce the shreds accordingly.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	Mays si è passato a leggere gli spazi e io ho fatto un verso o nero; in quell'istante che ti stringi quel amico fedele su luogo che sei denigrato da lui, per cui venga flussi di sangue, perché nella tela ci sono venature e arterie.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	A proper inspection of the water which is another level, and pause two extremities of the hanging part of the partition left over from the wreckage so that upon it your foundation for the tent of the bridge can be built and extension of the pier of the wave.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	In the town of Budel, there was once a dreadful event that caused great suffering among its inhabitants. The remembrance of this calamity still lingers in the hearts and minds of those who survived it. Let me recount the tale of how tragedy befell our beloved Budel:
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	In a case of minor abdomnent disruption in the belly and it is small, restoration at home may be possible, otherwise you will need to consult with your doctor regarding the condition that was previously present in his/her stomach due to percussion from a stone and there was an inflammation on the right side of the stomach; the inflammation was old and had formed a fistula, along with excessive gaseousness.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	In the healing of his soul that was not restored in health but ceased to be subtle within it, so much so that a focus on its wholeness is solidified.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	Ye must keep in mind that the place is already consolidated; avoid any stress or strain on your abdominal area due to an accident there. Do not engage in strenuous activities involving lifting heavy objects and vigorous exercise, nor should you exert yourself by exercising between baths.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	The person narrates an old custom used for people who suffer from stuttering or stammering problems, which involves a certain technique to be applied at home: it entails using large frogs; approaching the two lips of the affected area and placing one frog's mouth over those lips. When they close their own mouth, the frog'ps head is detached from its body because it sticks and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	In the first hour after an ant infestation occurs, and as long as there's enough food available, it won't create more ants but rather focus on dealing with the existing population.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And do away with those excesses of wealth in the city and diminish them, so that all may have their just share within its boundaries; and let there be no cause for any harm or ill will.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It may be possible that the flesh of this vessel is similar to the subtle one which is made from animal skin attached to it, as they seem like needles; and it is because you take the tip of these filaments of flesh, have them de-flesh, and attach the end of it with a fine thread, wrapped around that thread in the vessel, and then insert this into small needles, while encasing it within the skin.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This pattern of stitching is nothing but a second route of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	The sky is often vast and wide, especially in the subtle layers, for it's not thick but rather delicate, and not a healthy shield against everything from above.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	The treatment of hemorrhoids and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Entirely engulfed by plague and inflammation when it contracts; if the ulcer does not heal and persists with swelling for a long time in any part of the body, universally known as fistula, we refer to it as that abscess.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	A fistula secondarily formed is a hardened, white coating which causes no pain and has the consistency as much of toothache as that of an earache; hence it should not be called "earwax", that is, grief.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	H è um Alcuus Homes (um edifício), onde a umidade está presente, que proporciona conforto; mas quando o nível de umidade cai significativamoente em algumas horas, pode causar desconforto.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some of this moisture is light, and there's not much of it, but it's thick and fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	In the division of diseases and ailments, the following are all sorts of ulcers that do not heal or become raw flesh, but rather have one of nine possible causes: either by lack of blood supply to the area; or due to its malicious nature; or because there is hard tissue preventing natural healing; or if it's caused by an unhealthy condition; or if the matter that collects within itself is of poor quality; or if the medication used for treatment is inappropriate; or if corruption and pestilence are present in the area, similar to Saragossa where digestion of illnesses is difficult and natural healing from an ulcer takes a long time. Or perhaps it could be because there's bone involvement.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Já mostrarei todas essas causas, os sinais dessas doenças e suas curas com as remédios na classificação (divisão).
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	The translation of the text "E coveassi que yeu faça a tu sabe la curació da fistula cual es feita per via d'operació amb el" from Catalan to English is:
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	In cases of fistulae affecting all the limbs, four of which reach major veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the liver, or to the peritoneum, or to the bladebladder, or to any of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae in the spine, or to any of the complex joint compositions similar to those of the hip and thigh. And among these are those that occur close to a major limb.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	In this text from Old Occitan (also known as Langue d'Oc), there are several terms related to medicine and disease management during the Middle Aveven era in Southern France. Here is a translation of these medical-related words/phrases with explanations:
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If there are any fistulas whose depth does not reach the locations mentioned above and you have faith in their healing power, as well as hope for relief from your illnesses, and seek to come into contact with them, then try touching or rubbing them; if the fistula aligns correctly with your body, it may bring about a cure.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	The secret of the serpentine fistula lies in its subtle coils; from there, it aims to pull out the lead and achieve the lightness of its body through such twistedness.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	The given text appears to be gibberish or corrupted and does not seem coherent in any language. It is impossible for me to provide a translation into English because the original content lacks clarity and context. Please provide clear and specific information that you would like to have translated, so I can assist you further.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	A Crestieres bathhouse removes the waste from other drains, as the moisture for which it is responsible flows through them and out of their openings.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	In a manner most exquisite and following the method that you may know if here we have the nerves, it is the knowledge of distant or nearby fistulas, or it's a fistula with multiple openings and lies over all thereof in the sum of your strength, your worrying, which worries you of the illness, and from whom the pain must be compressed upon thee most greatly at its place. And appearances of meanings and of accidental causes to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	I have thought about all those reasons you mentioned and the ways to proceed according to confidence: And it is that I consider them whether they are apparent fistulas close or in a location near the joint, long distant from the union, or from nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places which I tell you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	The dried fistula, according to what is mentioned in Luke's narrative, and the water that is found in this filtration, as well as corrupted flesh, and blood born from the wound, or of tar and appearance; healing those within which are injured.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	The incision should be made as far back and deep as possible to reach the root of the abscess; then completely remove it if feasible, along with all its corrupted tissues. Next, administer medicines wrapped in cloths at intervals into the depths of the fistula which you have understood by means of a probe.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	An aqueous solution of some substances inhibits the rapid corrosion that occurs throughout all water involved in the creation of the protective coating for the corrosion of the tube.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	A prop restores that which generates healthy flesh within so it may heal.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If the wound is not cleaned properly, you should apply a sterile dressing as soon as possible after re-evaluating it.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	The cause of the fistula is from a vein and you should obtain approval, at this time you should ask what type it is and if there has been any recurrence, if you do not forbid any vascletein or nerve causes as previously mentioned.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	Mays si el os es en tu descobert e és en l'alcúnia corrupció i negror, ara totes tus rats aquells on la corrupció està hostada; i amb cura a aquel am quau que es encarnat en aquests locs on és santa.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not healthy and pure, then you will never achieve the total eradication of corruption; therefore, upon this realization, strive secondly and meticulously to purify your reason and cleanse yourself through thoughtful action, thereby restoring that which was once strong.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	If it is cured, then he is; if not, know that this corruption lies in the depths far within his heart, which has yet to reach its destination, so do not be dismayed by it.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the rotten bone is small or can be reached, now throw it with gentle tweezamoors of forceps as necessary for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If my words grieve you or cause any discomfort, please know that it was not my intention; I only aim to extract all the thoughts and leave none behind without a reason concerning your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	May you be comforted by none of the causes for humidity, and in your ignorance have no fear or mistake; then seek those who grieve here with these bodies if they are present, and liberate their bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	If you have not yet prepared your starfish bones for the hour of death, wait on the shore where a great wave will break upon it, and place that there within the environment of those fleshly and lamenting bangs; guard the wave so that it is not solidified, and keep the branch secure which you had severed during your work.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you fear it, pause over this submerged body above three feet deep or a submersed body in ancient Egyptian wrappings, or with green ointments, for when they shall burn those garments and the bones will separate by decomposition, from that attraction are born.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Mays is like the ears of an elephant or a goat or similar animals, and whatever happens to it causes solely damage to its face; often that resentment becomes so deep-rooted that it turns into extreme bitternamoindness and corruption, which remains there until it is healed with love.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Mays si aqui qu'a lu es corrumput és gran partida, i la corrupció ja ha aconseguit la médula del os, allò ens causa necessària fer-li clau e fer-lo tot inscidir entorn al lloc on s'ha arribat la corrupció, i aquells que siguen enfermos han de ser curats en un centro especialisé. (Catalan)
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	In response to your request, I would recommend the book "The Alchemist" by Paulo Coelho for its inspiring and uplifting qualities that can serve as an example in your work. The story follows a young shepherd named Santiago on his journey to find treasure near the Egyptian pyramids but instead discovers the importance of following one's dreams, listening to one's heart, and recognizing opportunity. This allegorical novel teaches readers about determination, perseverance, and seizing opportunities in life - themes that can be applied to your work as well.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A man of approximately XXX years old, who suffers pain in his thigh, with the malignant disease spreading over the tissue that reaches into the body where the substance has reached the thigh, and it is a large abscess caused by no external factor.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so the treatment time was extended in order to allow for the healing of the wound within which an abscess had formed, and a careful cleaning of materials, with its slow-pacculed application into the wounds orifices through which all exudates and moisture from the skin were drained.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	Therefore the curse of plentiful bread and fish was around for two years, but not here in those regions; rather I am called when summoned.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	The chest of gold and the materials that came from there through those great ports; already all the belongings of that man were tightly packed, and the color of gold was citrine.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	Then he got involved in one of those temptations and ended up succumbing to it, reaching the point of no return.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	I shall embark on this quest and scrutinize the sources to uncover those who may be involved in all facets of the organization.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	The passage you provided is in Catalan language (not Spanish), and it talks about the discovery of human remains, specifically a corrupted skull within an ossuary or bone repository where some fragments had been deposited. One part of this decomposed skeleton was found to be already soil-filled and decomposed with dirt and ruin.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	A few weeks ago, I discovered and prepared an exciting dish that I had never tried before.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	As you request that I was not in the house but rather that temptation which led me astray and into sin, and I have now repented.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	A long-term prevention strategy in medicine is considered consolidated if it has been established and implemented consistently over time, whereas non-consolidated strategies may lack such continuity or sustained effort.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	The discovery of the New World in 1492 by Italian explorer Christopher Columbus was a monumental event that marked the beginning of extensive contact between Europe and the Americas. This momentous occasion opened up new possibilities for trade, colonization, cultural exchange, and unfortunately, it also led to exploitation, conquest, and conflict with indigenous populations.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	I saw an oil that appeared to be contaminated, and so I felt obliged to make the cleaning and restoration of it, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	Thus I discovered another edition and did not cease to delve into it little by little; specifically, I worked on its restoration. It wasn't restored until around a year had passed when I extracted the core of it, and then with the help of medicines, it was consolidated considerably and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	The E is not necessary in the operation of LEU and secularization but for the distribution of power from LEU and scarcity of the tolerance of LEU as well as fear of death, because in all times, LEU suffers due to excessive relaxation (synchronism).
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	So be it healthy in entirety, and nothing is too hard for you; and make your disposition good within yourself and return the virtue to you; and converse in your dispositions and do not cause harm or trouble in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	Mays, when you have cut the bone in a certain location as described earlier on this pathway: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen that at the extremity of said bone, and command someone to extend that with ropes; then pause that ligament of wool so thick from the first one; and tightly bind that over the flesh which lies below the cut bone, and stretch out its extremity such that you draw the flesh towards both sides left, and you uncover the flesh over the spot where you wish to saw, in order for the saw not to tear the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	During the time of fasting or following a tablet diet, when you eat cooked foods is not forbidden and does not cause spoiled meat to become rotten.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	The fissures on the bone surface slowly deepen because they are in the hollow of the bone erosion and do not appear to the senses at first sight, but soon other cracks become visible.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bones are decomposed and not prominent, one part continues while the other is located nearby or within that area, at times you discover the flesh of all parts in its entiretity; hence the foul smell remains, as well as the saw from the initial part where the decomposition occurred, which continues into the adjacent part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	Let E be the grain of salt according to the lore of corruption a small one, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	The translation of the sentence from old Catalan to contemporary English is as follows: "Corruption at a junction causes damage to that specific junction; it cuts through and disrupts its connection with the other side."
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	Corruption is not an occasional occurrence; it's a continuous result of two joint factors: greed and lack of accountability.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	Corruption is either in the mother or father's side; however, it seems that you should investigate how this corruption appears to you and remove it accordingly, taking into account whatever measures are possible for you, and ensuring any solution proposed does not lead to further problems or harm.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	E sapiens which are skilled in this art and the tools for cutting these bones depend on the situation of the bones, as well as the preparation of those, their thickness, subtlety, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity. Therefore, it should be covered that you prepare all types of instruments suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	The above text appears to be in Catalan language and it seems to talk about someone who specializes in the operation of certain instruments, which implies that they have extensive study and deep knowledge on this subject matter. They are also experienced with tools used for diagnosing diseases. However, without additional context or information, I can only provide a rough translation:
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	In this final chapter, I will outline the types of instruments that are forbidden for you to play as well as their simplified versions which could be used instead. This prohibition is intended to prevent any distractions or potential harm caused by these instruments.
Forma de serra:	Serrated form or sierra-like shape in English. This term refers to an object, surface, or edge that resembles the sawtooth pattern of a saw blade or mountain ridge with sharp peaks and troughs. Common examples include serrated knives (with jagged blades for cutting through tough materials) and serrated coastlines characterized by their irregular, zigzagging outline along the shore.
Forma de autra serra:	Title in another language (Spanish): Título en otro idiamo (Español)
Forma de autra serra:	Alternative wording for "form of another mountain":
Forma de autra serra gran:	Another large mountain range is the Rocky Mountains. Spanning from Canada to the United States, they stretch over 3,00ebi miles and include some of North America's highest peaks, such as Mount Elbert in Colorado at an elevation of 14,440 feet (4,401 meters). The Rockies are renowned for their rugged terrain, diverse ecosystems, abundant wildlife, and stunning natural beauty.
Forma de ray:	Shape of an arrow: Arrowhead shape. This geometric figure is often used to represent direction or movement, and it consists of a straight line (the shaft) with a pointed end called the arrowhead, which can be triangular or sometimes diamond-shaped.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this bee follows the shape of a cloverleaf, and its eyes are in the form of convex points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	In Spanish, the sentence would be: "El nervio no se une directamente con el otro, sino que ambos están cerca cuando las articulaciones se hinchan, o sea, la garganta tiene una boca grande."
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Inglés: Major formes del otro idioma (Español): Mayoras formas de la otra lengua.
Forma de razori menor:	Menor forma de raciocinio:
Forma de razori lat:	Latvian: Lietuviški:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The form of the serrated blade is a distinctly crafted piece with an impressive steel edge and a pointed tip, featuring blades that are sharply descending.
Forma de lu:	Translating "Forma de lu" to English, we get "Shape of Light." This phrase might refer to a concept or artistic work that represents light in various shapes and forms. If this is related to an actual piece or idea you're inquiring about, please provide more context for further information.
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	En inglés, diríase "form of a spoon that has curvature". Esta frase describe una forma similar a la de un cuchara que incluye algún tipo de curva o convexidad.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Una forma más sutil de hacer un cumplido en inglés podría ser expresando tu impresión o sentimientos favorables a través de una pregunta reflexiva. Por ejemplo, si quieres halagar la inteligencuia de alguien sin decirlo directamente puedes utilizar una frase como:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Another way to express "extremal boundary curve" in English could be:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Forma de rasori, păcatul, semnat în fața noastră:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Sharp teeth are the ones that pierce through bones.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Scissors of lesser significance or importance. This phrase may be used to refer to a tool, idea, or concept that is considered not as important or useful in comparison to others within the same category or context.
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	The form of an other shears; this appearance resembles a sunray, and the end piece is like a saw, and it appears in various places according to the bones' ratio:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	La forma del rai que correspon al ratio de el que està perforat pels ossos se refereix als paralels i proporcions geomètrics que potm situar-se en un contexte arqueològic, històric o artístic. Per exemple, si es tracta d'un artefact antic o d'una construcció arquitectònica, s'ha de considerar com ara la proporcions entre els elements estructurals com podrien ser les colones o els punts de fusta que sostinguen un armadí.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The tip of the iceberg is triangular and has an acute angle.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	"E is an iron gate of India, and similarly carved to represent all the reasons for enmity and division and conflict."
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	The extreme stretching and the bone lock mechanism.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The swelling of the limbs may occur due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or if you have treated that corruption with medication and the healing does not progress, sometimes the corruption affects a member which cannot be reached by any means, then you should immerse that member into the substance causing the swelling so that the illness may disappear without resulting in death or severe damage to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign that indicates to whom the illness occurs is that the affected member becomes black within a certain time after touching it, or else it gets burnt by the heat of that fire within that member which caused him to be paralyzannoed; and so he experiences great pain because of this.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	If the cause of corruption is a result of certain venomous factors, such as those from Scorpios (Scorpion zodiac sign), or Mercury (planet and alchemical symbol), or Lead (metal with healing properties in alchemy) or Semblance:
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the fracture or compression is at the end of the bone, then remove part of the bone and do not leave space to allow for further progression into the marrow.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If you approach the fire, try to stay close enough to feel its warmth, but not so close that it leads to burning within the flames of anger.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	The old clock on the wall ticks away as time passes by within its wooden case at the junction of hours and minutes.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	Passing the torch of corruption from one generation to another marks the hours until evil's demise, and administering justice in this regard is a testament to our virtue'n valor.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	In the event of a suspicion about the legality of the property, you should dig deeper into it through one of its documents or sources.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If you take in the peak of the hill, all day long your eyes will be delighted by its beauty.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Mayes dives into the ocean, hours before descending to the cave's entrance at its junction with the ocean.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If there is ever any corruption found upon the soul, it shall not be in punishment but in dismissal, and let the evil leave to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of cutting or severing the limb, as you have chosen it in the part that is higher up from where you wish to cut, and strain another ligament on top of this location; then extend the minister'amputation a piece of thread between these two locations so that all the flesh is covered by two threads. And appropriately sever or saw at said location.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	Article II - Obligation of full disclosure by the parties for all transactions made solecu they do not harm the property and that any damage caused is adequately compensated.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Mays decides to stop the blood flow when wounds occur, so he cauterizes them immediately or simply stops his bleeding with some powders that inhibit the blood; then promptly returns to your medical care once it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A member of the family or friend circle can be chosen at convenience for visitation rights, provided they are healthy.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	In the event that an individual experiences a burn on their leg due to an unfortunate accident involving contact with fire and resulting in blackening of the skin, it's essential to take appropriate action for treatment. Here are some general steps you can follow:
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	From that moment of initial corruption, it spread throughout the whole body, affecting every part.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Therefore that man prepared himself so that you would not see his embarrassment when going to the cure; he went with such vehemence of pain and irritation from it that he entered into the joints, and there was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For many years, the following corruption took place in your department.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	Therefore I yield to you and let my oversupply of medicines on your water reflect the worldly actions of yours; and it is not caused by excess, but begins to go into another day that starts with them in the morning.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	The wind blows over the sea of love and I don't want to do so hoping for that overflow, but rather fearing the madness of the dead, because the virtue of illness was too intense.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	The man whom you had enslaved has returned to his land and conveyed to me that the other man prepared all of your bread and set it on fire; he is cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have not edited this narration, but rather assisted in its creation regarding the matter at hand and its significance, for which it has been written, as well as according to which it was composed.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Treatment of diseases in the intestines and quality of colon hydrotherapy with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	A pus abscess develops when bacteria penetrate the tissues around a hair follicle or sebaceamo gland, causing an inflammatory response that leads to localized collection of pus within a confined space; as it enlarges, the surrounding tissue becomes ruptured and perforated, leading to discharge of the infectious material along with associated blood vessels in such manner like if there was an exit route. The collected pus is not allowed to spread further or cause damage to bone or nerves; instead it forms a sinus tract and is referred to as an abscess without naming it as fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the spread is extended before any signs of infection appear on a limb, it is called phlegmon and not gangrene.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment of this wound consists in thoroughly cleaning the entire coded area as such, mainly when it is delicate and made with a dressing that does not adhere to the place due to its decomposition.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the wound heals and that the infection does not persist afterwards, if the wound is now well-bandaged, then treat it with an enema.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	It is thought that sinus issues arise when one's head and times are great; the bone that brings relief has an odor, for hours it detoxifies with Egyptian medicine which consists of olive oil, vineger, cumin, and other spices mixed in equal parts, placed into a vessel over heat until the mixture becomes fragrant.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Take some warm water that is necessary and dissolve the aspirin in it; then irrigate your throat with this mixture and massage the area gently, leaving the medicine there for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	C and apply extra zeal in that regard; let water wash you for so many days until the world is cleansed within yourself, and your modesty restored again.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Some medications are administered as an enema with warm water and when not available, this medicine is taken orally; it contains the ash of witch hazel (Hamamelis virginiana) extract, which you should dissolve in warm water and then apply to your rectum by inserting a syringe. The remedy works within a few hours.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient has no intolerance to the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then at this time one should give them a clistery of that water and honey mixed with three grains (of pepper), and another clistery of the same but without the pepper, as the property of honey cleanses and washes, while the vinegar helps to adhere to the veins, especially when there is an abundance of stiffness and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And you shall drink some water and confess that the sin has been washed away; those hours will be cleansed with the same water that makes your flesh clean once again.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	Title: Properties, Preparation and Usage of Ointments in Medicine
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the anal passage is too narrow to receive an enema nozzle, gradually and gently widen it with a small metal tool, pausing when necessary in lubricated gauze or using an ointment like Egyptian balm.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the orifice is wide, you should extend your lips with stitches and reduce its size using a catheter insertion.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	The orifices from which the blood flows are elevated above the surrounding areas; during dry periods, it is located at a lower place where the blood flows in streams beneath the surface because when the blood accumulates on the slopes of the sinus, tissue is formed there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it's not possible for you to dry the wound on your arm within the environment of the OS, then before performing any procedures, ensure that you prepare the limb by adequately dressing it according to your attire and making sure there is no retained cause in the affected area.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	Two examples of consolidated medicines that would be suitable at the appropriate rate to extend those on your prescription are:
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The material used to cover the anus must be of enough quantity to ensure complete communication throughout the entire region; and then, with precision, insert the hemostats into the right side of the anal orifice just a little wider than the orifice itself; extend over another layer of cloth from the legs in accordance with the thickness of the first layer, and place it nearby so that the blood flow is avoided near this area for one to two days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	The one who is above the threshold of shame, he renews it at all times with firewood placed there in front of his right arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	To know whether a food is classified as high or low in fat content, you can refer to nutritional information provided on product labels, consult reliable online resources such as the USDA National Nutrient Database, or use dietary guidelamo apps that track and analyze your daily intake.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	A doctor will also consider the location of that wound, whether or not there is pain in it, and if there is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	In the event that your medication is extended in this manner and you observe that the material placed over the wound of the sinus adheres or forms an attachment, remove it on the third day, and when removing the plaster, change it for a new one and reapply.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Mays beware of the subtle spread of the flu virus; do not despair at its adherence to you, as healing shall prevail, for it is beneficial in those cases where a strong immune response against viruses is needed and for those individuals who might experience an opposite effect.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinus is not adequately moistened and there are symptoms of poor digestion, you should be aware that such a sinus does not adhere; if its attachment is delayed and its cause is prolonged, adjust it with exsiccation from medicines, and if the medicines themselves are humid in substance and quality, they will dry out just like an ointment when there is excessive moisture due to a surplus of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The potion which you seek to create is made by taking the essence of lavender and dissolving it in rose oil, then applying that mixture over your body like an ancient emollient in its original substance, and use this as a lotion.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	In that action, when the ointment is prepared and ready to use, apply a little of it on your fingers or hands. Then take myrrh, aloes, and oil, mash them together until smooth, and spread this mixture over the honey where you have previously poured it into a container. Pour water over it and stir thoroughly, ensnaring all ingredients well. Apply this ointment to your entire body, focusing especially on areas that are sore or in need of healing.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Some vegetable extracts are administered with long-term and regular use of celestial lilies (and the heavenly lily) and millet flour and centaur's plantain, using those simple remedies or adjustments, adding more to them and sifting it into a fine powder which is then spread over honey; and used like this.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the swelling is prolonged and not healed by this remedy, know that the infection lies in the inner part of the limb, and already it causes pain or discomfort to the bones or hard tissues; then cure with a poultice as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	The cure of the worn-out nails and the addition of a finger'amo, and the incision.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaritium is an abscess that has formed under the nail of the hand or foot and in other cases it can be a cauterizing type of abcess, which leads to deterioration of the nail bed, resulting in discharge with foul odor from within the nail, and sometimes causing total decay of the nail. In severe cases, this condition may lead to extreme pain in the area involved.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	So when you have reached the heat that we mentioned in division don't entrust your care to it, but as soon as you apply it make sure you remove all excess from the glaze and then carefully cauterize the wound with hot water; for caution is advisable in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is not affected and the gland remains healthy, and there are no adhesions in the gland that could impede access to its parts, begin by piercing it with a needle until you reach the subtle channel of the gnathic duct that punctures the flesh. Then, apply gentle pressure and make an incision into the flesh easily, and pause for the duration required so that the medicines combusting within are completely vaporized; afterwards, carefully extract the fluid while ensuring it remains contained in its appropriate container once healthy.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	The corruption has already started in the bone, so you should now insert and extract it from that very same bone, as there is never a time when it cannot be cured if it's still within the bone.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"If greed and corruption persist in the speech, at times you may instill them within one of the nuts according to how strongly it is recalled, and as soon as that occurs."
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If you suffer from an ingrown toenail and experience intense pain, your first step should be to consult with a podiatrist or healthcare provider for proper diagnosis and treatment plan. Here are some general guidelaturas (guidance):
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May's assertion, the quality that is innate in most noble people, is great kindness throughout their entire body, and strength of bone, or greatness within themselves.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	The sound of the bell echoes at the junction point; it is their birth in non-noisy places.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The one born in the shade of a tree does not become evil, and the one born at crossrocks is considered very lucky.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	From those that are not of flesh and blood, the section is insignificant, and it is your duty to exclude them from the group.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	The healing of someone who is born under the sign of conjunction can be difficult; therefore, avoid exposure to cold.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the place where it is natural to do so, collect nuts during your meal and slice into the round raw meat with one of those suitable knives, then cut towards the bone where it's healthy.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Mays consolidates all the accrued interests from time spent away due to birth of a child that wasn't present at home or for consolidation of debts, or by fire, or through similar events; thus it is decreed that such consolidation shall return to its original form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	There is a pause between the layers of laid leaves in oil paint to prevent them from being overly thickened, and separates between those, the gap between those includes a thin layer of lead-based plate that becomes solidified accordingly.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	If the application of resin is not evenly distributed over the surface, the drying process may be inconsistent according to how it's prepared and suits the structure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	In the context of vice, I am venial sins. (Translation for "so" as 'that' and "son" to 'are')
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices so very small, and twisted thick veins filled with superfluous melancholy that flow into the members of the body; their greatest accumulation occurs in the veins of those who travel often or work hard or carry loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Administer some doses of the plague treatment for black fever and strongly administer blood from the patient's basilar vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Mays' method of extracting their precious ore involves two approaches: the first one is that it should be scraped and extracted along with the black sand, and the second approach is to have an elevated vein from which all the material can be removed.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The segment of the root is second following this method: begin by inserting a needle into the water-filled hollow tip so that when the thick blood is fully released, it will be squeezed out from the tube, and tighten the tube at the higher part of the pouch below to the lower part of the bowel with one wide bandage. Then dry the vein in a spot or two or three places using a wide gauze, and raise the black blood towards your thumb on the upper side of the bowel upwards downwards until you have drawn out the desired quantity as many times as necessary, which tolerates the virtue of the illness.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	A is about to sail across the sea and commands that he may avoid the black plague which breeds on provisions.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	It is crucial to perform phlebotomy when the veins are well filled and blood flow is optimal, as this reduces discomfort for the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	May's recipe for treating illness involves the following method: If you have caught an infection, take off your clothes and wrap yourself in a warm bath while pouring infused water over your body until it starts to redden and your veins become swoln; or if one has been trained through physical exercises but hasn't bathed yet, immerse oneself immediately.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	The correct form of the sentence in Esperanto would be: "La kodo estas sur la mallumoj de la vendoj supersekvenaj unu post alia, aŭ en la longa o sub la lasta duon de l'ilum, aŭ en la malpli alta duon de l'ilo."
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	I propose the code as follows in Python and then explain it with comments:amo_uncise(vena):
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	Thus, the key to unlocking this mystery lies within those very lines you have provided. The white keys that follow a specific sequence will lead us to our desired outcome.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Take the piece of wood that is long enough to be raised and lowered with a pulley system, and suspend an apple from it.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	The given sentence appears to be in Catalan and translates as follows: "Se empareje cada sección con otra sección para tres dígitos y apriete suavemente el extremo de la vena fuera de donde se aplicó". In English, this means: "Match each section with another section for three digits and gently press the end of the vein outside where it was applied."
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	A propel forward from the axis and cut into that until you reach the first section of the stem, then raise it upwards so that it stays in place for the second section; afterward, proceed along to the cutting above that section.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	In the water of this river extract that portion which is more superior or higher than all sections, into which everything flows; and then divide it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If the wax does not obey your hand when you extract it and lift it up with a fine iron rod twice as long as it is thick, then insert a needle into its hole, and rotate your piece around completely where it lies embedded, until the wax becomes smooth.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And look at yourself that you are not severed; for if it's broken, it is up to you to effortfully lift this burden and bring about healing from the harm caused by that.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then that entire area washed ashore, hours of peace upon the place where the shipwrecked vessel lay submerged in mud and smelling both rotten and not-rotteen, yet healed within.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the land is contiguous with areas having curves that are not in line with what has been stated, then you must cut through those curved parts of it and all its encircling boundaries so as to include everything within the curve up to a certain point determined by us.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	You must watch over your section so that the vein is not scratched and you do not injure it, because it will be difficult to raise afterward. And use wisdom in dealing with this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The shape of the inscribed circle which surrounds it is known as a circumcircle.
Forma de unci orp:	"Form of a Spanish orange" in English would be translated as "Shape of an orange." However, if you're referring to the fruit itself (as opposed to its shape), it remains simply "orange." There is no direct translation for "Spanish" when it comes to oranges because they are not unique to Spain. The term 'Spanish orange' may be misleading as most of us think about oranges, but you can specify a particular type if needed (like Valencia or Navel).
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not overly thick nor as sharp as a needle, but rather of acute extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is very flexible like a lion's mane when it is subtle, it can penetrate the vein due to its subtleness. It has an excessive thickness just as we mentioned before.
De extraccio venae cruris.	The removal of vein from the leg (or calf). This is a medical procedure known as venesection or phlebotomy, where blood is drawn from a superficial vein in the lower limb for diagnostic testing or theraamoietic purposes.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein originates in the basins located at the tail of Athagudi in the land of Arabs and also in the lands of Central India, which are dry with little vegetation; where there is neither grass nor trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	The river Cefn flows through various locations and passes by many meadows in the area.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The decomposition of the body is a process through which it becomes infested with worms, snakes, and various parasites such as scolices and worms that are born between the intestines and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Sign of the onset of his illness is in this vein which inflames vigorously; and at its place, swelling occurs; and from there, a pus-filled blister begins to form, resembling a plant'nail growth.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some women give birth in May (un), two, three, four, five, six and seven months; others up to ten months, the cause of which was determined by consultation with learned scholamoens.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	Tantos vientos con sueños de su alma ausente, engloba hoy en plomo y noche ese.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If left untreated, the hours will incise a piece of your skin and envelop it; and do not make that cut of reason within which is outside and free from infection, for if you make that one opposite and inside into the flesh, it may cause abscesses, bruising in the area, and bad ulcers.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	The water from the spring is usually extracted gradually and after extraction should be allowed to drain completely away without any obstruction in its course.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	E of this vein runs through the houses along its length for about 20 paces, and I have reached it at a point that is in line with two trees (de dez) and three shrubs (de ja).
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If he is sliced during the administration of his medicine, for several hours it will cause irritation in his throat and pierce that long trail across his body, through which all contents are evacuated from the matter; and administers a putrefied substance to the wound for several days along with medicines; and afterwards according to the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	There are some veins in which small branches occur, mostly when they reach the joints of the arm and leg, and then come to openings, forming as many exit points as there are branches.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Then let us proceed as we have said in the division and concerning the point that has been mentioned above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	About the section concerning worms generated under the skin, it is referred to as bovine disease. In English, this would be "Concerning the area related to parasites developing beneath the skin, it is known as a cattle illness."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is known in no land as bovine tuberculoides; it appears in cattle four times over and tends to the liver, and it's very little a lump that grows inside between the kidneamoans and flesh, causing it to swell all over its body, leading to disruption of the kidney membranes and bursting out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of light is caused by the decomposition of certain bodily fluids, so with an acceleration of worms and snakes and earthwormnits and ascaris in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	E is terrified by his cruelty; when he goes near him and raises his hand, a great fear comes upon him, the hours seem too long before him, and then rushes in to destroy him completely, leaving only wreckage behind.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Then when you wish to heal that and extract it out, nothing can be done without your own movement towards it and appearing at its side like this, so you must hold onto what is above it and what is below it tightly and compress it firmly over it until it's removed.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	"Even if the flesh is unblemished and does not possess any wickedness, your hour of pause has arrived; do not stay in this place where you reside for too long, as the greatest danger that should be feared is corruption within, which can spoil a place just as we have said."
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If the illness approaches the head area in its most severe form, one should rest as much as possible and avoid stressful activities; also try to elevate that part of the body slightly and apply cool compresses if needed. Also make sure to use appropriate medication for detoxifying purposes and maintain a diet rich in foods with natural cleansing properties.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the Book of Psalments on overcoming sorrow.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our native land "Fibromyalgia", and it involves pain that occurs in various parts of the body, with changes occurring from one limb to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	You should follow the second option that I recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	A young man once approached a sick woman in a village and discovered her vein of the arm had swelling, so he squeezed it for an hour, and watched as the swelling moved similarly to how blood flows through this, but more slowly than if it were alive when running from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then suddenly the pain from that place went to his muscles, and stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	A proper correction in the other course entering that reaches the opposite arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	A chap was amazed by his own recovery as soon as he saw himself, and too astonished at the exchange of hands and the speed of member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	I saw before that in the better ways according to this manner, but I have seen also several cases where the extreme pain was transferred from limb to limeby touching or rubbing them against each other.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May's love for him is just like the woman'amoore to her man.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	Indeed, it is not water but rather through the water that the woman from the valley appears, with exposed limbs and veins, evoking a feeling of windsweptness in this depiction.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is essential that you do not appear following this relapse in those who are contagious and prone to human vein inflammaturism.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	The patient wants to receive the healing touch of you, and the person feels that pain, hours are not enough for them to be present as we have said, hours strengthen over that one and leave it completely abandoned while being surrounded by the breathing coziness, and cauterize the wound.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you don't visit your oaks often, then cure that injury to the body and pour out the wetness within it, as well as those foul drops and those of serpents and resemblances.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extraction of sage leaves.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sagetas are diverse according to the species and according to the localities of the bodies in which they occur, as their diversity consists of those that have large, small, concave, sour points; solid ones. And those that have three angles; and those whose heads resemble tongues.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	From what I understand, you are referring to the ancient medical text "Ars Magna" by Arnau de Vilanova (1240–1311), a Catalonian physician and philosopher. In this work, he discusses the human body'amoor and its relation with health and disease.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	The signs of the servant's seal are in his left shoulder, and he crosses the joint, with the mark on top of the head caused by intense pressure, leading to symptoms such as headaches, dizziness, vertigo, and ringing in ears. Additionally, there is inflammation and burning sensations in the tongue, spasms affecting cognition, vomiting due to colic, speech becoming significantly impaired with voice destruction, moisture at the site of a white patch resembling powder on skin, and tears like dew droplets.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Then if you're ready to learn this sign language, avoid the cure and extraction of the sage unless necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Mays's left-hand index finger is bent towards the palm of her hand, so it appears to be in a cause for concern, but there is no real danger; and she gives a strong movement with her little finger as if it were caused by pain. And you should know that sudden death may come anytime.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the lung lobe gets empyema of pus from the pleura and the blood vessels in its wall become congested, along with a change in the color of malaise, there is expiration of great spirit, and it demands access to fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	The lion is lying in the den, near which there are small rocks; and at times his pain becomes quite acute, accompanied by a strong groan and without being able to move all of his limbs and muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the cat licks its paw in the stomach, hours later it has no desire for any type of food left over.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	The cat is sick in the belly and lying down; there are no signs of fever or rumbling, but it's impossible to extract the hairball without hope for recovery from this procedure.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If there is swelling in the scrotum (sageta catz), and discharge of urine from outside, along with some pain at all times associated with this illness, you should know that it can be deadly.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other parts such as the head, neck, throat, wings, shoulders, and appendages of the back, spondyli of the vertebrum, pelvis, body, and appearance of the members are considered edible according to major regulations provided that the venom gland is not damaged or ruptured, and it's not a poisonous snake.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	You should consult an expert who has seen the effects of these herbs to determine which ones are best for your specific condition. Herbal remedangs can be beneficial in many cases but it's essential to use them wisely and under professional guidance. It would also be helpful to know more details about your condition, as some herbs may interact with each other or have side effects depending on individual circumstances. Always ensure that any supplement you take is safe for you based on current health status and medications if applicable.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason for this is that there are small glands called tear ducts located in the inner corner of your eye, which drain tears away from the nose area. To extract these, you must leave behind a part near the earlobe and it will heal, without causing harm to the other side.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	The Jew pulled out another arrow from his quiver that had been hidden in the folds of his sleeve, without lifting his eyelids too much; now the arrow was concealed and he could not see it anymore but only its tip which clung to his arm, a sharp Turkish arrowhead with no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Senate is at the Judiciary, and it didn't happen on their own volition that they were involved in a legal mishap.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	In the early morning light, a man named Crispin discovered a small sack hidden beneath a willow tree. It was made of Arabian fabric and had an ornate golden clasp around its opening. Curious, he carefully pried it open between two branches, only to find that it was submerged in the water below. Despite this, he managed to retrieve the soggy sack with great care. To his amazement, upon examining its contents, Crispin found a rare and precious artifact - an ancient map leading to untold treasures!
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	A man extracted another snake from his belly and considered that he died because of it; so after passing thirty days without showing any signs of illnesses, he decided to attack the samba and pulled it out, and became cured, with no further mishap occurring.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	A man had a hen in which he had implanted an egg on its back, and the joint was consolidated over it, then placed fire under it for seven days; the egg hatched from the shell of the nest.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	A woman was seen to have a snake in her belly, and the saturation occurred within herself, but she did not experience any change in her natural processes or operations; the woman felt no harm at all.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	Once he was walking along the beach when he saw another house on which waves had crashed and broken the windows but there wasn't much damage, it seemed quite similar to this one.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	From the house of the king's son that was hunted in the nearby place where his nest had previously been straight and all but one were concealed.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	The heir of the castle has been summoned to take possession within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then you see the web of the spider not torn apart; then you investigate that which is enticing to you subtly, and do not feel it; but you hear a sting in your ear still, and thus I hope that this sting was caused by the extremity of the web.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	E amplastregui the place to graze in this area that has attractive and digestcuing properties; he informed me that the location became more appealing as it resembles the spot of the shrubland where it subsequently expanded onto that land.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	In the event of an accident at that location, it is imperative to avoid any kind of acid contact with the affected site; I will maintain surveillance over the area for several days and ensure no further incidents occur; meanwhile, the crust consolidates during this period, preventing eruptions and weakening in the vicinity. After a few days, when one senses discomfort in their nose, they should report it to me immediately.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then I had to take a break from my medical studies on acute corrosive poisoning within ten days after the burn occurred, and indeed I tried that remedy, but it hardened at the base of the sore, which stuck to the bone.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	In the event that I suffer from an acute illness requiring medication and my foot's condition becomes visible to you within this period of time, please provide me with necessary assistance during these upcoming four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	In the context of my work in the field of optics, I observed an amplified rainbow and pondered how to intervene with its laws while adhering to them, without causing disorder or chaos. It was on this day that I began experimenting with various contraptions for descending forceps operations, according to the methods outlined in the final chapter of my treatise; from there, I extracted and restored a prism.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	The judge ruled that the bridge's keystone was not repaired, and I have restored it; the wall has been consolidated as well, but the entire structure is still in a bad state of repair for full restoration. There are no excuses for its current condition.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	Recommended reading material for further understanding of this article and its implications, as some parts may not be easily comprehensible without additional information. This includes the appendixes to this article and definitions that are not understood through narration or explanation in the aforementioned free book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The skilled craftsmen know very little about the motion; and they are aware of the present force, which is absent in the past; and they often use new methods and instruments due to external causes that affect their craft when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, it can be said that settlements are not arbitrarily attributed to the members in which they are located but according to two methods: either by attraction of the location where they intersect or by contrast with the other party.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	That which enters from the land into a body of water and is then thrown out again as it proceeds in its course is called runoff.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not observe the rule of fasting during the time when animals are slaughtered (as specified), and if you leave it for more than three days until meat spoils that is in proximity to you, then let it be cooked thoroughly before consumption.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	If you have resided here and abide by the rules, after a certain period of time (let's say one year), your stay may be extended indefinitely with renewal every day, as long as you remain compliant.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not follow the instructions on this form, your piercing will be scheduled in the circuit of the studio at any time that works for you, with the location being subtly enhanced from the studio and beyond.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the sack is pierced and has proceeded into one of the brain'nests and appears as disease in those accidents which I am about to list, abstain from extracting the sack and let it remain there until its being equal to a few days; if the sack were to burst, then death would not be prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the splint is not broken but only slightly bent and does not enter into the bone completely, and it causes pain for a few days without leading to any injury from that accident, then you should try adjusting the tension of the splint and also try loosening it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If Mays fails to comply and does not remove the obstacle, then you will have to adjust the circuits of the saga accordingly as we have reported, and in accordance with the location where it is situated.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Mays is the cage partly located in the room of the heart, and it's partially hidden by emotions; then you might try to find that feeling again, and if you feel it, throw that aside any thoughts that are convenient for the attraction of love.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot go over it due to the obstruction of the bridge and its length, then here there are no nerves or veins; therefore, you shall wait on the bridge as much as possible so that the cable can be extracted.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	If you know the bones to which it is attached, often contemplate on the flesh in which it was entirely embedded; and ponder upon this matter if you cannot avoid the removal of the flesh around the joints or between those that are connected so as not to break them.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you are removing the spleen, whether in any location where it is to be done, use your whole hand for traction throughout that period of time; and apply subtle yet firm forceps on all sides ensuring that the spleen is not torn and that it is made accessible through a difficult extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot do within your hour, the hours must be extended by at least one day before the parties in that circuit can withdraw their claims. And if it is beyond two hours, then those parties should have withdrawed earlier on.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	My apologies if this message caused you any distress; I will strive to manage the flow of responses more carefully in order to provide appropriate solutions on the subject at hand.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Observe your hand trembling due to excitement, nervousness, or tension and try as best you can to control it; and let this help bring about ease, tranquility, slowness, firmness just like I do and instruct yourself accordingly.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Thus you should make the scythe as follows in order to avoid injury according to the figure which dictates the making of the scythe here, for it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	"Maintain your focus on what's possible and manage your time accordingly based on the figures."
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	The tree's seedlings that are cut down by the opponent team or have already been planted in other teams' plots, or when they illegally occupy outside territory due to their own team being behind their designated area and occasionally that of another; then you claim ownership over them. You take possession according to the quantity taken with forceps; and aim to throw it as fairly as possible during play.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	When anger is held within oneself, the thoughts turn to resentment until they inevitabely become lodged deep within one's mind and heart, increasingly affecting them, and causing emotional turmoil.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Sine that same place for several days and gradually approach the area where you've seen them.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the log of the saw is in there, you pull it out from there with a few hours' effort.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May the mast be cut and you aim to administer an electric shock; then intervene and push her, if she is pregnant, gently encourage her to lie between your legs and apply moderate pressure while guiding her towards the target area.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If a bowl is concave, then the hours seem to be pushed away by its strong inner entrance as the bowl is hollowed outwards.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the dagger is poisoned, keep watch over your actions so that you do not consume the flesh where it has been applied; if possible, drink water from another source to ensure safety.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the bladder stone is located in the pelvis, or the abdume, or the urinary bladder, or on either side of it, and you are close to touching that lump, then there is a high probability that this stone can be reached. Carefully avoid injury to blood vessels or nerves while removing it; if necessary, drain the fluid as needed, and treat any internal wound until healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Forma en la que se sujetan las uñas con pinzas.
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The hands of those who work tirelessly like scissors cutting through the fabric, they grasp firmly to not let go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	Of those types of fruits mentioned - apples, pears, cherries and peaches, there are large ones, small ones, average-sized and slightly larger or smaller than the standard size, depending on their degree of ripeness, color, sweetness and juiciness.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Mode of inclination for this shriveled tip just as much like penis in erection and stimulus from that deafness: to push the intestines inside the sac through.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Title: A Guide to the Use of Sign Language Impulse Devices for Individuals with Severe Hearing Loss
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Hey, come Ray, pour qu'il soit incliné à l'intérieur du cône creux et soit poussé vers là-bas.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	The sphenopalatine ganglion block is a procedure used to relieve nasal congestion and pain by numbing the branches of the trigeminal nerve that supply sensation to the nose, sinuses, and parts of the face. This technique targets the sphenopalamic ganglion (also known as the pterygopalatine gangl
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The phlebotomy veins usually draw blood in amounts of about X.XXX mL. In the preface to his work, Descartes states that he wants to present his ideas in a clear and systematic manner. He seeks to establish certain foundations for knowledge on which others can build upon. Hence, the statement "so in chapter XVI" likely refers to an idea or principle laid out in this specific section of his text. Here are the veins mentioned in the given text, along with their Latin names and corresponding locations on the body:
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins which were just bandaged in the arms are now healed. "Of those mentioned here is a cephalic vein, which in the wild resides, and people call it 'the head's vein'. It is a migratory vein composed of a branch from the basilica vein, and another branch from the cephalic vee; hence, they name this "vein through all the body", with the basilica vein being the one that rests on the domestic elk (anatomically in humans), also named 'civatric', and thus people refer to it as "the abdomen's vein". The arm veins are located over the armpit, where bloodletting occurs, and those which become visible upon pressing. Lastly, there is a small vein that lies between the outer ear and the little front-facing part of it, made up of two branches."
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	E is the vein that descends from the curvature of the thigh bone (femur); and the second one is called the saphenous, and its location is just below the crest of the shinbone; and the sciatic nerve, and its location is just below the femur. And in the same area are other similar veins to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The juice of the veins that enters into contact with the ears is an ancient remedy and it migrates, cleanses, and heals old scalp ailments.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of this hair is as follows: it should be at least half an inch thick and the roots of the hair should have good blood flow; they are placed behind both earlobps symmetrically on either side of the head; you should choose one that suits your taste, and if you feel the pulse of those areas, here is my assurance.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	He takes up the kitchen knife and it is this incision, and he inserts that leftover vein into the canal within which the blood pump will bring him to his doom.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	He elevates the vein and artery towards the extremities, inserting the needle into the vessel.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	E be the length of the incision, and the amount of stitches needed around that area depends on your preference. In English: The length of the incision corresponds to the number of necessary stitchamoins or in the surrounding region; it also includes a margin depending on what you prefer.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	A proper strengthening of the pillars and foundations is essential to ensure that they are soundly repaired.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	He and his wife started with the desire for liberation before proceedcuing their divorce.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The old and harmful practice of bloodletting, which often caused chronic otitis media, persistent ear infections, excessive discharges, sudden hearing loss, and various other complications, has been abandoned for many centuries.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The quality of the flebotomy is such that I relate to you as follows: with a serious illness, his condition becomes apparent when both veins are seen for palpation immediately below your words; and then try to understand.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Above the vein, insert the needle slightly above your indicated direction, and advance the vein within it; then puncture just as you did with the other two veins; let blood flow according to the amount needed.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Remove the bandage from the wound, and rest your voice for an hour, then press gently on that spot and rub it with a strong massaging motion until any discomfort is relieved; let the area heal properly.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	Once upon a time, there was a king who had three daughters. The eldest two were known for their wisdom and grace, but the youngest daughter possessed an uncanny ability to remember everything she heard or saw. Her remarkable memory earned her the nickname "Eidetic."
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	The juice of the flower, applied to the forehead vein near the head's phlebotomy, is said to treat ancient facial diseases and migraines, as well as foul-smelling sores. (Reference: This sounds like a traditional remedy possibly mentioned in medieval texts on herbal medicine.)
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the phlebotomy you perform is as good as your technique, since an unsteady hand may tie a bandage around the vein that makes it appear. Therefore, take hold of the instrument known as the lancet, which has the following form for this task:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	The tip is prominent at the top of the vein, and strikes upon it with either the handle or another tool in the hand method you prefer; then release the puncture hole once enough blood has flowed according to your desired amount. Let the wound heal naturally as much as possible.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Some valves are overtaken by the flobots machine, but it should not be assumed that the flobot is of acute extremity as with other flobots; rather, it is from a lateral extremity, and flattens this one according to its transverse axis because the bone is close and strong enough to break the flobots when they are subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May's ointment from the two veins that are as tear ducts of two wells for scabies in the well for pus and wax in the wells, and for facial diseebases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of bloodletting is such that the severe illness will clothe its head with a bandage, and then you shall use the lancet on those areas, standing by his/her head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	E should be done the phlebotomy according to a few transversely and somewhat along its length so that in this spot there is not much vein; and if the puncture is subtle, then easily the tip of it will break off.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	The Hebrew passage from Exodus 14:21 says: "וְאַתָּה תִּזְנַחְלֵם בְּי׳ד רָמָה, עַל-פְּנֵי הַיָּם כִּי אִם-שֶׁקְטוֹן יִהְיֶה, וְאַתָּה תִשּׂרְפוּם בְּלֶחֶם עַד-חֲצִי מֵמוֹלֶדֶת הֵנָּה.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Mays le fleabane of the nose vein is attributed to acute fever and severe colds, as well as facial diseases that migrate and fester, especially when it has been present for a long time.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the bloodletting is such that the strong sickness attacks its head and approaches to your left side, and then take the lancet long and thin at your left nostril just below the top of the nose according to right alignment because the vein does not appear by touch here, and because the blood starts floweby now.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	I'll administer your last blood transfusion gradually as needed; and apply heat to that area for one night, because it helps restore the circulation significantly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	May's Juice from Fleabites Doctors provides relief for constipation, commencement of leprosn, various illnesses and infectious diseases, as well as severe ulcers and erysipelas just like Herpeticum.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of the blotch on those leaves is such that every disease lingers in its own spot; and there are craftsmen above the disease, and the disease resides upon a stand.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	The vein gradually extends towards the far end of the leaf where numerous smaller veins branch out, following the amount and frequency determined by its need for water; and it resembles the appearance of other veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Here's the translation from Occitan to English:
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The juice of the fleabane flower's veins causes small abscesses and pustules in the mouth along with gum decay, bad ulcerations, and fissures; as well as harmful ulcers that appear on the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the bleeding in those veins that you observe is as follows: You tie a band around one'n of his arms, making sure it is tight enough to stop any movement but not too tight as to cut off circulation; then, while holding this arm out for visibility, locate two prominent superficial veins - one on the right side and one on the left. Observe the color: if they appear darker than usual, there may be a problem with blood flow in those areas. Now, carefully insert the needle into each vein by a slight angling upward to ensure a clean entry without causing pain or discomfort.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	May's doubt is about those, and you don't know which one of them is the biggest, or at least most evident among them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	Fill the appearance of those veins that are under my lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	May's habit usually is to pierce the remaining veins that are on her lower lips.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The four arteries that branch off from the tongue supply blood to the frontal lobotomy above the chin, related to uvula disease and mouth disorders.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of the blood sample that follows illness when taken before sunreban appears elevated in its tongue and looks back on it; from one end to another vein flows outwards, and their colors tend towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then gently massage your entire body with a cream or oil; and be careful not to overdo it in those areas, especially around the main arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The veins that are usually flooded in our bodies, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two ways. One way is by placing a tiny blueberry-like device or an olive with gentle declination; this is how it looks like: (Insert image/illustration).
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	The correct pronunciation of the word "alveolus" is /ælˈviːələs/. It refers to a small air sac in the lungs where gas exchange occurs between oxygen and carbon dioxide during respiration. According to its specifications, it varamoe closely related to certain specialized cells and depending on the size of the capillaries as well as their constriction within those structures.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Projectile mode of the botfly: The botfly, also known as Dermestidae or Oestridae family members, has a unique and somewhat disturbing reproductive method that involves projectiles. Adult female botflies capture their hosts by sensing carbon dioxide from breath or body heat. They then deposit eggs on the host's skin using a sticky substance. When these larvae hatch, they can burrow into the host’s tissue to feed and grow until they mature enough to drop off and pupate in soil.
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	As for the large veins that need to be opened, proceed with caution and address those containing thick clotted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the sprayer method for olive orchards. Here's an overview of how it works:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	A fine needle aspiration is of smaller diameter and more delicate tips, and is suitable for fine-needle biopsy of small vessels containing subtle cell types.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The blood flow of the femoral vein is one of three vessels: two carry away the waste from diseases that have affected both the liver and the colon, and one collects the debris in the intestine.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	Celebrates the phlebotomist, how to perform phlebotomy on that person, ensuring they are comfortable during the procedure after accessing a vein, and if they miss or incorrectly puncture the syringe in the venipuncture site, it may result in arterial injury causing blood flow, so be sure not to use just any sharp instrument before proceednig with the phlebotomy.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica is not immediately apparent by its visible characteristics, then at some point you may leave that place and move to another, or seek out any signs of it; or you can ask for directions in a nearby location as this one is clear. Then follow those instructions as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to perform the femoral artery puncture, place your hand over the area near the groin where you know the pulse is located and apply slight pressure so that it goes away; then wrap your arm around the leg and pinch the vein slightly concave for a few seconds just as we have instructed. Be careful to check with percussion if blood flow occurs at some distance from the artery location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	Upon reflection, I embrace the challenge; expanding upon a place you've once felt at home, inflation is indeed an economic phenomenon of currency value and market dynamics that must be carefully navigated.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	Once upon a time, there was a flow of sacred blood in the phlebotomy needle as soft as an angel's breath; and the blood is subtle gold, hours making you aware that it is from the artery; at times your heartache and pause linger on this long journey; and soon enough you return to your senses, but if the blood separates, many times it has separated, hours strengthen your arm as you let go of that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	The person became ill with a fever and was very scared of it for several days until they recovered.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the limb is not severed and you do not receive medical attention promptly, then at times you should try to cut off your artery with a sharp object if it appears near you; but when the extremity of that part becomes paralyzed and blood flow stops, or if you grab hold of a fishing rod, and use its line, twist a piece around the area where the vein is tightly constricted, and insert small pills through this within another day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If he cuts himself off from the world and does not think of that person to whom his thoughts previously turned, time cures him; otherwise, time flows away without curing the wound caused by remembering that place where ashes are scattered.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The extraction of the tooth in this case can be challenging due to its location and the possibility of injuring the adjacent lip or cheek during the procedure.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	In the Mays of Fuscia Valley, flebotomy is more common than bloodletting in the Subirana parish and around the town center; this is due to its composition consisting of basilica tree bark and cephalic tree bark, as we have mentioned before.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The plague of fear that is greater than the phlebotomy itself; for then one adjusts to the puncture of the phlebotomist and numbs the nerves, causing stupor, with great difficulty in healing, sometimes never fully recovering from it. This nervousness will eventually manifest through sensation; if hidden within certain men, it is subtle and not apparent. Beware that you stop to apply the phlebotomy at the location of your weak spot, avoiding the nerves that are your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If a vein lies between two nerves, then its length is the distance between them.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The blood flow from the venipuncture of the cephalic vein is intended to draw blood and transmit it to the diseases of humans.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	In this particular case, if you want the lymph nodes to be lymph nodes of the olive tree or hazel trees; for it is the least harmful of all veins, since it's not cutting off any artery nor nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must ensure that the fleam (a surgical tool) which is used to perform lancetting does not prick the tip of the scrotum only, but rather a more distant location, and it should not be done late at night if possible. Initially, make sure that the first puncture using this instrument occurs on an area with some fat tissue.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, even though it is an abscess in the ear canal, if there isn't a syringe used during the initial cleaning process, then there will be no complete removal of that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of the veterinary care in this region and its impact on livestabity rates due to accidents during mating season, which prompts you to think about their prevention.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first bloodletting is from which vein you know that phlebotomy is not administered but for the conservation of health and by hope of recovery, and it is done through one of the veins located in the body, which are: cephalic, femoral, and basilica; and it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast on a sunny morning or autumn, and during winter close to mealtime when there are signs of replenishment.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	"Patient E underwent phlebotomy and will have passed three hours before the first results are available."
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Mays a pedicure that is administereed, may be done because of convenience or necessity at any time and during daytime or nighttime.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	Children who have reached the age of thirteen shall be circumcised, and women whose pregnancies are more than four months must undergo female genital mutilation by the seventh month, while all older individuals should not have any form of genital mutilation.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	A catheter should be used in some manner to ensure that the bladder is emptied before a cystoscopy procedure; if there are any obstructions retained within it, so that excessive fluid does not accumulate during the cystoscopic drainage of the bladwart's vessels. This ensures purity and prevents leakage into major limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	E does not subject patients to surgical bleeding and cruelty, nor do they escape from disease or insanity at the time when their remedy has been exhausted, nor from malnutrition or epilepsy, but that bleeding is feared as a cause of abdominal pain and vomiting, bloody stools, diarrhea, lack of appetite, sleeplessness, weakness and exhaustion, which dissolves the vitality (corporeal/physical), or animal spirit.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	A proper consideration requires examining the subtle effects of fumes before entering water if blood pressure is high, as well as diet and beveratury (beverages), and also including medications if it's feasible with water.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Article I: No person shall be allowed to engage in any activity which is not expressly permitted and which could potentially result in punishment or harm due to its subtle nature.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	The lunch break for the injection of love in the heart of the day is upon us; thus at three o'clock, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	He performs the rite so that whatever it is must be observed on that day of all kinds of misfortunes among animals, as well as when they are in pain, anger, fear, and also for all physical mishaps, like exhaustion, excessive pain and strain, and appearance.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	A is the one who possesses an aura with reasons that typically make men fragrant and scented, and such as to those of similar nature according to the amount of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the flowchart to determine if you should get vaccinated or consult with a doctor regarding your concerns about potential side effects. The chart takes into account various factors such as age, medical history, and specific risk factors. If you are unsure of any step in the process, it's always best to seek advice from a healthcare professional.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	The person extends their arm, and the healthcare provider cleans it with an alcohol swab three times; then they wrap it with bandage material and securely tie it in place.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	E is the prescribed resting period, if the restraint does not equal exhaustion or it's an excessive restriction, hours of sleep are forbidden; or it'anguish relief and hours of sleep are essentially allowed for recovery.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	As the incision made by a phlebotomist involves clipping off his sleeves between their insertions where veins are inflamed and declared to be sensitive.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	The phlebotomist applies a small amount of antiseptic solution to his/her phlebotomy equipment and gently palpates the selected vein below which he/she intends to perform the venipuncture. To ensure minimal pain, the needle is inserted with due care into the chosen vein such that it slips smoothly through without touching other nearby veins. The phlebotomist avoids deep breaths during insertion as this can cause movement and discomfort. If he/she misses the vein on the first attempt, the needle is carefully repositioned rather than removed entirely to prevent further distress to the patient.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	So then, let the heart surgeon be stopped and concerned in all these cases.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	The prolonged use of flea bombs, if the vein is blocked in a wound for more than an hour, you should go to another location immediately; otherwise, if possible, stay at that place for some time after using the product unless the area becomes stuffy or smelly.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the wound becomes infected or if illness develops, you should rest for a day or two and not overexert yourself, as excessive exertion could lead to the spread of infection or prevent healing.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	A) She absolutely supports the practice of abortion as she considers it a woman's right to choose what happens with her body.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the wound is small and bleeds very slightly, and you fear it may not be enough blood for what you want, then repeat the application with a cotton ball in that area following the correct procedure and adjusting the pressure slightly, but do so promptly before the place becomes inflamed, as many places are prone to slight inflamm
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	May you always avoid it if possible, don't approach that hole immediately; there might be a valid reason for your caution; and pause before stepping over the edge of that pit, as it may harm your body.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	E is better in this place than I used to be and than the others did.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Phlebotomy is the medical procedure in which a healthcare professional punctures or makes an incision into a vein using a needle to draw blood for diagnostic purposes or treatment of certain conditions. The venipuncture site, usually on the arm'amoq (forearm), displays little discomfort when done properly and under sterile conditions.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If an abscess is formed at the location of a fleam injection and several complications occur, mostly in those who are not bleeding but have a welt, or if there is insuanguination of the vein, then you should worry for a while; apply a sponge soaked in warm water and salt to the area, gently massaging it for an hour until dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	Cave that flows water close to the sediments of blood from those veins, either yours or another's.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	Do not place any black or green ink on the paper; if you wish to use an enhancer like oil-based paint thinner, turpentine, or a similar substance such as mint extract or camphor.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Multiple varicose veins, thromboses, and swelling require the treatment of phlebotomy at a medical clinic.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	So be it then your pause upon that matter, and if at times you feel the urge to compress upon that point, know that such excessive emphasis can prove detrimental; therefore take heed not to dwell unduly on this specific cause mentioned, for swiftly might blood flow from an artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	The water extinguishes at the place where it solidifies so that its location is preserved and carefully near to where the other healing occurs.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	The Covenant extracts from the essence of all humans according to the amount of their virtue and based on the outcomes they achieve above the covenant, as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If you see the flame as black, it signifies that anger or bitterness may be present in your life; and similarly if you see a large flame, it indicates intense emotions; while conversely, a small flame suggests subtle feelings at play. Similarly, if the flame appears sharp or piercing, it implies strong energy or intention behind them.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	The vein that is easily accessible and strong, requiring venipuncture in a patient, should have the phlebotomy of the vein enlarged on both sides.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	In that which is wrong, make the opposite of that to be done; and demand that anything excessive should be retrieved, and let strict measures be taken against it.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best way to administer a vein injection is through the cross-sectional cut rather than the puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This circumcision method is safe from bleeding and nerve injury, and it's more praisewang than the traditional lengthwise or widthwise procedure.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	In case of syncope before the venipuncture, ensure that you have a small amount (about a teaspoon) of infused glucose or simple sugar solution ready and administer it immediately to the patient prior to the procedure. Then, rest for three to four minutes.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If you are allergic to complications, hours may be taken before the phlebotomy for infusion in an intravenous drip of myrrh or in an aromatic iv fluid with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and others, or in an aromatic IV solution that is also fragrant.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	"The rosehip syrup is decidedly sincopic due to the loss of its blood content; hence, it requires consuming water with meat and fatty substances for enhancing subtle aromatic notes. It possesses an overall mild flavor."
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	E uses other causes mentioned in the division of the capital into sinusoids by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	If the vein is accidentally cut and its blood flow stopped for a second time, it leads to the place from which the phlebotomy procedure was carried out, where the fluid extraction is performed mainly for evacuation purposes, and the value of this fluid lies in its ability to gradually drain small amounts of blood, depending on the amount present over continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If Mays were to lose his left arm, the second time he would bleed from his veins, and his heart is strong, then it will take him about seven or nine hours for the first blood transfusion.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	In May's game of crossbow shooting, the player who hits the bullseye from afar must yield to the team with which they were paired for the next round or match day; if a tie occurs on the second day or third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	The blood flow from the cut artery does not stop immediately as it continues to spurt rhythmically due to the heart's pulsations; therefore, while attempting to control bleeding through tourniquet application or other methods, one should ensure that all necessary precautions are taken. It is crucial that the blood volume remains adequate and that care is taken not to overly tighten the tourniquet, as excessive pressure may lead to unintended consequences such as severe shock instead of stopping the bleeding.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	E does not wish to unlock his arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as it has already closed off the vascculet of the vein and now experiences difficulty in draining the blood, which he presses under that intense vehemence; moreover, his limb is stretched out lazily, for this position is quite uncomfortable.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	The person should first apply a bandage to the area around the injection site; then press on the hematoma that has formed in the vein orifice; or pause over one of Tyre's alfarache (a type of plant) or sachet, and gently compress the swelling so that blood is expelled from it.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is thrombosed, wait a few hours before touching it until the thrombosis has settled down.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If you need to urinate immediately and cannot hold it in, please use the nearest restroom or find another appropriate place nearby. It is not an excuse for relieving yourself on a surface above that one or in another vein elsewhere.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The "tube of the arm" vein is phlebotomized in the antecubital or medial aspect, provided that they are not thrombosed or obstructed, and it consists of those vessels.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the leg ulcer is that the illness interferes with water flow as soon as the area around it becomes warmer, and the vein appears prominently.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	The instruction provided is in Catalan, and it translutes to the following in English: "Proceed strictly according to that map of strict regulations; proceed phlebotomically as per the small traverse, neither longitudinally nor latitudinally." This appears to be an unclear directive without additional context.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	E is the wide opening, and your precision lies in what you bleed from the junction where it meets a small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If you are forbidden from blood flow or bleeding in your body, wait until morning before entering the water to allow your blood to coagulate and stop flowing so that you can fulfill your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the days of summer, those times your journey by horse would be excused to visit the cold water spring, and during winter, your body's thirst would be quenched with cold water from that same spring.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The bleeding of this vein is less dangerous than that of all the others, as it does not have a pulse or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The fly-borne transmission of the liver fluke disease is associated with gastrointesti disorders.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the bleeding you perform is that you must tie off either your mother's arm or your own, so that you have moved it upwards and forwards, ensuring that the vein is inflamed and clearly visible at the time; then do a transverse puncture; and if blood does not flow out through this incision immediately.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	The bird still has the shredded remains of its prey hanging from its beak, barely concealing its nervousness as it drops them.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	In the case of a nosebleed, tilt your head forward and let the blood run down into the sink; if you don't do this, the blood will clot in the vein opening, and it can be dangerous to swallow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	E pull out the blood from the vein according to the necessary amount, rest a while on oil and salt so that it does not become hardened completely; similarly make sure you do this throughout in one go.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The sap of the leafcutter ant's fungus cultivation is believed to be effective against melasma.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	In a similar manner, he performed the bloodletting just as he did in the other case.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The jujube tree'cujuvenal vein of the phlebotomy causes diseases in the lower body as well as those of the upper body; likewise with menstruation retention and various diseases such as insomnia, ulcers caused by old wounds, and similar illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the flebotomy is that the illness affects its seat in water causing discomfort within a friction zone which appears as veins; it lies at the joint of the arm secured by a bandage, and from there the visible vein expands towards the face of the arm on multiple branches.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, applying a hot compress on the wound several times a day can be benefebticial, as it's better and more soothing for healing.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	He cut out that mole on the face of your cheek; for hours you kept watch over the nerves left there on the face and paused your moleskin technique which you use when cutting across, as if you wanted to remove it completely.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Let E be the set of all violet flowers.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	In French, the phrase would be: "Maysez-vous se prohibir le gonflement du sang; les os votre pèlerinage de la lune dans l’eau chaud et assurez le sang coule en cette entorse qui soit évacué."
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the beekeeper makes a mistake in choosing the first area to place his hives, hours later he will have to move them again as the location turns out to be unsuitable; however, do not fear the malicious, but rather guard against disturbanebr>ys (stings) just as we've mentioned.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Craft a similar speech to the one of the other candidate.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	The translation of the text in English would be: "The head of the sciatic vein is as you have told it; just below lies the tail of the starting forest."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The spirit of the butterfly's sting is hidden where it seeks to protect itself.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the flebotomy tool is that when illness enters as a bath, it cleanses and strengthens the body's blood layer within the wide chest underneath four points on one side with a long subtle band that appears only by water.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Then when it appears, take each wheel according to your ability and in sequence, and it is better; or insert that for enjoyment or out of necessity as required, because where the tool lies is its place.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	In the early stages of embryonic development, there are three germ layers in humans called ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm; if these develop properly, a fully formed organism results, which appears to all senses as a single entity. Later on, we can observe certain features such as hair growth at specific locations, with the most noticeable being two types of skin folds—the auricle located between the tragus and the antihelix, and the helix which forms the outer rim of the ear.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	He looks at your nerves and makes the blood run in the amount you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Relaxing the tight restrictions and bans on cannabis use could slightly strengthen its medical benefits.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	In order to use the ventosacius and ensure their quality, follow these steps:
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	There were once three friends - a crow, an eagle, and a vulture. They all lived in the same forest but had distinctly different ways of living. One day, they decided to have a contest to determine who was the best at finding food. The competition began!
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	A ventouse is made from two types of leather: one is scraped and stretched skin, and the other is a type of treated hide.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This gust of wind that's causing the scorching is according to two theories, whether it'amo or its hot.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	The xiv sutures that are administered and excised during surgical procedures include the following locations on the head:
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Erratic ventilation does not drain blood, but from the tiny capillaries in the flesh, and therefore it is similar to embolization; nor should it be considered an effective treatment for any disease caused by replenishing fluid within which the entire body becomes evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	L'obbligo di somministrare il pasto si verifica in caso di malattia o per continuiere sempre durante il pranzo della settimana e alla fine del lunedì, e al mattino prima e dopo la sua presenza.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason behind the symptoms in men whose blood is mingled excessively and drawn out by windiness, causing severe turmoil in their head; those who have replenished vigor and growth on their face and head, with prickling sensation on their face and forehead, darkness and dullness in their eyes; those who draw the place of blood circulation; those whose laughter is multiplied; those who reduce taste for blood in the mouth or cause their tongue to be swollen and spit blood; those who increase desire to sleep, with intense dreams, pains, and other effects on their appearance.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, when there is any cause for which these rules apply, it should be done preferably in the third or middle of the month and not earlier than two to three hours from the specified time.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The buildup of static electricity on the back is due to the accumulation of charges in the hair and at that point where it comes into contact with water; but enough so that this charge causes complete dissipation throughout the body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This fresh one is at the site of the phlebotomy in the head.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	E is not good to consume that which belongs to another's property or in the case of diarrhea, for it may cause great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	I avoid places that were frequented by many in the past and where illnesses are still prevalent today.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	The winds that were over her are now blown over it, and because of this, she has been forgotten; therefore, you command the fan to pause its breath briefly at her departures, fearing for the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Mays' mixture of alkehelium from the vein fuscus and basilica promotes relief for asthma, bronchial constriction, coughing, and shortness of breath.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	A cold wind blowing at night can lead to weakness in the body and stomach if it is persistent.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The "ventoscope of Alhazen" (referring to the medieval Islamic scholar Ibn al-Haytham) contributes insights on accidental pains in the head and otitis, as well as migraebulous pain, emigration, prefocus, and earache. It's a topic of focus in the field of basilica fracture treatment.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	The fan should not be pressed too hard to avoid cutting the vein and causing blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	The windswept leaves leave traces of alcohol in the mouth, causing gum corruption and signs indicative of diseases present in the oral cavity, potentially leading to lip herpes outbreaks.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The breeze that blows over the two spoons of cream cheese provides warmth to the hands.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	In the anatomy of the double division of the eye'cups concerning the confinement of the three veins, namely those originating from the superior basilic and cephalic veins; this is where all blood flows from these various vessels converge into the larger ones. The smaller branches come together in the other veins that eventually lead to the triple junctions of the upper venous system.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	C commands the windlass to avoid erosion by leaving the place naked of flesh and retaining only veins and artereste.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	E is an herbal remedy that helps with inflammamoons of the colon and heals wounds, as well as purulent discharges from ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	Set the fan to a high speed, and make sure it is far enough from you; also ensure that there are no fragile items nearby as strong gusts could potentially cause them to break or get damaged. Additionally, be cautious of subtle drafts created by the fan.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Mays ventozas of the cambas minueyos are known for their medicinal properties which include alleviating pain from all parts of the body and causing ancient pains in joints and women's issues; they also bring relief to migraines, bothersome aches, and swelling. These plants serve as a natural remedy for insect bites, warts removal, and inserting small wooden pieces.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	A high level of stress can sometimes cause people to experience fainting spells.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	In the town of Alahórcoben, there is a property that transitions from being owned by two cabins to being owned by two cabins.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the positioning of the winds is to initially pause the window slightly ajar and shut it quickly in early morning, and do not prolong the positioning of the windows; rather stop them abruptly and resume cautiously, allowing the air to come back into the room after evening hours.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	In the absence of redness or swelling, and as long as there is no pain during exercise, you can continue to work out within that limit. If however you begin to notice any signs of discomfort such as pulsating veins and inflammamoent in the area, stop exercising immediately.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	The weather was pleasant and the market bustled with activity, as people slowly made their purchases here and there, and each carefully considered the dispositions of the goods.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	That old house with rare and expensive furniture: ensure you cover it with a protective sheet so that nothing spills on it to prevent stains.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	C orders the fan to increase its speed and produce a little noise, making it easier to cool down.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the blood cells are large and numerous, hours of intense exercise may cause them to be more prominent in the initial sample due to increased oxygenation levels within the body.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second phase, May acquired data through the extraction of large samples.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the seeds are not fertile, then they must be scarified during the second season to obtain a better yield in the third.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	In the end, when we want to extract very little or just a small amount, even our minimal effort will suffice.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we want to extract blood plasma, we perform a skin puncture or phlebotomy procedure; and if we know that the blood is thick, it may take hours for us to complete the extraction process through this method.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The depth of the excavation solely refers to the vertical distance below ground level that has been dug out or removed during the construction process, without considering any horizontal spreading or expansion beyond the initial site boundaries.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the oil is thick, hard, dark and its grains are narrowly strewn, so that the locks of the scalp are made more tender, less tight, easily resolved; if it's in summer time, likewise as olive oil or violet oil, or almond oil, or apple pine oil; and if it is in winter time, then hours (oil) from narcissus, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or sanicle.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If there is excessive abundance of fragrant herbs like marjoram, lavender, or oil from balm, aloe, or anise, it appears pleasing to the senses and has healing properties.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the fan is made of soft natural leather, it should not be exposed to oil and care must be taken so that in all locations where fans are installed there aren't dripping or freezing water from air conditioners, or swimming pool water, or boiling water, etc.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	The water that springs from a damp source, washes the breeze away or cool water of myrtle and sycamore and similar ones.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	Of those whose excess is thick, cleanse your windows either with vinegar or water from the fountain of Sansus (a term referring to ancient sources), or with aniseed infusion, or chamomile tea, and so on.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	The cover of the windscreen shall not be placed in front of the driver's seat; you should ensure that it is managed by an employee for at least one or two hours before driving, and that the person sleeps after using the windscreen.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	It is essential to treat sand flies before the wind season by implementing a variety of control measures, such as:
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	When it comes to choosing what to eat for breakfast in the morning, I consider that foods which are refreshing or include ingredients like lemons and inflamed ginger could be beneficial, as they tend to have cooling properties. Foods such as mint with its invigorating taste, cucumber (cool and watery), sekanjabin (a sweet and tangy drink made from honey or sugar, water, and rosewater), and julep can be great choices for breakfast in hot weather due to their cooling effects.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	The feast of Saint John included various roasted meats such as poultry and rabbits, seasoned dishes, and other delicacies resembling the ones we have today.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	The one of whom the relationship is close and loving should receive in drink honey wine or apple cider, sumac, and a bowl with fragrant mixed herbs between summer and winter; And let him be advised to eat sparingly and moderately, refraining from excessive consumption of bread, cheese, pork, rabbits, birds, doves, and columbines.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	On the day of dental cleaning and tooth extraction, drink more water than usual food intake.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	Conditions where it is advisamo to avoid applying musk in some hours before surgery or invasive procedures, medications containing musk, such as muscadine oil, or near strong winds or flying or during pregnancy; and do not take this cream if you have any skin irritation.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	In the areas of the ventrescopes that are affected by scarring, these sections shall not be scarified; specifically, over the melsa and podagra, and over the umbilicus in the regions around the nipples, and on the pimple of chest. These members should not undergo any scarification procedure on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	E is not a curse for those women but an attraction of blood from the limb, just like a warm compress on a nipple in breast disease with bleeding of blood vessels; and use that (the treatment) so it may be dissolved by invisible bubbles within the member, as if applying a compress over the belly and navel; for this will enrich the part and scrape off its pain, thus resolving the swelling.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	The rocks are often disturbed during landslides in their vicinity or due to strong attraction forces that easily displace the soil from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	The appearance that seems to be resting on the thigh and buttocks involves massaging in those areas.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These windows are only cleaned with a cloth sometimes; and some times they are washed with soap, and others with just water or vineg # Completed Question
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some boiled vegetables are served with plenty of water in cases of diarrhea.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The water must be pure and plentiful for the bottle to be filled, either with cold spring or clear water containing only suitable herbs.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Here is the translation in academic-style English: "The shape of a venturi administered at focus consists of the diameter of two orifices as we have designed; and the quantity of flow shall be proportional to one palm; and it shall lie within length, in its location along the circuit, proportionally small according to the amount that passes through it by a needle."
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	The sky was clear of clouds, the mountains were majestic, the trees lush and green, making it a perfect place for one to express their opinion on the matter at hand.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	E is in the middle of the red cross-shaped iron piece that was made or forged; it holds a lit candle at its focus.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	This here large vessel which we have mentioned before; and the small portion of that wine according to illnesses and the state of those who consume it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The veins of children and elderly are fragile, while those of young people and large animals are tougher.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of the pauser is such that it extends a flame in front of a few wax candles placed on a fire made with logs, and holds that above the transverse beam at the center of the pauser so that the flame can be ignited; this causes the draft to reach back towards the chimney so that the smoke does not fill up inside.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	A properly placed candle near the afflicted member and the phrase spoken over it, during which you feel the winds and do not extinger the flame, but let the smoke rise above that body part; eventually the gust is dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	Crafting enchantments in the manner of Mecca, if you so desire; repeat this process as long as needed.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In a ventose treatment for polyarthritis, where water is used and there is no crosswise or longitudinal bandage, but it is filled with water only and rests solely on the limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is how it goes in Occitan (also known as Provençal): En esta es lo romiu tal que pluei más se trufha, tanto es bòstian, pèr qo pué recebre gran quantitat de aiga.
Capitol .xcvii.	The term "Capitol" is the building where a legislature meets to conduct its business, including enacting laws and discussing public policy issues. In the United States context, it typically refers to the U.S. Capitol in Washington D.C., which houses both chambamoeba Chloramphenicol
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leeches are not administered in joints but rather in limbs where it is impossible to position the suckers, due to their small size, as well as gums and similar areas; or on a naked area of skin, such as previously mentioned and described.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The quality of using those that you have found leeches in the mountain springs of pure water.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	In the event of chicken pox outbreaks, it is advisatur to take certain measures during the day and night while in water, without causing any agitation. Avoid contact with infected individuals and maintain personal hygiene by using flea collars and ventilators. Apply cooling gel or cream to alleviate discomfort from lesions as they may appear reddened. Lastly, rest and stay hydrated for a speedy recovery.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	The sun shines brightly and casts long shadows.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	It's very windy at the place I live, but it gets even worse in summer.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	C sun, hours of wash are left at the river and soon will flow water; it's used for cleaning and expressing oneself.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the leech is prolonged near the cement of the bloodsuckers and it exudes fluid, after an hour insert a cloth soaked in cold water under it, and place another cloth on top that absorbs the secretion.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the wound is multiplied or polluted with lime triphosphate or similar substances during the time when the blood clot forms, it may delay healing and cause stiffness in the joints due to scar tissue formation, or if they are left on the site of fistulas from scraped fava beamoins and not removed before they adhere to the location, the blood clot will dissolve.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	Certain feeding habits of leeches may need to be changed if necessary; when is that possible?
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If ticks are not allowed to be suspended, they must immediately remove the tick or place a needle in its location within five seconds and then wait for any signs of bleeding; those that feel any significant amount of blood should seek medical attention promptly.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	He wants to cook these potatoes; sprinkle a little garlic salt or ash on them and fry shortly afterward.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Sure! Let's dive into the topic of restorative justice, which is a fascinating aspect of criminal justice systems across the globe. Restorative justice focuscuroses on healing and rehabilitation rather than punishment alone. Here are some key points you should know:
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This capital book is essential in the field of medicine; and it covers bone fracture and joint dislocation recovery techniques.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O children, be aware that they talk about this capital among the false messengers and common people, as well as those who at any time did not respect or read a letter from the Ancient Free Legion.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason, I have made it so that these scientific instruments in our land were restricted; and I never forget or abandon them at any time. Moreover, I did not use them for personal gain but rather to study the works of ancient scholaders and understand their intelligence, from which the science of those times was derived.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	A person is applying to participate in an experiment and study on the length of overall lifesebiology, and they are seeking approval from the ethical committee before proceeding with their research proposal.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	In this chapter I have described everything that my science can reveal; as well as what is revealed through experimentation; and now I shall show you all the things about elongation and how it occurs, as well as its applications, also demonstrating various forms of deformations which are administered in a similar manner to those previously mentioned.
Capitol primier.	First Edition.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summaries and collections from the fragments of bones, which are necessary before we begin recalling the limbs and various parts of each individual.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	In the beginning of this chapter, we will discuss the essence of rhetamo (speech). Moreover, to understand the concepts presented in these capitols, it is advisable for you and those who are quick-witted or have knowledge about this artful skill to familiarize themselves with its principles.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	When an accident occurs causing a bone fracture or dislocation, sprain, or strain, it is adviscu to seek immediate medical attention via emergency room visit or urgent care clinic if there are no contraindications for any reason at all, as such injuries can lead to serious complications and worsen with time. It's also important to note that older individuals may be more susceptible to these injuries, and it is advised to seek medical attention during extreme temperatures or heatwaves.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	A proper diet for those suffering from hemorrhoids should consist of fruits and vegetables such as berries, carrocks, and leafy greens; and it's essential to avoid fatty meats and foods that fill the intestines with bulk. This includes ensnaring oneself from constipation cauterization and preventing excessive discharge of material from any body part.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Once more the malady returns to its original regiment, as is its custom.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	So the broken bone begins to be restored, as long as pain from consuming nutritious food rich in energy and fat such as wheat bread with water, milk, eggs, fish, meat, butter, fresh cheese, fruits and others similar to those items is avoided. This dietary regime helps promote a more significant coagulation of the bone fracture.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	In this case, the water-soaked bones of animals found in humans as well as in the wild or among the elderly and decrepit may not be able to continue existing and consolidate according to their nature due to the desiccation of their body parts.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	E remains and continues according to its nature for the drying of those members, and it also persists and solidifies those that are left at the end of clemency, just as in children's bones.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature provides and nurtures over the torn apart pieces of everything without a seeming cause to glut in that greediness which adheres and sticks together those fragments within which strengthens through cohesion and unity, just like fire at mealtime, unless there is no cause forbiddamo from its deeds.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason, it is necessary for you to avoid the foods of gluttony, such as those that are heavy and sticky and oily, just as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Type of fracture according to the affected limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	The types of breaks vary according to the variety of limbs, so a fracture of the leg bone is different from a fracture of the arm bone; and similarly, a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the backbone; likewise all other members are varied among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	Once upon a time, in the bustling capital city where everything was unique and each fragment stood out from all others...
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Type of fracture in the left tibia.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	There are various types of bone fractures in their classifications; some cases result in an arc-shaped fracture while others occur due to impacts on stars (traumatic incidents). Some fractures follow the length of the bone, and there are also compound fractures resulting from compression or tension forces, both with and without movement. The fractures can be simple, hairline, or a disruption in the joint capsule, as described when preparing to write about the condition.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	The total essence of the event lies in creating one's own entertainment, rather than relying on a repeat performance at an upcoming venue.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Signal of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The cracked bone is a fracture of the humerus; it shows curving and protrusion, with an appearance that when you grasp its counterpart to your mother's, you feel such similarity.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Then it's not an obvious curvature or something that involves your own touch when you press the bone and there is no severe pain or great suffering, so it's likely not a fracture either.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that it may be tortuosity or a small crack, for I fear what happens to your mother and the pressure she experiences from all of this; take pauses over the medications you remember that time when necessary attention should be given; and use them appropriaturally with subtle strictures.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	In the case of an E sapiens who is bent and not divided into two or another water that does not reach dry land, the whole parted from its companion shall be compelled to commence rectification of their fault which has occurred when it came upon them as a plague.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If the eye has developed an infection, it is adviseb to avoid contact lenses for at least a few days until the infection clears up; and proceed as follows according to each situation you can manage regarding wearing glasses or not using any corrective devices.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	The restoration of the light and refining of it is a little doubtful that from which occurrence misfortunes arise.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	A proper introduction to the subject that will follow this recollection includes its history, significance, and relevance in today's context. This provides readers with an understanding of why they should care about the topic before diving deeper into it. It can be helpful to also offer a preview or teaser of what insights are to come, enticing the audience to continue reading.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the broken limb is a hand or foot (whether it's yours or your child's), you will need to immobilize and elevate the affected area until help arrivcuo. In case of small hands, use both pieces of cloth tied together; if larger, use one piece of cloth. Alternatively, you can use two strips of fabric or a single strip for securing the limb in place.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	E is your position in which you pause the limbs according to their natural figure, while those parts that are extended from the limb tremble, then you should make them return to their proper places and positions as best as you can.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Be watchful and attent the strength of your will, so that no harm comes to the afflicted through your negligence or injury; and use all your power to foster love between each person and their companion in whatever best serves this purpose.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	At that hour, it is very beneficial for you to touch your mother's heart with kindness and care; if at any time you notice a difference in her behavior, adjust accordingly by maintainering the same level of affection and love as before.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Extreme stretching and compression can also occur with excessive force during massage sessions, which may result in inflammamo or muscle sprains as a consequence of the therapy process.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	In relation to the anatomy of a joint, it is crucial for maintaineing equilibrium and proper function; advise against discomfort while lying down or during sleep hours, and observe any twitching or restlessness, as well as vomiting due to these movements. Wait until the affected limb's position causes no pain before attempting repositioning (which could be caused by a joint injury). Consider changing that position to another one where there is no discomfort; ensure that the adjusted position of the limb maintains straightness and symmetry, so as to prevent any abnormalities while it heals.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the limb'aturition is such that I advise you about it, because you should know that the severed limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and form according to those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	As for those who are small as the arm and said elbow and similar to them, sometimes they cover themselves with a very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	The fishes that are so large have a skin as tough as the hide of an ox or cow; it is so tightly wrapped around them that their limbs become strangely rigid throughout, yet they do not allow any marks to form on them in this manner.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	B starts by preparing the equipment for evacuation of a broken bone, taking appropriate rest intervals with sufficient water intake at the site of that fracture, then strengthening the bandage on the affected limb slightly.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	A) Upon your departure from the site of injury, proceed to a higher location and ensure that you do not focus directly on the area where you have strained yourself.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	A prolonged use of this cream around the site of the fracture helps to gradually soften the scar tissue, so that you eventually remove it entirely with your hands.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	A method of applying a bandage over another layer involves wrapping the new layer around the previous one, and then adjusting the wrappings close to the point where the fracture is located; your work should be in line with keeping the first wrapping taut as well as softening that second one according to the instructions given for the initial wrap.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	The angle between the stopping points of a Leonardo or Draper curve, in which it is equal to the curvature of the fracture, if in it there is any curvature; otherwise, do not pause at all.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	In the area around the wound, apply pressure to another bandage and then wrap these sterile gauze pieces neatly, if in that place there is no inflammamen or abscess present, leave it as is for a while; and let that remain wrapped for several days. Then gradually loosen those wraps.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The spines of the hedgehog's back are short, and it is well-formed. They may be made of pine or fir wood; or they could come from palm fronds; and each thorn follows this shape and figure: (...) [Please note that a more complete description would require additional research to provide accurate details on the hedgehog's spines.]
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	The spike that is paused over this fracture should be thick and slightly larger than the other spears; the length of the splint according to how it is fitted to the limb in magnitude and smallness. Then strengthen around the spears with another band following your initial tightening direction, and let it be evenly distributed as we have mentioned regarding tightening, so that it should correspond to the location of the fracture more or less depending on how far along the fracture is; thus the tighter the wrapping.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The threads should be of varying thickness and fineness, and they are frail; if the threads are too thick, as I have seen in the operation of loose folds passing through the previously spun cord's filaments, it is a significant error when the tension is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	The use of subtle and small fishing tools may not be suitable for all water bodies that you wish to fish in, as they are unable to reach or catch the desired ones through obstacles. Also, a certain amount of time is required between casts with such equipment.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	The following disease is considered to occur at the extremities of the stones near the strictures in those places, during times when there are breaks in the stopping stone or a chiseled piece that does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some broken bones and accidents causing trauma to the spine may result in a loss of memory that occurs after returning home from the capital on such an event.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	People who have had amputated limbs should not put weight on their prosthesis immediately; in fact, they should only do so after a period of days or weeks, depending on the security against the possible occurrence of an abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the method of casts used by ancient healers for treating fractures, dislocations and sprains.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manieyra is a simple and popular dish made from breadcrumbs or croutons of fried food, usually convenient at mountainous regions, predominantly among women and children. It's a comforting meal often served with warm sauces but can also be enjoyed without any heat-inducing ingredients. This traditional delicacy consists mainly of wheat flour that has been finely ground as part of the milling process in grain mills.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	C does not just copy that piece of wood, but rather carves it into an album cover, and stops the crafting process neither too thick nor too thin; then he proceeds with it.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	Then, the end will appear when you wrap it over that piece of lead whose weight is equal to one dram. After two drams, and remove that and leave only the hanging piece of lead from the balance.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	In the event of fractures, dislocations, and sprains in restaurants, consider using this herbal remedy recipe containing asafetida, laudanum, acacia gum, eucalyptus oil, myrrh, aloe vera, and chamomile. These ingredients are known for their medicinal properties:
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	The old man carefully tended to his garden patch in the backyard, watering each plant and herb with great care. He knew every type of vegetable he grew - tomatoes, cucumebers, bell peppers, carrops, green beans, and much more. With a gentle touch, he checked for any signs of pests or diseases, making sure to remove them promptly. His gardening tools were well-maintained: a pair of sturdy gloves, pruners, a trowel, watering can, and a trusty wheelbarrow. The old man took pride in his beautiful and bountiful garden.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manieyra experiences discomfort at the joints and separates from its usual places, causing accidental pain in those areas along with cracks and fractures. The wood is both sanded smooth and submerged in warm oil and grease, then left to dry on a flat surface.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this mixture there is no healing from restoration, of blisters and properly dispelling pains.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for making the paste that restores the tranche: take almond flour and poppy seeds of wild Papaver rhoeas; mix well to make a paste, using olive oil as needed.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	The swelling bruise is administered to restore the bone fracture and you want to resolve the current inflammation. Here's a recipe of aloe vera, camomile, violet flowers, barley flour, using all parts in equal proportions (1:1). On that day at three o'clock in the afternoon, her brother was not injured.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	When May sprains her ankle, she applies a cold compress with chamomile-infused water or just plain water and uses a bandage for support.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	In case of a deep abscess that requires member restoration: recipe for elderflower and chickweed infusion, and balm (bear's breech), mallowwort, violas, camomile, dandelion flowers, all finely chopped and boiled. Let them simmer in either sour or sweet almond milk or water from the birch tree or rose hip, according to the condition of the member and desired color intensity.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Mayes Ypocras shall not perform an incision on the limb that has been lacerated for the purpose of restoring its normal function, unless it involves a cut made with wax and oil and no other cause; moreover, he should describe whether it is more serious or subtle.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	It is commonly believed that applying certain oils to the severed limb promotes healing and restoration, especially when it lacks vitality due to reasons such as cold exposure. This is somewhat similar to the use of myrrh and other related substances for such causes mentioned before.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	To create a plaster for treating lesions and pain from migraines, kidney issues, sensitive skin or bird feathers (presumably quills), as well as other types of discomfort; prepare the following ingredients: white clay, ground herbs, powdered willow bark, sea salt, divided into two parts. Grind them together and mix to form a paste for plastering.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	According to the severity of the injury caused by breaking the ligament and dislocating it, if it does not cause pain or irritation, nor is the bone broken, then you should avoid moving your joint for a few days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you experience severe pain or inflammaturd, take some time to rest and apply a cold compress at once.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	A wet cloth or sponge made from seaweed and a damp lion'amoeba is submerged in warm water, then gently applied to the affected area until the burning sensation stops and the pain subsides; then rest the limb for an hour. Afterward, place it on a soft cloth soaked in lukewarm water with oil or rosewater, covering it overnight until you're sure of any risk of infection and that the swelling has reduced, along with relieving the pain of the affected area.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	The subtle binding that is not first and foremost should be carefully woven together within the realm of healing it resides in.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And so the swelling and pain and inflammebombed from all injuries have healed completely, and you no longer need plaster or bandages. Now, as in the past when you first consulted me, your health is restored.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If you do not agree to any of the reasons mentioned above, then I will have to terminate our agreement within three or four days. Section VII. For several weeks after you come to us for the dislocation treatment, as we have said, until the fracture heals and is attached to the coagulation of flesh over it, keep this bandage on your wrist constantly moistened with oil for two days.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	The sentence in Occitan says "L'adjustment must be made more rigorously than the first overall adjustment, and it should correspond to the increase of the food supply, according to its preceding memory." Here is an equivalent phrase in Old French:
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you come across a bone fracture and it has dried out or become atrophied, do not cover the wound; instead, know that nutrients are prohibited from reaching that area. Therefore, provide plenty of water in small amounts throughout the day; this will help hydrate the tissue. After three days, loosen the bandage slightly and allow blood flow to the affected area by performing gentle movements; this process helps deliver nutrips into the wound and promotes significant healing.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	"Because the waters of the rivers flowing through the restored lands of the land division do not resume at once after restoration, as they should, and their course is altered according to the operations undertaken by them, there is great concern, and if the rights were properly defined, then those ancient ones would remain free and unburdened."
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	I have never seen anyone drink so much water, which makes it more reasonable that they didn't get sick.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Second Capitol: From the time of breakage when events occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	Cracks in bones are small chips, and their shapes are varied, and the causes are different; none of these cracks is caused by a blow to the spine, but rather it pushes all the bone inside that shell which remains on the outside, just like sawing into the wood. Therefore, this type of fracture is called an avulsion. Or, the blade cuts off part of the bone and also cuts through the flesh without going beyond its farthvee; and this type of fracture is called absolute lift.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The extent of these two fractures is large or small, and whether they are dislocated (luxation) or partially displa
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This is a skull fracture that approaches the pericranium which is behind the eye; it is in the face of the bone, and the plateau of these two types of fractures can be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	C Capillary Fracture is characterized by being mild in the bone and in subtlety of hair-like cracks, and it's called this type of specific crack due to its features.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	E is the fracture caused by either cast or percussion of stone, which results in penetration into any thin plate of bone from its sides, and it occurs at convex areas just as accidents occur to ramrods when impacted and broken upon entry into their respective cavities.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	A large portion of water is found in the bodies of humans, just as in the kidneys of children.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	So these are all such types of fissure cracks, they are like steps as well as separated stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	Every year, we celebrate the preservation of all water in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	Certainly! Here is the translation of your text from Old Occitan to contemporary English:
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A fresh cut is often surrounded by a clot that forms over the wound, and it eventually hardens, so the injury appears blackened.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	The healing of bone fractures considers the impacts of illnesses, and when you experience accidents that imply clear danger such as vomiting from cholera, loss of understanding, deprivation of speech, syncope (fainting), acute fever, discharge of bodily fluids, and requests for help similar to those in major health conditions, it does not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If you don't take proper care of your health now, it will begin to deterge sooner or later.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason why it comes to you in the morning when it's hot as well during winter days is because you study at the altitude of the sun before midday, according to your schedule on day XIV.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If you have surgery during the summer days and spend hours lying on a flat surface starting from day seven after the procedure, ensure that your incision is not contaminated by sand and avoid any complications that may arise.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the parietal bone fracture reaches the panniculus carnosus covering the brain and is fragmented into small pieces of flaky texture, then you should cover the fragments with stitches as I recommend to you. (Translation from Catalan)
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	In the region of Plagueville, there exists a belief that certain bloodlines are more suscepteable to contagious diseases, and therefore, it is common practice to identify people according to their lineage in order to understand potential health risks based on familial patterns. This method relies heavily on the accuracy and validity of these inherited traits related to illnesses.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	It's decided that you must detect the onset of blood or pus discharge from a wound, as well as signs of redness and swelling around it. Now help to supply its required warmth, and ensure the area is covered with clean drapes soaked in vinegar and oil to prevent odor. Let the injury rest until the inflammamoion subsides, and be sure there's no further bleeding; then you can begin treatment around the wound site and the removal of any foreign objects.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	Option A or B, which is the second operation to follow?
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Maniglia è una maniglia che tu inserisci le ossi della mano stretta in tal modo, ed è questa la forma di lei: E appoggia un altro inscissori questo, un pò più largo di quello; e questa è la forma di lui:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	A prop is an administrator who manages more licenses than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	All knights shall bear distinctive names among which some are longer than others; and those of shorter length will be placed at the end in terms of their surname's alphabetization, and they must have a metal signet ring or seal pin as proof of their knighthood.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	He uses a soft touch with the pliers to avoid hurting his fingers while working on that task.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bones are strong and hardy, during the procedure of administering them in front of where you manage the incision tools, which we shall refer to as non-deep scissors or forceps.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	In E there is no name but those who do not pause at the end of its body towards that which it approaches, because this is where the rounded extremity or margin lies above that one which is left behind and appears as a small margin or circle; this prevents it from being submerged and passing beyond the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is convenient that your teeth take from this vast array of which some may be appropriate to the edge of each one according to where it belongs in all parts of your brain, and the extent and narrowness should correspond to the sharpness of such an edge.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the method of three types of trepanning tools: The quality of penetrating in the circuit of the broken bone is that it stops the trepanning tool on the bebone and turns around within what you know that the bone has been pierced; then apply to move the trepanning tool to another location, and pause for all through the thickness of the drill or core.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Apropensideys insides as well as scissors for water that are between each of your bones, and apply the subtle pressure that you can do underwater in order to levitate, just as we have explained. In this way, eradicate the bone, or your mother, or any other cause due to certain uncomnfortable movements which you will attach to water, like fins and subtle forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	I must ensure that the scissors do not touch any of the paper at all.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	Hence you will have circled the perforated bone, and then separated from it as follows: if it is still continuous with itself, extract that part so that its edges are equal to that in the hardness of the liquid contained within this bone which appears similar to a blade being split by another seemingly less thick but more subtle than other blades.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If you have any sprained ankles or bruises, take advantage of this opportunity to rest and recover from the strains that you've been enduring; also apply these ointments and plasters which we mentioned earlier.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is the unethical and distant one, which involves gouging out Gualia and Lauzeck with great joy; and this is his advice to you: it's crucial for you to begin by revealing the location where the bone fracture is most severe and evident. Once you have located that spot, carefully sever the extremity using a slow and gentle cutting tool of the type described here.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Lens E is characterized by being convex and not causing any distortion, while the acute angle is formed in two equal lengths along its length; thus resembling wedges; that the lenticular lens be adjusted to match the face of the oblique edge.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	A prop weapons about scissors of one hand and a small mallet within which inscriptions all the bones make it so much easier to revolve, and you too secure in the pancreas that does not come accidentally in any direction, and if the medicament1n was the most feared of all men and the least knowledgeable; certainly, and if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	In Lahore's case in Romania, there is no associated cause of the hernia at the site of the inguinal ring, and thus the surgery should be performed without hesitation to eliminate that problem, which would ease his pain and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the subcutaneous layer and what remains above it is separated from the bone, causing an open wound; then you should prepare for eradicating those subtle sutures by which you have prepared a number of different quantities so that you may administer them in the most convenient locations possible to promote healing. Accordingly, apply those substances properly according to how much tissue damage has been sustained during your procedure on the fractured and dislocated bone.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	In my opinion, the best approach to manage your portfolio is by following these steps:
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any of the other minor capillary and subtle fractures, indicate which treatment you administer according to how soon you want to correct it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	"E is not pleased with all those who have studied that subject."
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	The text above is in Catalan, a Romance language spoken primarily in Catalonia, an autonomous community of Spain. Here' cuida (care) es super importante quan nos apresentim aigua que hem demostrat als grans fractures. This translates to "The care we show when presenting water that we have demonstrated at large cracks is very important."
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If you remove the panniculus during surgery, cover it with a dressing according to the amount of bleeding; soak that in oil, and leave it on top of the wound drain; then take another folded or tripled cloth, soak it in vinegar and oil, place it over the first one as much as you can without causing deep sutures, just covering enough to stop any bleeding. Then apply pressure with that layer only as much as needed according to the amount of blood coming out.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Elias is here with this cure that will last for one or two days during which you are safe from inflammatur; and then unbind it and apply medicines such as excessive dryness in flax meal and wheat flour, and dust of olive oil and aromatherapy, and similar things to the area.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	E is the type of medicine you should use for these powdered remedamoons that have been pulverized on dry cloths; and universally, administer any medicine with the properties necessary to repel and not cause itching.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Look at your virtue and ensure that the plague in your body is clean; it should not be on an oil or any other substance; nor should you add to its strength when applied over your neck, as once adjusted thereon, if corrupted, it can spoil and bring about illness with malicious intent.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	Accidents on the surface of the tooth, as it becomes exposed by its erosion and mainly when its cure is conveyed, along with blackness on its surface; therefore consider if such accidents pertain to the illnesses mentioned earlier, knowing that they are all interconnected.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If not because of blackness but due to medicine that is outdated and it's in virtue of this medicine causing the discoloration, at times you may notice traces of honey with a portion of rose oil. The healer collects the herbs and fabrics needed for the treatment, and then sets them aside in preparation; they also gather any medicinal spices that are required for when the patient is to be cured.
Capitol .iii.	III. The United States Capitol Building
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	At the restaurant, they cut the nose when trimming it.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	It's not broken but rather divided into several parts with high complexity, or one of those sections, some veins, having two bones, the section left is cartilaginous and it is not fractured but may result in twisting and turning movements.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two pieces breaks off during the procedure, it is required that you put the broken part back into your nose, and align that fracture according to the indicated direction on the outside, so that the nose returns to its natural shape when reassembled.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	Certainly! Here's the translation in standard English:
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper third of the nose and it does not involve any displacement, healing typically occurs within two to three weeks at the tip of the bone where it was broken.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the break is in two pieces, then it appears to be a clean break.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	On the first day of the break, if possible, I will restore you to your health; otherwise, within seven or eight hours take the rest from the bruise medication.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	A common treatment for a broken nose involves the use of an external splint on one side if the break is in one area; or two splints if there are breaks in two areas, and it should be thick enough to provide adequate support along the entire length of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Five days ago, I visited the old restaurants where they used to wrap the calques in linen, and change them daily but never saw it myself; having heard that the meccas were wrapped in a comfit album with a powdered wool coverlet, let alone making sure whatever goes inside is secured and hardened by cartillage.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Some bee stings may enter the nostrebones, at the skull's calvarium, causing severe pain greater than that covered by lion-skin fabric; and it occurs when there is a forceful fracture of the nose or the illness involves respiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	In this case it is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do so, or if you wish, don't do anything at all.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	He decided to apply a fresh poultice, spreading it over his nose with either lard or butter mixed into warm water and tinted orange, or alternatively, using vinegar.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If May's does not decide to heal the boil promptly, she will have to resort to using barley flour and eggshells as a poultice, and then place it on top of the lion's paw without any particular reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of your nose are fractured or dislocated, you must separate them carefully using suitable instruments and then immobilize them with appropriate splints. Then treat the wound by cleaning it thoroughly and apply a healing ointamnet along with bandages as needed.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	The water has entered your nose, causing you to feel like something is stuck in your throat; now it's time that we give you some medicine and insert a small tube with a metal tip so that everything can get better immediately.
Capitol .iiii.	Title Page (Capitalization and Typography):
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Mandible fracture repair
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the mandible is broken and the alveolar fracture is not displauted at all, consider if the fracture goes through entirely, and it's not tranched into two parts and bent towards each side, then the hearing loss is slight.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	If the break is on the right side of the jaw, then you should insert your left index finger into the mouth up to the fracture site; similarly, if the break is on the left side of the mandible, at that time insert the aforementebfore mentioned finger from the opposite direction. Thus gently press towards the broken fragment inside and outwards through the other end of the jawbone, ensuring proper alignment as much as possible.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jawbone fracture is divided into two parts, administer splinting for two hours as soon as possible to achieve alignment within feasible limits.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	If you decide to correct dental issues that cause disruption and pain, such as teeth of gold or silver or copper; then pause over the broken mandible joint, and pause over your duplicate crown, and over the large poorly made filling, or a similar piece to the length of the mandibular arch. Then proceed with the correction according to how you are fitted for the dental appliance and what is appropriate, without causing destruction.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	A commands the evil to take a break and find peace, and halts the feast of your wicked lions.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	It's believed that the figure has been altered in no way; you will feel it on the third day and then correct what has already been changed from its original form. Bring back those things - a molar tooth, an eagle feather, or flour of chickpeas, for instance - so that you may still have your own essence intact, and rest upon a layer of woolen lamb's wool.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	Then indeed it is attached and adjusted with that plaster on him, and the position of the bone remains unchanged, so long as it does not deviate from being healed and strengthening the fracture; in many cases this fracture is closed within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If the boil recurs despite treatment with a warm compress, apply water frequently as mentioned in the care instructions until it heals and is fully recovered.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is an avulsion, consider if it's a simple or complex separation; accordingly, you should subtly address these issues at the appropriate time in relation to those injuries.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the mosquito infestation is extensive, you may need to intensify your fogging efforts according to the level of necessity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And so you shall have those old tales again, and of those that were forgotten no longer will they be, the hours you spend listening to the horrors of the vast sea; or otherwise, rest upon one of these pillars that are fitting for this place and embody it, within which is healed.
Capitol .v.	In the case of Capital v., which court held the opinion on the matter? The United States Supreme Court, or a lower federal court such as the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, may have rendered their decision based on jurisdictnial grounds and the specific legal issues presented. It's important to provide more details about the case (including year and context) in order to identify which particular court ruled on it.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	The chicken's wishbone, also known as the furcula, is cracked during a tradition called "wishing bone."
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Broken feathers are torn from the starting point below the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	The fragment is from Catalan language and it translates to: "It breaks or separates into two parts that don't meet again; it is inclined towards dislocation; or so happens with repetition, and the restoration of it is difficult; or so much that the fracture becomes a plague."
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	In that case, when the fracture is dislocated, you must be present with two ministers so that one may hold the lever and follow the broken furcula, while the other extends it to that portioned area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Article IV: The filling shall be placed in such a way that the dental cavity is properly shaped at the time of application and not excessively convex or concave.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If you're experieneing episodes of discomfort, pause for a moment to relieve the itch caused by an annoying sensation of wool or cotton, and the size should be according to your needs; extend and raise the brim while bending the rim towards your head so that the fit follows the curvature as you move.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you can't thrust the end of the furcula through the openings out there, then by God, it has returned to your chest, and times come when the illness is reflected over its cervix, and pauses upon his muscle a very significant blow.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The minister presses upon the muscle lying beneath which the bone of the wishbone is elevated and located in the groin area; then you should correct the fracture and align it according to your own descriptions.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	I feel a persistent pain in my lower back and it seems to be worsening, making me think that something might be pressing on the nerves there and causing those sensations for which relief is sought after.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it's retained in the bone, then at that time your ingenious surgical skills which you have acquired come into play, as you had previously removed the furcula (the keel-bone) that serves to support this structure; and this is a wooden or iron structure of which this form results:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	E is similar to the gear of which this is the concavity; and its latitude should be adjusted according to your needs based on the size of the wheel or the scarcity thereof.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of Luzius is such that it can be operated on with two equally opposite ends and one end being wide while the other being narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the disturbance of the grape infestation that you have caused during harvesting its satiety is extensive and likely to cause an abscess, then go immediately and stitch the two lips of the grape with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the disturbance is small or you fear of an abscess, use fewer antibiotic drops and pills according to the amount of wound opening.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	He decided to take a rest under the apple tree in the bright sunlight and enjoy some ripe apples, while listening to the birds singing overhead.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	The Mays' strictures of the bone, which are its plague and section, consist of bandages made from ground flour and lard oil, placed over a leopard skin, and with these straps at the lower end of it, if you have that kind of ague, and then take mustard, so is twisted the cord the Saracens use, which should be long enough to go around once or slightly more than that; and with these bandages, cover over the skin and the plaster. Then wrap a thin tablet (bandage) around it such that its length should be about three fingers and almost as wide; then wrap this thin tablet with cloth around the bone at the fracture site. Then place the straps on the collarbone, both above and below the titillic of you're fine health or your poor health, and rotate it back and forth over the entire area, each time that the strictures of the fracture are descending, do not cover them with anything.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	Ephesians 4:29 (NIV): "No say such things among yourselves; rather, speak to one another in psalms and hymps and spiritual songs."
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	The lymph nodes are situated along the lateral margin of the sternum, and they become enlarged due to an illness affecting the body. As this occurs during sleep at night a small portion is lost; however, if that portion were elevated in terms of height compared to others, then consequently, the fracture on the furcula would be raised as well due to muscle tension; or the arm is attached to the sternum'ebony.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	The suture does not lose its effectiveness if it is not exposed to premature rupture or infection within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	The surgeon examined the facial wound thoroughly under water, and adjusted it within the sutures, ensuring that both were repaired and the humerus bone fracture was stabilized.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	E is strict and comfortable according to the standards in twenty-eight days, with occasional stays in luxury houses during that time period.
Capitol .vi.	Capital VI (Virgin Islands) is an unincor cuper state in the Caribbean, a territory of the United States. It consists of three main islands—Saint Thomas, Saint John, and Water Island—as well as more than fifty other smaller isles. The capital city is Charlotte Amalie on St. Thomas.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Shoulder joint fracture surgical repair.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula tart is broken at the bottom of its location and not torn by you, but only along the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	Therefore, when the place of yours is broken - and it's broken in its middle part - and unknown unless touched, at times according to the figure of the fracture it breaks away from you and prepares itself by reducing that portion as per the natural shape which is possible for it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Here is the translation of your text from Occitan (also known as Provençal) to English:
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	Mays noticed the concave shape of one of the locations on the spatula resembling that of a lion'amoji. He then adjusted the stele according to this similarity in concavity.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	A proper reinforcement of the human spirit, especially under prolonged constraints and adversity, is essential for maintainebl to retain their sense of self within that situation.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Every day he examines the limestone; and every time it softens, another layer is added to reinforce the wall at its original location.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	The eagle feels sad about its lost mate.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula will be restored in X days or less (in XX days).
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Then the number you will complete is eleven, and after an hour it will dissolve into a liquid, and you'll know for sure that its origin from the bones of which it begins does not cause fear or concern.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	The lymph nodes of the neck and groin region become swollen; later you observe them on yourself, and they are examined according to what has been said in the fracture of the furcula of Saint Apotomy when there is an abscess present.
Capitol .vii.	VII. The United States Capitol Building is the home of the U.S. Congress and one of the most prominent symbols of American democracy, located on Capitol Hill atop Jenkins' Hill in Washington, D.C., adjacent to the National Mall. It was designed by William Thornton and later modified by Benjamin Latrobe, Charles Bulfinch, and Thomas Walter after a fire destroyed part of the original structure in 1814. The cornerstone was laid on September 18, 1793, and today's Capitol is an amalgamation of various architectural styles as it has been expanded and restored multiple times over its history.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Orthopedic surgery for the treatment of a fractured pisiform bone.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Some leaves are torn at the middle part of their length and end, while their ends extend as curls and comma-shaped fringes.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	His accidental injuries from when his rib was broken caused a decline in his health and severe pain, difficulty breathing, coughing, and considerable blood loss; it is evident by the fracture in the bone and not hidden to perception.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The correction of the spine is achieved by placing a curved support on top of it and enscribing its contour; then gently pressing along the muscles, aligning both sides as much as possible with two movements, following all the correct procedures to make sure that the shape of the bone returns to normal.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	The silk threads are carefully wound around the bamboo skein, avoiding any knots and ensuring they resemble wings in their delicacy as you wrap them with drapery; and weaving this subtly over the broken thread so that it doesn't become too tight. Continue looping according to a rounded path along your back, making sure each loop is neatly secured; and always consider the tension of the silk threads throughout the process, ensuring they remain soft yet firm.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If the wound is caused by an infection or irritation, pain, or abscess that occurs at the site, it may cause redness and swelling of the surrounding area. Remove any plasters if necessary and replace them with a suitable dressing for healing; also, reduce any swelling as often as needed using an ice pack. Adjust the bandage to fit snugly around the affected area that is healing.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter Eight - The Capital City
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	During the coastal restoration project, what measures are taken for dune stabilization?
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	It is known that the fracture of the ribs was not a cut, but in large wounds; and from the extremities of their body on the side do not accidentally injure those contractions, as they are cartilaginaturous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	The awareness of you is not diminished by the feeling, but I will seek it from what you say.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The fracture must be reduced and aligned as best as possible according to the available method; while it is healing, take care of it based on its progress and promptly apply a splint or strengthen the broken bone with steel if necessary. If required, seek expert help in this matter.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the rib fracture is descending towards the organs, it causes severe pain and puncturing, so much so that it affects those who have cried out in agony; and at once, the bone shifts, leading to difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood. This condition is difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The Ancient Egyptians were skilled engineers in that area, creating various inventions.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	E of the Holy Spirit sayeth unto me: Cover thy face with holy bread and wine that I have blessed to expel sickness and spread ill winds, so that the stomach may be filled up and extended, and the fracture driven out from within.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	If you suspect that the wound is causing an abscess to form or has already formed one, do not hesitate to apply warm water (warm compress) as soon as possible; if it has occurred, seek medical help promptly.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They advised that the patient be kept calm and relaxed as much as possible because of their fragile state; and it appears logical, but there's concern that strong wind may blow excess moisture onto the area due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They said to each other: What place is this, hidden under the layer of oil that has submerged it? And let there be dusty clouds between the shores within which its abundance encompsaw; and may this cure prevail against the illnesses caused by pleurisy from food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	The text appears to be in Old Occitan (Old Provençal), a Romance language spoken from the 9th century until well into the modern era in what is now southern France and adjacent areas. However, this particular passage seems to involve some medical procedures or rituals but due to its complexity it's challenging to provide an accurate translation without further context. Here's a rough attempt:
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	A) When adjusting the lips of a large wound on the leg, if it's necessary, sew it together and apply a bandage while it is healing.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you develop an abscess, apply warmth and pressure to the bump every few hours using a clean cloth soaked in warm water or oil, and make sure to keep it moist with this solution until it heals properly.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	Sleep on your back over the bed upon which you rest, within that you shall be healed. (In a poetic sense)
Capitol .ix.	In the United States, capitalization follows specific rules to ensure consistency and clarity in written communication. Here are some key guideleiners for using capitals correctly:
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Repair of spondylospondylitis in L2 and L3 vertebrae.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some cervical vertebrae fractures involve the neck bones, while others affect the lower back, and similarly to the spinal discs of the backbone.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	If your child has swallowed poison or a harmful substance and remains conscious, consider the following factors to determine whether they will be okay or not: how many times you have previously mollified (soothed) their spasms, stupors, deaths, etc., as well as if you cannot stretch nor relax them further. Whenever you touch or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in those areas, know that it is not healing, and after these days of treatments, it becomes fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	Those who have such symptoms and feel pain in that area should know that the spinal cord is likely injured, but it can be healed with proper treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you're wondering whether a sick-looking dog is actually ill or just tired, the hours of sleep should be taken into consideration.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you become so angry that your judgment is clouded and you react as others might in similar situations, when you lean on your own judgments, let anger control you, it may lead to losing self-control and urinating uncontrollably, remember then how mortal one can be. Therefore, do not rely solenly on yourself during such times of distress.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If May doesn't decide on any of those reasons, the reason is better and more plausible.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment for this condition is to apply a cold compress over the affected area until it becomes less swolamo, or you can use warm houes without touching the skin directly; place the compress on that specific area throughout the day until the swelling reduces.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	In times of rest, the healing bandages provide comfort and existence, and strengthen him in his suffering; while commanding the illness to take its repose and tranquility, and not torment the loved one who has passed away within it, causing pain until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	The doctor will decide if the fracture of the jaw is dislocated or if any cause has already separated from it, currently causing swelling over the neck and that prevents you to open your mouth; therefore, close the lips of the wound with a stitch if necessary, and then treat the deep cuts with ointment until they are healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	In case the last tooth of your lower jaw breaks off, and it is loose, then you should take a small piece of wood (preferably hazel) with your left hand's thumb and index finger, and balance that piece of wood atop the broken-off bone as much as possible. Then gently press down on top of the tooth using this makeshcuem dental splint, holding onto it tightly if necessary for support.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	I hear the distant crashing waves upon that shore, and there it is - the cure for all woes. The healing of the storm within, until peace prevails and restoration comes.
Capitol .x.	In the United States, each state has its own capital city. Here is a list of some states and their respective capitals:
De restauracio de la ancha.	Restoration of the wide road.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the anchovy tarts are broken, and if they break apart, then the hours until the fracture occurs on both ends of those pieces and run along in the length and decline to the parts therein; and incidents of bad pain in that place and puncturing occur, and the basket is stunned when it is broken.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of the light is that you should spread your hand over the area above the fracture, which figure it is.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	"If the bone is broken at one end only, heal it by making an equal-length counterpart which is fitted in so that it may be joined to its original figure."
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the bone is broken or you lean towards surgery for the injured parties, hours later you may feel pain around your abd groin area as it is prepared to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	Then you'll have to apply that paste upon it; pause for a moment and then press down on those wooden or metal strips, and reinforce through tightening without causing any cracking or shaking of the structure.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	The wound heals faster than the water that flows through a narrow channel according to equality and commands the illness to sleep on its sides or to cross over its ribs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	Mays decides to apply a warm compress on the affected area twice a day and avoid using any ointments or creams until the boil is settled, and wait for the water that appears according to the previous instruction; then proceed with restoring the skin as usual, by gently rubbing it in this manner.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If a prisoner dies in his detainment or is executed, you shall handle the remains accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	In the United States, the federal legislative body is known as Congress, which consists of two chambangs - the Senate and the House of Representatives (also called "The House" or "House"). The term "Capitol xi." seems to be a reference to a specific piece of legislation introduced in the 11th session of the United States House of Representatives. However, without additional information, it's impossible to determine exactly what this bill is about. To learn more about any given congressional bill, you can use resources like Congress.gov or contact your local representative for assistance.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Casting of the maxillary arch fracture repair.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Assisting water that lies between the shoulder blades.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	Si se rompe, el reemplazo ocurrirá en una de dos formas; si el producto vence antes de la fecha indicada, procederá a un proceso de restauración. ¿Cuál es la manera que deberías elegir primero según esta norma?
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	The two extreme limits of the journey involve being in high altitude locations and adjusting to different time zones.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	The following is the translation of your text from Sardinian to English:
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	He then places the sling over that painful wound, extends it to both sides of his body; and he wraps him with a bandage around the fracture, making sure it stays in place as the bone returns to its original position.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other method involves the sick person lying on their back, with the head slightly elevated and hands suspended above their chest; two assistants are instructed to gently extend one of them over the fracture site using both hands, while the other extends from below the injured area.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you want the extension to be as strong as possible, hours your strength over the cracked area and on the other side of it; so that both ministers stretch out towards their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	If the fracture is close to the end of the bone, it's possible that the middle part above will be displaced upwards and the other side below the fracture will move downwards.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	If the injury is caused by a fall, medical attention should be sought immediately for that area and related injunctions.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Ensure the tube is easy to handle and assess how it fits and is applied for proper application; otherwise, avoid infection by using caution when handling.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Mays decides to have an acupuncture session for his chronic pain on Monday, and he feels relief from the tightness in his body by Tuesday evening. He rests for two hours after beginning the therapy with a warm compress at noon, and then he resumes normal activities.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method to set that splint on the fracture is by applying it with cast padding over the fracture and then wrapping a new dressing around the cast; next adjust the arm using an articulator, and place his/her hand over the affected muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	In the pause of rest, he lifts and places over the assistants his arms to make sure they are on their feet; otherwise, for any reason that may cause them harm or breakage.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Two hours is used to weave stars.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	E is what causes you to pause over that fracture of the stele which has been placed and found among other steles; and to pause between each stele at a distance equal to its width, and be as long as the stele according to the division by adding three inches from all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Article 203 - Regarding the provisions of this chapter, it shall be strictly applied as initially outlined in its introduction.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	The English translation for your statement would be, "E is that the site of the fracture is too narrow." This suggests an area or a location where a bone has broken but the space within this region might not allow for proper healing or treatment due to its constricted size.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	The E wave is less peaked than the A wave, and there is also a minor narrowing of the fracture.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	In the event that you come across a situation involving the inscriptions and adhere to what we have mentioned at the time when restoring his status, do so then.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear an abscess, apply heat frequently and follow the prescribed treatment within seven days as we have instructed.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Article E: Consideration of Layoffs in All Departments over Three Days to Avoid Dismissal at the Production or Distribution Site; Prohibited Food Deliveries for Staff, Except as Necessary for Strictly Defined Purposes; Therefore, Adjust Accordingly as Previously Mentioned.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	The translated sentence in English is as follows: "Mays, you and your wife may enter into an agreement that does not result in any cause of action; then you do not break the language but stay silent for three days or more."
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	Blessed be the one who dwells in sorrow and pain, let their troubles rest upon their shoulders; may they find comfort above all within their heart.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Upon observing the full moon in its waxing phase of light and shadow, consider during all nights or days that are not sleeplebreaking nor fleeting, when the figure of a severed limb is softened, thusly adjust your virtue wholly.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	During the first meal of the day (breakfast), let foods be light, unless these heavier dishes are consumed during a time when they can be fully digested before the next meal; ideally, one should eat hearty foods for lunch and dinner.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Common advice for treating a sprain and bruise is to apply ice, rest the affected area, compress with a bandage or wrap it gently, and keep it elevated above heart level; also consider taking pain relievers if needed and applying healing ointments which can help in alleviating discomfort.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture is stable and non-displaced, you may not need to remove that cast within days or within two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Bone fracture repair surgery (English). This procedure involves the use of various techniques to align and stabilize broken bones, allowing them to heal properly. The specific methods used can vary depending on the type and location of the fracture.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The compost of two bones which are called the atlas; one is small and is that which supports the head (the pous), and the other is large and is that which is pulled down from above by the smaller one (from behind).
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	The great hearth is broken only, and the smaller one gets cracked as well.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	The small lamp above has been flickering for hours; its restoration is imminent and its healing effect will be even more significant.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	The light of the day breaks when his glasses are cracked, and the healing of it is difficult; its recovery is challengeing.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	The old lady's cat has broken two of its bones.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	If the bone that is broken protrudes through the skin, immediate medical attention is needed to restore it; a short period of rest will be easier while the injury heals.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	My soul feels as though the fountain of water that is frozen, hours long to wait until it thaws out passionately.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If the two foci are very close together, then it becomes more difficult to extract the ellipse precisely with a compass.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	The priest places the figure of Mary in front and begins its restoration process; it extends over a chalice, with its hands positioned apart as on other depictps but this time the left hand is lower than the others mentioned and the malaise is centered above a fallen olive.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	Let S be a wise person who dwells in the highest tower of the east, that he may prevent bad luck from occurring.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	The minister extends his hand in farewell from the church steps, and another minister follows suit.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	An optometrist seeks to match the glasses with the frames that best suit one's face shape, according to the most suitable profile possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If you see the bill of your lord's losses, the hours must be devoted entirely to restoring it at its place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	In the event that it is not to your expectation for restoration, and you find yourself overwhelmed by its presence, let us follow the method we have discussed before.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the May's fracture is an avulsion, I would not have made a single capital mistake and therefore take care of that injury.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you notice an abscess at the beginning of your restaurant's operation, take a sterile gauze pad and make it out of olive oil and white wax, ensuring its consistency is between liquid and subtle; then thicken this mixture over that area where the abscess has opened up. Afterwards, apply some clay plaster mixed with powdered molybdenum to reinforce the affected region; finally, place a bandage on it tightly enough to cover the fracture well and provide strong support.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	The name of the stone markers in those places shall be broken into one single piece or two separate pieces at once, according to the major provisions.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	A prop of pause your strict rules regarding the place of the fracture and how it extends beyond or near its lower parts, relax the restrictions slightly when such a mention is made at the beginning of the paragraph.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The bandages that cover your fracture should be soft and not rough or hard; the thread used to bind them properly must be of medium strength - neither too fine nor too coarse, as previously explained.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	C also considers the members of her family to be very dear to her.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If there is any swelling due to which correction is necessary, thus press the affected limb and make sure you apply water as soon as that pain subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	The leaves fall without restraint within the forest, and then return to their rigid structure.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the inscription is made softer and the stone renewed, along with similar features to those, then it restores all its beauty unto thee.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	E should consider if the nutrient is prohibited from entering due to strictures, as it may help loosen that slightly and ease access for days afterward when consuming that nutriader.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If May suffers from none of the causes mentioned earlier and wishes to withdraw within 30 days or sooner, she may do so by notifying as follows.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	The sheet is now carefully suspended from the guilty of ill motions, and it makes him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	In case of this fracture being healed within thirty days or thirty-two days, or if it is not so promptly healed, it shall be considered completely healed after twenty-eight days according to the circumstances and provisions regarding such matters.
Capitol .xiii.	Title: Capital XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	The restaurant'amoeba has successfully repaired the fracture in the chef's teeth and fixed her speech impediment.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	"You must tell my mother and your uncles about this incident immediately; do not delay in conveying the news that there has been an accident and serious injuries."
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	Evan accidentally broke or twisted his mother's arm; hours later he felt that the pain followed him everywhere and persisted with her lying central according to equality, and then gently placed his hand over hers extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	The Minister extends the duties and functions of equivalent medical professionals within those that are qualified, ensnaring them in a good collaboration.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	In the event of minor burns or scalds, first apply cold water or a cool compress for a few minutes to alleeinfermeriadisminuirthepain and swelling. If blistering occurs, do not burst them; cover with a sterile non-stick dressing instead. Depending on the location of the burn, you may need to loosely wrap it using cling film or an adhesive bandage.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	The passage is in Occitan language and it narrates an incidence of magic called "Mays si la trincadura" which means "if the sprain". It tells that if someone has this sprain, they should pretend to have a bandage (semblant de spera de drap) on their hand. The evil being is commanded to remove the bandage (strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada).
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	E be the armchair with curved arms in which you sit to ensure that your body is supported by the backrest and gently pull on that according to the curve.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	The text appears to be in Catalan, a Romance language spoken primarily in the Catalonia region of Spain. Here's an attempted translation:
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you break one of the nuts from those shells, then it is said that he grows up; his beard will grow according to how much you sharpen and rub it with your palm and if you wish, stop a small straight rod undernepressure so that the fracture does not become crooked.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the break is in one of the others mentioned (such as the index, middle, ring or little finger), it should be equalized and attached to the previously described piece; or they are all joined according to a continuous technique, which is better; or pause on that small stone, just like we have said for the nail.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	In your restaurant, you must take into account and prevent any instances of food poisoning - as per the guidele from health regulations - in case certain circumstances may lead to such incidents, according to what is outlined in this document.
Capitol .xiv.	Title: Capital Letter XIV - The Fourteenth Chapter of an Exciting Novel
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Orthopedic surgery for a mandible fracture repair.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the cuyass, once broken, are declared according to what is transferred in front and to the upper supreme authority.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of Luke takes place in Nazareth, where the anointing is strengthened over the wound and another portion beyond the wound; and the illness lies stretched out on his belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The minister extends the entire limb length according to the quality of the break, when the fracture occurs in the middle section of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Mayes was stalking the deer, when suddenly he stepped onto a branch causing him to lose his balance and drop his bow at the beginning of the pathway. As a result, he extended his arms for support, leaving behind the broken piece of wood.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the partition is granted to Danielle, then her rights and obligations are transferred from Donna, and any outstanding payments are assigned to the remaining parties.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	A similar fracture in the same limb that results from a reduction according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by a good joint; then you must stop with dressing and compression if not followed by an abscessed member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	In case of an insect bite, you should clean the area thoroughly with soap and water as soon as possible. Then apply cold compresses or ice packs to reduce swelling for the next few days until the swelling subsides. Afterward, return to your regular skincare routine.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The wrapping of Louis's injury must be done as follows: First, wrap the hard bandage around the fracture two or three times and trim any excess; then carefully wrap it so that it reaches up to the joint above and below the injured area.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	A long iron pole is inserted between the sheep and the chamber directly underneath the lord, with both ends of the pole reaching up to the higher parts of the two domains, which then revolve over the chamber and the sheep when they exceed its boundaries.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	In the dimly lit room by that crack in the wall, she paused and placed one of those stone slabs over the coffin's lid.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	A pour the broth over the mixture of chunks and vegetables in the pot, to ensure that it is well combined and heated through.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	A iso comes begins with the application of a firm compression wrap over the site of the fracture in three or four layers, and as you move away from the fracture site, your wrapping should become looser and lighter, and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Extending the docks to both ends of the field up to the partitions that have come before reaching the central pole, and strengthening both end beams of the other side such that the structure'astoce does not get damaged from its own place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	The contract stipulangs that neither corrosion nor blistering and similar defects shall occur; if any such cause occurs, then the party at fault must compensate for all resulting damages as mentioned in various instances.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If your horse falls ill or injures itself with the saddle you use, notify us as soon as possible so that we can provide a replacement when feasible; if not, inform us and we will arrange for a new one to be sent to you promptly, along with instructions on how to proceed based on its condition.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	In some cases, the strength of this fracture in the foot can be reinforced by adjusting another quota to fit the straps, just as we have said in the appendix and on the brace.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the process of restoring lu (presumably a body part or function) in such manner made, it should not lead to malicious clots; and if restored alone, another fluid that is applied will be necessary for the other channel, otherwise shortly afterward the one from which it was taken will weaken.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	The saliva is usually strong for a few days or a little more, depending on the complexity of the cases and other factors involved.
Capitol .xv.	Title: Capital XV (or simply "XV" for the fifteenth edition)
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Restoration of Denolh's scapular blade fracture.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	As he learned of the broken shield's edge and its unfortunate fate, more accidents occurred on the tall towers that had fallen.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Maya decided to break her arm accidentally; it was only a crack or injury in the game, and that's a pity but not too serious, and on this matter, everyone seems to have an opinion.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the ruin should be designed in such a way that it resembles the original structure as much as possible, based on what is indicated by historical documents at the time they were added and combined, to the extent that this is equitable, feasible, and practical.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	In the pause before pressing and on that round stone, if you desire it; and strain from under a suitable amount of pressure water.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Article E(1) considers all the measures recommended in other fractions, as well as with bruise and similar cases when it is necessary to take action for any reason that may be deemed appropriate within the timeframe required for recovery.
Capitol .xvi.	Capital, abbreviatur "Cap." or "capit.", refers to the city in which a country's government is located and where its central legislative bodies meet. In the United States, for instance, this would be Washington D.C., while in France it would be Paris. The term can also refer more generally to an accumulated wealth or resources that are used to fund large projects or ventures.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Recovery from the tibia fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	That in the bush there are two bones of which one is large and is named by its own name 'camba'; and the other is slender, and it is called 'focil'.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	A cut injury causes a rupture of the blood vessels that leads to the loss of two bones in the arm and so it is done reconstruction as well as reconstruction of the arm alignment, and the surgery is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If one breaks two or more bones simultaneously, the cast is broken into multiple pieces.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the ox were more subtle, it would turn away its opponents in battle.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	Sei'trincadgli ossu grossos, atrofichisquedetegno, e sesa dichessu tuesimissas che non sou tueamiguas. (Friulian)
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Article shall be extended and applied equally to the stars according to such alignment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, though the split of the bough may be smooth and slippeby with a few knots, I hope to extend it as much as possible in strength and lightness, and highlight its virtues.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the cocoa harvesting process, a worker's hand is not involved in any operation on the tree; when you remove all the pods and collect them entirely, then take some wood pieces from there which are already separated out of the branches - these should be small ones from palm trees. Remove those with little growth and it shouldn't be twisted, its length should be according to that of the trunk and up until halfway down.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	The wrapping of each bundle shall conform to the length of the piece of fabric and rest on the starting point of one end while the other extends from the opposite side, with both ends converging at the lower half near the edge.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	A proper ladders have three legs at the ends and one in between; thus this structure does not tilt towards either left or right side, and stays stable.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	The mayor is administering a budget according to the length of time; he rests in the office to ensure that it maintains its momentum.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	The main issue here is the fact that you broke it and when this becomes a problem itself.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	A person considering pursuing any kind of work or study should consult with you regarding possible ear infections and their prevention, as well as protection from other similar causes; if there are any such issues, provide them the means to seek professional medical attention that ensures proper treatment.
Capitol .xvii.	XVII is the Roman numeral that corresponds to the number 17 in Arabic numerals. The capital letter 'X' represents ten, and each subsequent 'I' adds one more unit. Therefore, X + VI (which is 5) equals seventeen.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	A fracture of the ankle and bones in the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	In the hospital ward, there were cases of total hip fractures and recurrent fractures of the femur; as well as fractures on the side of minor accidents without any displacement or injuries to nearby tissues in the month of discharge.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	The snake slithers along the ground until it comes across a bone; upon touching its skin, it experiences a sudden and intense pain in its body. As if driven by this affliction, the snake lifts the bones high above itself while wriggling on the ground as though fleeing from danger.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	A prop is a tool used in construction to lift and position heavy materials such as beams or pipes. It consists of a strong metal arm with a hook at one end, which can be attached to the material to be lifted. The other end has handles for the operator to hold onto while controlling its movement.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	"After lunch, take the prescribed medication and continue your diet with a small table featuring two place settings."
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	In that case, the tension within the rope would decrease as it extends and you have wrapped around that am drape and other causes of which you seek to relieve tension.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	After three or four days, you may notice the rigor mortis loosening and discover that the bones are cracked, broken, or dislocated, and the task at hand becomes quite challenging in those cases.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	Mayes also holds the keys to knowledge, restores those who have been lost, and equates them just as I do you in the restoration of its words in my text.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	The next paragraph follows the width of this line and is slightly wider than that one; near to this table which has been described, and strengthens its rigid structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	May's sit on the ground with his legs stretched out and two or three pillows placed under his knees, as well as a small cushion at each end of the table to support his backrest. He will rest his arms on the table, which should be positioned close enough for him to touch both feet comfortably while maintaining good posture. His head should rest gently against the pillow behind it, and he can place a rolled-up cloth or small cushion under his ankles for extra support if needed. This relaxed sitting position will help May breathe easier and improve circulation during long periods of writing on parchment with quill pen in hand.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	E is also important to remember that not all causes mentioned in the other types of accidents we have discussed apply here; this type specifically involves water.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII - The Capital's Core
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Femur shaft, pelvic bone, and male pubic bone fractures.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman's skirt is tied up, she must remain in that position for an hour, and then lean slightly towards the left side, with her back to the right direction.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	The woman placed her hand over his mouth, and gently touched the side of his face; then she moved the head of the little one upwards bit by bit until it was fully out, as all that was outside had escaped while its front part faced towards the mouth thus touching and breaking teeth.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Cats rest their paws on the ground and when they urinate, they lift their hindquarters to facilitate urine flow and reduce mess, then return them to the original position in which they began micturating, and back onto their first posture.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	After seven days or so, the envelope will be fully restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take a sheep bladder bag and stretch it over the edge of your pot; then put the entire bladader into its neck, and carefully blow through the reed tube until the bladder is fully inflated inside the vessel so that the crack returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	A fully recovered person should stay isolated for at least two days after symptoms have subsided before they are no longer contagious.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	The surgical pinning of the femoral or hip bone is performed to stabilize and align it after a recent fracture, as part of the rehabilitation process for maintaineing proper body mechanics.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	The correct version in modern Catalan would be: "Aquell que és dreit no és occultat en aquestes fractures propias i que poca veinen a aquel al qual es apliquet un estudi i una utilització d'aquí, majorment per al meu llibre mot; aquesta fractura significa a tu en les majors disposicions dreta de restauració i de estabilització. Doncs enten ben."
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	Mays in the goat's wound at home when it is lanced, apply turmeric paste on sheep fat, and place the gauze in there; then wrap it with cloth covering, and have it wrapped up for three days or more, until healed.
Capitol .xix.	Nine. In Roman numerals, "XIX" represents the number 19. The capital letter "C" stands for 100 and each of the lower case letters "x", "i", and another "x" represent ten less than fifty (40), one (1) and ten less than twenty (ten) respectively. When you add them together, it equals nineteeby five plus three is eighteen; therefore, XIX represents 19 in English numerals.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Bone surgery for the fixation of a bone fracture when it is immobilized.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for the case of accidental fracture near a bone, mainly if the bone is large such as the ones in the leg or arm, or similar to those that you are called and syringes used immediately if the conditions of bleeding occur as we have previously mentioned.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the rain falls on dry soil and you are required to wait until it dries before planting seeds in that area, do so unless there is another reason not to.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	A prop starts to restore the fracture in that area today, and do not extend it if an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	Mays si accideys apestado caut, la hora troi la restauracio di lu entro al du ixi dies, entro che sia cedat l'apostema, e no apropinca a lu en le tertze die e li quarte de tot, quar tu faras accidire mals accidentes.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered joint, you should consider reducing it to ensure alignment and minimize your movements as much as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	The armlet should not be made too tight or loose, but rather the size of your wrist and the equanimity of its movements; the length is usually seven or eight fingers long, and the width according to the amount of plaster used. Therefore, it is necessary for a doctor to choose from three or four sizes based on what you need for care in all types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	E should be free of charge, and let there be a small fee for those who wish to receive compensation upon completion at the time of operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Article X - Definitions
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	Aquí tiencué la forma de hacerlo en inglés: How do you proceed? (En español: ¿Cómo procede?)
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	The given text seems to be a mix of non-English and possibly distorted words, which makes it difficult to interpret in its current form. If we attempt to make sense out of the Greek phrase "λάμπρα ατέλειωτη", it translnates to "bright indomitable" or "glowing eternal". However, without further context, I'm unable to provide a complete translation or interpretation.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	To reduce pain at the end of an extended limb, it's best to rest and avoid activities that cause discomfort or strain on the affected area. You may also try applying a cold compress for temporary relief. However, if the pain persists, consult a medical professional for further guidance. This advice is given in English:
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	In ancient days of yore, an elixir was sought to restore the bones within a wounded sage; so potent and rare in any alchemist's ware.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Then make an effort to align the ends of the fracture with each care if the severed end is subtle and you cannot acquire that instrument for proper fixation, then it should be ensured that the extremity of that bone is inserted into another where the instrument has the power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot lower the wages to that level again, then raise them by as much water as required from there is available in any way to those ignorant individuals whom we have mentioned; or cut it by one of the mountains wherever it may be feasible for you to do so.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	A rabbit that roams in the depths of loneliness and small misfortunes.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is reduced and set in place, it quickly alleviates the severe pain previously felt, as if the bone had not returned to its natural position yet; therefore, I suggest you consult a healthcare provider for further assessment of this condition.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	The completion of the restoration work on you involved submerging your hand in a stipulated black substance for hours and properly keeping it away from salt water or any other cause that may affect its oil, so as to prevent decay and corrospitus. However, this text seems to be about medical treatment rather than boat maintenance.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	A proper application of the cast is during your complimentary follow-up after the bone restoration, and leave the plaster exposed unless you have scars or use of wrappings according to the amount of plaster required.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Carefully watch over the wound to prevent infection from developing at the site of the fracture, as dirt and debris left uncleaned can cause illness or disease that may result in death or severe impairment; it is crucial for health.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the union is a lax ligament, soft and different from that of other fractures, it's considered to be an unstable fracture.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	Is the plague serious or is it a bad plague, and do you fear for those who have been affected by such an accidental illness? If so, I understand that you are in pain at this location and wish to remain there under heavy blankets rather than seeking treatment.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When the storm is to begin or has already started and you are in its vicinity where a child might be conceived, promptly seek shelter under that old cloak which you have previously stored up, and provide warmth by wrapping them with our usual remedangs for storms like those of Tetrapharmacist's art and other similar concoctions.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	The interpreter convenes with you to untangle the matter and consider the danger each day morning and evening until it is consolidated and stabilized, and they should ensure that the member is prepared in such a manner so that the swelling runs from top to bottom easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the flood lasts for several days and it is not consolidated nor separated from your leg, hours may pass before you know that here are small pieces to which you cling in order to try to reach the flood.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	From those wounds that are not separated but joined together and cause considerable pain, proceed to suture them according to your skill level at the earliest opportunity.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	In the event that it happens to you by chance or otherwise to develop a swelling or inflammam, then these are symptoms of deterioration and putrefaction, which should cause concern for someone who is undergoing the treatment described in this chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	In the waters where I speak now and you present your pledge, when the large ones are squeezed, they bend over their limbs just like the joints of a cow or helper, and resemble those of the big members; do not assume too much pressure on them nor extracting from them for many times may result in death. Be mindful that it could fall hard within two days or thirty days. And if you see this plague, cure it; but if not, let that befall thee.
Capitol .xx.	"Capitol." This is commonly used as an abbreviation for the United States Capitol, the building where the U.S. Congress meets in Washington D.C. The ".XX" can be interpreted as Roman numerals representing the number 20. Therefore, "Capitol .xx" could potentially refer to a section or document within the Capitol relating to some topic of importance that dates back approximately two decades. However, without more context it's hard to pinpoint exactly what this refers to.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The healing process that occurs in the bone fragments of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Fresh wounds should not be aggravated by this treatment in the healing process of a fracture, especially near joints, and it is often done without regard to the shape of the limb; it strongly restricts the natural movement of the affected limb.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Adonc, he considersi si la nocedat es recent i amb l'amistar dins aquesi medicaments que han estipcat així com és aloena, enses, sercacoll, acrassia o semblants a aquells. També allèx que pugues de aquesta alguna o totas, i confessiu aquellas em vi estipteix, o em vi blanc de hou, o em vi greu, i punaques d'aquesta sobre la nocedat en estopa, i conjunguiqués aquelles sobre lú per bona constricció.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Lea's surgery involved a stitch that should not be removed for more than three days; and she was instructed to change it once it is securely in place, during which plastic has the property of remaining wholly within the body parts.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays shall be liable and converted into a stone to cause such necessity that separates it against the royal property above it, and penetrates its abundance and eminence or razes that enclosed area within which it was previously secure; and for any place in which it is safe.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI - The Capital City
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	During the restoration of a bone fracture, the delicate and fragile aspect is restored according to its original nature in Roman law.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	A bone fracture is repaired, and in the Roman era, the subtlety and fineness of the member was not only due to several reasons: among them, one was an excessive swelling of the lamina and congestion of the blood flow made according to what should be; or because of an overabundance of stricture within which the nutrients are prohibited from reaching the limb; or for an unnecessary accumulation of emboli; or due to excessive movement at inappropriate times; or for a scarcity of blood in the body of the malady and weakness of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The healing power of water is to soothe the pain and make one's tender heart within, until its essence has been thoroughly absorbed, and it brings about purification; and brings joy and comfort upon you.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	An enzyme's pause on the substrate so that it can shoot for the vital nutrient, while continuing its binding of the water moleccuhence that the nutrient is broken down and returns to its original form.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	The healing of the broken bones when they are carefully restored and the operation in water that covers them is forbidden.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	The decision to amputate or reconstruct a limb contributes to the alleviation of severe tortuosity and prominence on the joint, as well as restoring its natural form, although it does not completely prevent you from performing your daily activities. However, one should not expect that such an intervention will result in a perfectly straight limb.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Mays is also operating in other countries with various hotels and restaurants, which he acquired from our land; however, this operation is reprehensible as it greatly diminishes the valuable brand name that is potentially fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	Mays's cramps and pains are relieved by soaking his feet in warm water containing mollifying herbs such as parsley leaves, mallows, and similar ones; the mixture acts like a gentle ointnent to soften and alleviate discomfort. Alternatively, he could use an emollient made from tall oat straw or linseed oil mixed with this remedy, or pre-soaked figs in colomba water and similar herbal mixtures that are known for their soothing effects on cramps and pangs.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some feet are soaked in constant warm water as advised by traditional medicine practitioners who believe it should be among the most moistened, and movements of the limb administered throughout all hours.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Mays' tortuous condition requires constant care and monitoring by a skilled dentist to prevent the need for further ferrous work and ongoing dissolution of his tooth structure. Additionally, there is an excessive accumulation of debrebris around that area, which needs to be addressed through simple yet effective measures under close observation.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Topic: Slipped Disc / Disc Dislocation
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	A dislocation is a displacement of one of the joints in the body, which prevents movement and causes severe pain and injury.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When a bone displacement occurs, the sooner it is reduced (put back in place), the better. If it's delayed, the area becomes inflamed and very hard for water to be produced, making the reduction of displacement difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	Aseptic techniques must be strictly followed to prevent bacterial infections and ensure patient safety during catheter insertion procedures, as improper handling can result in painful spasms and discomfort for the individual.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomamo del malaute, e aprop siara layssat entro que repause l'apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop siara reduzit am facilitat.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	Every member of the council shall take care to preserve and maintain all records related to water, so that future genereback may find them in their proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	In the event of an earthquake, buildings shall follow this order of priorities as indicated in the seismic damage list; from the most superior authority to the least inferior one.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Treatment for temporomandibular joint dislocation.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Misaligned jawbones if not treated early; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: either they are slightly deviated from their original position with minimal movement, or completely dislocated resulting in a full displacement up to the point where saliva may leak out during malaise causing an inability to close the mouth, and the tongue being wrapped within the palate.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When May's joint dislocation is minor, the hours in major repositioning tend to be less and for a shorter duration with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the shoulder dislocation is complete and straightforward, it must be promptly administered with a slight delay, and not at all delayed.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The minister should have the upper hand in treating the malady, and insert the aforemente's tooth with one finger into the dislocation of the jaw within his mouth; if the dislocation is on one side, or insert both his two adjacent fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, while the others should be outside equally. And he commands the patient to cease their mandibles and absolve them from either part; the physician aligns the mandible and gently pushes it back into place until it returns to its original location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	Reducing the size of a tooth can be difficult, especially if both lower jaws are dislocated. Therefore, it's better to perform root canal treatment and provide water and oil afterward; this way, reducing one side is relatively easy, but reducing both sides may take longer time as mentioned earlier.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	So let them come and return as equals, the mouth of anger is closed, and no longer inflamed, for now peace rests upon those dusty red draperies, it shall be made from wax and rose oil; and may its scent bring ease to weary soujors.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	E be the sick person lying on their back with the head between two pillows; and do not cause any pain to that side directly or indirecteously; while having their food served, there should be a lion's share portioning, so that when pains subside and jaw muscles are no longer tired, they can eat as much as desired.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	Aquatic environments should be kept clean and simple; do not engage in activities like excessive talking or drinking and spitting within the mouth as this may hinder the healing process of a fractured jaw.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	It is difficult to reduce the two dislocated mandibles in any given hour and not turn them into their original position; then acute fevers often occur, along with persistent intense headaches and severe nausea as a result of this malady.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	Once upon a time, there was an old man who knew how to turn water into wine. He also had the ability to transform stones into precious jewels within seven days. One day, he came across someone in need and decided to use his powers for good.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV: The Journey to the Capital City
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	In the case of a humeral fracture and distal muscle injury, treatment may involve several steps to ensure proper healing and recovery. The specifics can vary based on the severity and exact nature of the injuries, but generally include the following components:
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula (wishbone) is not dislocated from the left clavicle due to its continuous attachment to the bones of the shoulder girdle; however, some cases are dislocated at the beginning externally, and this situation has been reported in the literature.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of her beauty is that the illness has fallen upon her skin and extends over her arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	A proper comma is placed in the text to clarify its meaning: "Prop era te coarta le loc pe la ta pa lma pe la fuort coartao; quar e-la retur na."
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	A propósito, passe o creme de massagem e aplique levemente com força para esticar as músculos.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The extreme end of the one that you saw remains with him continuously; it is not dislocated on any day. You know that he has been reduced and equated as we have said, and according to how he has appeared prepared.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of your text from Catalan to English:
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	In this case, the therapy reduces the length of the muscle when it is separated from its origin.
Capitol .xxvi.	Certainamo XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Reduction of the shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	I know that the muscle is not misplaced but displaired in three ways, of which one is displaced from its original position to a farther distance.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second rule states that the shoulder joint is dislocated anteriorly beyond its normal position, and this occurs abrupt <br>
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	In most cases, it is common to remove fat deposits from the parts of the body where there are fewer or thinner layers of fat, as this can be easily done; however, in those with a significant accumulation of fat, removing them through surgery may pose more difficulties.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	Fear the dangers of alcohol at home accidents such as falls from ladders or hitting your head on concrete, and the risk of muscle strains or spracks that may cause swelling (edema) due to injury. Also beware of water hazards if a family member has previously suffered a dislocation.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	I pray that you may sprinkle this water on me while I am overwhelmed with sorrow, and bring healing to my heart.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	E is the dislocation of the ear canal when it extends beyond its natural boundaries; therefore, you should distinguish between a dislocated muscle and a sausage, as those differences are manifestly clear; and in addition to this, at the end of the concavity of the muscle and after the cartilage, there must be touching with the cap of the muscle just like a sheep bone, and if illness cannot reduce it back to its original shape, or move that.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the stone is displaired from its place or moved, and you notice it tomorrow, and it was not misplaced, report it immediately.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	A) The displacement of this lesion occurs when it is fresh and the pain is severe.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The wind blows from the sea towards the land and raises the height of the coastline; then it approaches its own dunes, raising the junction into a strong fortification in their location, and the minister increases the length of that as well, extending it towards them; then it pauses there again because they return very quickly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Mays if you have been told not to return, avoid the meal that caused the dislocation and do this for several days until the ailment is soaked in water; then administer a warm drink with mollifying and lining properties such as chamomile tea, fenugreek seeds infused in water, and melilotus (sweet clover) infused in water.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	The malady is placed over the patient's back and its tips are gently touched along the path of recovery, with the physician placing his hand on the patient's spine, raising the top part of the muscle strength, and tossing the edge of the malady so that it does not cause harm to other parts. Another person assists in holding the tip of the malady to prevent any harm as well, for it quickly returns to its original place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to do so following this method: present yourself as a man who is much stronger than the evil spirit and take position on its side, then insert your muscle beneath the spirit's chill vapor, elevate that vapor above where the evil entity hovers in the air, and another minister may remove the essence of the evil from below your belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the illness is more deceitful, there are times when it appears as if another cause might be responsible; however, this one tends to be serious because such displacement often resolves quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	E is reduced in shape according to another model: it has an elongated head with a rounded top, similar to the mortar of a pestle, which should not be too thick or too thin, and its handle is attached below the head; then its straps run along the length of the stick, and at each end are extended arms like wings for stability; and its other side extends from those parts in a strong fortified manner, as it returns to its original position with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	It seems that the text you've provided is written in Catalan. The text appears to describe a difficult procedure for administercuñam (I assume this might be a typo or an archaic term, possibly 'administrar' meaning 'to administer'). However, the original language and context make it challenging to understand completely without more information. Here is my attempt at translating your text into English:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	Here is an approximate translation of the text into modern French: "Il était une fois un lion qui, bien qu'il fût méchant, n'avait pas mal au cœur."
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	A thorough examination of the injured area should be performed to assess the extent of the trauma; meanamoanwhile,the limbshould besupportedwitha splint intheaffectedareasofthebody, and then the limb shouldbeexaminedinconjunction withtheturner'sofficeandtheradioregion.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	A prop jcia paosat le bras sobre un scal de scali segon la latitud, e la ma sia estensuda a las parti deixes, e l'altra cos sia suspendut da l'altra part, quar la junctura intra tantost.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	A complete the dressing of your wound as follows whenever possible: Cover it with a clean, dry cloth or sterile bandage; apply an adhesive plaster to prepare the area and use a sponge to gently clean around the entire wound. Then place another layer over the first one. Make sure that the edges are securely fastened together and not too tight at the incision site. Leave it undisturbed for seven days, enscribing no unnecessary movement or pressure on the affected area.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	The food of the ill person should be paused when feverish, within which time the member shall be comforted, as it is more conducive to recovery from the sickness.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	The proper dishes must be served hot or cold and are often accompanied by some kind of movement; therefore they should not be allowed to cool down, as it is healthier.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	When the skin joint is dislocated due to moisture or other causes, it should be treated with a three-step cauterization method as described in the book on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If it has been more than three days since the ligament and joint were dislocated and have not been properly fixed, the strain and sprain will decrease somewhat on their own, but the nerves that serve as the head of the muscle may be numb or stretched or weakened. Know that at no time will the joint remain in its original position.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The dislocation that has occurred must be reduced and the bones or fragments moved back with an impulse; extend them as much as possible while returning to their normal position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	A shall be administere in aquella altria strictura, e cura aquella intra quae sit sanata.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	When gravity becomes excessive in the limb and slows down its movement, illness often uses this condition to spread mottled veins that emerge when such gravity is reduced and returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	The treatment of shoulder dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	The joint of the knee is dislocated and there are difficulties in returning it to its correct position; when that happens completely, it's mainly displaced anteriorly or posteriorly, and if it has been unstable for weeks since the injury occurred or touching, according to any figure it may be dislocated. In such a case, we declare manifestly that the joint is concaved, and thus it can not bend the leg nor touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	A cove that is close to the bone, and which reduces slowly after it causes a local abscess, if you find such an abscess, then reduction is difficult and seldom completely heals; especially when located behind the muscles, as this type of dislocation is worse than all others in terms of pain and complications, often leading to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	In the Lu restoration process, when it is feasible to reduce, that means extending the upper arm by two units and expanding the forearm, so that the surgeon's hands are above the joint and he pushes the articulation with his fingers or turns in its place using the palm of his hand.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	The translation of the given text is not clear and appears to be a mix of different languages or perhaps gibberish. If it's supposed to be in Romanian, the correct phrase for "Mays si dislocare este la partea din spatele" would actually mean "My shoulder dislocation is at the back part." However, if you provide more context or a corrected version of this text, I could give a proper translation.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If the dislocation does not obey reduction, it may result in severe consequences and significant damage.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	Article LXXIII - The Extension of Ministers' Tenure
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	The sleeve is gathered at the armhole and sewn together from top to bottom; it then wraps long in folds over the upper arm, creating a loose fit.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	E quant the midwife touches the junction with her hand, unguents applied therein of some oil so that it is smooth; and appropriately pushes on the junction with a strong force until it returns to its original position.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	"The surgical procedure involves the removal of a cyst that has become enlarged in a specific area and is causing discomfort or swelling; it also includes trimming any excess tissue within this area through an incision, as well as suspending the surrounding blood vessels and draining them for up to several days."
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Firstly untie it; then at the joint itself is formed in its place, you remove that flap and let it go loose.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If the joint is not broken, you should repeat the plastering and bandage it for several days until healed; then remove that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Mays decides to get close to the joint and applies some warmth, then gently massages it for a while before leaving it alone - it feels like gentle movement. Sometimes she rests her hand on the joint, as if giving it supportive motion; when applied correctly, this should be done during both day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And place that there and put this in the dish; and as soon as she warms, take up the junction quickly before it is too hot, and repeat on that ladle three times, one spoonful at a time.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Autumn is the season when you can use a recipe with figs, white wine and cranberries for making liqueur infused with rosemary twigs, as well as other flavorful combinations such as myrrh, aloe vera, acacia flowers, and arbutus berries.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish, pause over that wet and scratched cow's chasm at the edge, and step on it; then place some vegetables there - as that is moist and bring them closer to their position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	The Malassez's curved ligament is the junction between the arm and the forearm.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The Malassez's nodes are slightly displaced and the reduction of this dislocation is minor; however, it seems that there should be a speed in the reduction at the time when it is dislocated, before it becomes swollete or causes an abscess.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation involves stopping the joint's movement with a table and extending the affected limb over it, while the doctor places his hand or palm on the tendon near the joint, pushing that until it returns to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, one must also consider if the palm is already in the patient's stomach, then during the painful episodes of the mother, her belly should be extended and reduced; and if it moves from its position beforehand, then naturally the mother's belly will have to rest on that surface above the table, so that the doctor can examine the area near the junction.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	If it returns soon, that's good news; if not, let the sore continue to grow until the abscess bursts and lets go of its contents; but do not try this for long periods or you won't be able to bear the increasing pain.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the Roman junction according to its curvature; and not of any bad cause, but that I am softened and cannot raise any cause; learn from this that nerves are knit or crossed, and now it is not in it but rather stiff, so as to be properly cauterized during its excision and strongly attached by water giving rise to some cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	The text appears to be in the Occitan language, which is spoken mainly in southern France and also in Italy'cuits, Monaco, Spain, and some pockets of Northern Africa (due to historical reasons). However, it seems this particular phrase might not form a coherent sentence even when translated. Here's an attempt at translating the text:
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	The current flow of the river and any changes in its gravity may cause erosion along the water's edge and affect some vegetation patches within that area.
Capitol .xxix.	Title: Capital XXIX (29)
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	The displacement of the joints in the spine.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some of the words are misspelled in this sentence. The correct version is: "Vaig dislocar algunes paraules en tot el discurs." This translates to: "I mispronounced some words throughout the speech." Here'n, 'vaguadas' should be 'dislocats,' which means mispronouncing or misstating; and 'ditz' is replaced by 'paravoles', referring to words.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	He is a dislocated something from those on the back of his hand or belly, hours since he spoke and pushed for its displacement, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	A proper support is provided to the affected area, and pressure is applied where necessary, leaving it in place for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Article III states that no person shall be deprived of life, liberty or property without due process of law within the scope thereof to which it is applicable according to justice and right as established by law in his day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	In the evening, after reading that second narrative, and not stopping until daylight while engaging in physical activity, review it again at night; do so for several consecutive days until well-learned.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	The fisherman pretends to have a wound, if it is located in the abdamnent of his belly and he makes an attempt at that section and performs his first operation until healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Pretend that you are an aqua that is located among the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital XS
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Treatment of the scoliotic displacement in the thoracic vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	In cases where one or more vertebrae in the neck are completely dislocated and resultant subluxations occur at that location, there is currently no cure for this ailment, as death often follows from such an injury.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	Sign of water outflow that the discharge of illness is involuntary and cannot be held back; sometimes it relieves painful body parts, giving one or two glasses of water or one spoonful, while in other cases it has caused improvement and at times relief from such symptoms.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	The phrase you've provided appears to be in Galician, a Romance language spoken primarily in the autonomous region of Galicia in northwestern Spain. However, it doesn't seem to make much sense as is. Here is my best attempt at translating or understanding it into English:
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May's concern about blue light exposure is whether the hours considered to be most harmful are not only detramalizing but also unhealthy overall, considering that those same hours might not be as damaging or unhealthy in another context.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In that which you see by cementing or percussing or through appearance for those, the Ancients used lengthy ways of treatment speech, from which much is returned to profit; nevertheless I find myself grateful for that one in which little excuse can be made for too much excess, due to my greater proximity and exposure to it, by which I have expounded and formed with a different instrument than the one you present me.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	In his book, Dic says that the party which goes across the river in boats is not safe nor healthy on either side; likewise, the one made of two sticks.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	F of those is not cured but the one that arises in its own right, which I have mentioned before.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The illness should spread over his face as if painted by the same brush used for walls; it should be thickened afterwards with such strength that the stones of the wall are not chiseled from it.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	A prop up a straight stick planted in the ground at one end of the pole near its head and another stick as counterweights on the other end of the pole.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The minister shall hold the scepter and not be set in a tomb; another minister holds the other according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The saddle is placed on the horse's back by fitting it over both sides of its spine and tail, extending the extremities of the saddle tree to meet with the croup and loins of the horse; then tighten each strap or cinch around the girth points of the horse, ensuring a snug fit.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	The Minister of Currency shall extend the loan to the party departing from the vessel, and the cargo and documents in their places where they are located shall not be seized; however, we have firmly stated them as mentioned before.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	Place your hands firmly upon the backrest of this chair so that you may feel its strength; now place them upon that table and adjust yourself comfortably against it as well.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If Mays doesn't return in this manner, the hour is marked by a table whose latitude or longitude extends three furlongs from it, and digs into the wall of which we have said that evil lies within the area between its two extremities.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	The patient lies down on the table and the therapist applies force to one side of the vertebrae while placing their hands on the opposite extremity, then gradually shifts so that the vertebra is misaligned and returns to its original position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish, make a wheel with which it can roll on the ground; and you shall stand in land where the width is of one arm's length, and its center should be at the end of two sticks that are each as long as one palm, and thereafter these two sticks must touch in such a way that they form an angle. Each stick has to be fixed on the ground so that it does not move easily.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	Let S be a hollow cylinder in which the rotor is turned and it revolves around the two axes of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	E at the tip of its stem is a thorn where it forms the trunk, whose length is about half a hand'amo (a unit of measure), and which wraps around; on the other two stems they resemble that one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	A firmly bind the ties that have been strained within your relationships during times of illness and grief, in which it is due to you as leader, along with the bonds that have been stretched through circumstances involving them, for which it is due to you to provide support.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Close to each other stands a minister who turns the wheel at his command, and measures equal with a protractor as we have instructed.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	A este respecto, esta es una versión en inglés de su oración original en español. Aquí está: "En cuanto a esto, aquí está la forma del torno". Si necesitas ayuda con más traducciones o tien cuestiones adicionales, no dudes en preguntarme.
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	The vertebrae are repositioned, and the location is equivalent, with hopes of avoiding painful pressure on the nerve roots through an album approach, and proper stabilization; moreover, during surgery a retractor will be used over the table whose length equals three times its width, providing ample space for the area under examination, and along the start of the affected vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	Certainly! Here is the translation of your text from Friulian to English:
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	There is no apparent risk at the site at the end of the healing process, and it is advised that medications be administered to prevent contamination or infection during long-term table maintenance, which we have recommended; however, already applied a layer of plastic coating.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Some cases of acute exacerbation occur in the last stages of dislocation of two, and it is related to that displacement; therefore, it is that bone which has already been displaculed by which no one should undergo this surgery as a remedy, because it will certainly cause you to die.
Capitol .xxxi.	"Capitol XXVII" in Roman numerals is represented as 27, which corresponds to the number twenty-seven. However, without additional context on what "Capitol XXV cuartos" might mean or refer to, it's not possible to provide a direct English translation or interpretation.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	It is known that the articulation of the great toe and the articulation of the muscle not only cause dislocation, but also do not lead to those issues that affect other small joints due to slight movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	At the joint of the broad one it is dislocated according to four methods, namely when it is dislocated towards the inside, or towards the outside, or in front, or behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	The majority is moved to the right, with few shifts to the left or to the sides.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	Sign of the dislocation from one part to another is four, when you adjust the splint for the sane sickness against the disease, it is more prolonged and less painful than the illness; the disease cannot double its own weight, but must be spoken by the tongue. And so that the matter has arrived here: a sign of catarrh or an inflammamoious cautery.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The name of the event to which it occurs that the incidents on the outside cause contradictory events is an "external shock" or "exogenous disturbance".
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	In the event of dislocation to parts behind his own body according to the above described expansion of the chest, but not doubling that pain which is in his neck, and if it continues to go further without being able to reach those parts behind; then there's retention of urine and swelling around him. He should walk on the affected limb.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	Sign of the place where an accidental dislocation occurs is that it does not cause excessive pain nor does it allow for bending beyond its normal range; however, the strength on one side is less than the other, and the affected joint is swoln, while the cap of the injury is located at that specific location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of spices in this displacement is that you consider, at times, if the displacement is very old and ancient, which has already become outdated according to what you administer regarding its reduction, at times it does not require such a treatment for the entire cure; therefore, there's no need to make an exception.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case of a recent dislocation which is one of the four types of dislocamts, hours you should return to the joint and extend that area towards both internal and external parts, as well as towards the right and left sides. Do this gently without needing any other intervention.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If Mays does not return in this manner, the hours come when you should prepare to fortify and extend the tent of light for departure on his behard (ordeal), or if it is your lot, then with prayer strengthen him who lies upon the bedding below the canopy; and another minister extends the mantle from above so that he may cover his own arms with the sleeves of the garment; and still another should raise the lion over the rope at the center of the ceremony, and one more should hold taut the end of the mantle.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	In English: The bee extends from the left or right wing towards the central body to the hind wings, or from the rear edge to the front edge of the hind wings.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	E is the extension of all those within a district where evil prevails and they worship their false gods while hanging upside down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This kind of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	If the displacement returns back to what we have said, it is all right; if not, hours are needed for every type of water that will be mentioned regarding one's own injury.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation occurs towards the inner parts, causing that the pain be located over its left shoulder; and so as well the ligaments are stretched across the width of the case in this place where between the head of the case and the place that is removed from the wing the distance extends.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	The other ministers also took action in the matter and addressed the issue at hand. They strongly emphasized their proposals regarding this unfortunate situation and extended efforts to various forums in order to seek a powerful solution. Consequently, that resulted in progress being made within their own locality.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This species is a particularly mild irritation for the affected member, unlike other types of itchiness.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	Mays excuses himself for not obeying this treatment method completely; he hopes that the combined strength of both illnesses will be alleviated with firm determination, loyalty, and on both sides through mutual support.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Let L be the length of each side and Q be its quantity; then let M be the area extended by one more than the other for a difference of two units.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	The cargo is damaged at the top of the hull and it should be lowered; and the length from the deck of the ship is two fathoms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	A boy with great skill bends down the cap of the goat and it is suspended by a malady affecting another young person, while the other youth raises the goat on high due to its strong support, as the joint returns to its original place at high speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the case of an internal reduction, when it is displaebed outside its proper place, the illness will act upon the limb once more as soon as there has been a relapse in swelling; and the strengthening force lies directly over the affected area itself and over its bones.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Close to the ends of the staves (or sides), one as high and the other as low; adjust their ends so that the cloth wraps around it such that your malaise is not bewitched because this stick belongs among your belongings, therefore you must extend from these extremities that it may not be snagged.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	The Minister and the Physician both extend their share equally according to the law.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	If reversed, it's great! And if not, pause on that carefully and thus as we have said in the translation for that agreement.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	Mays Cove feels the weight of his choices upon his shoulders as he gazes into the distance.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	The dislocation is to the anterior compartments, which were considerably extended, and according to this narration of movement on the beam; and the surgeon places his right hand's palm onto the mallet-like instrument, and with a quick twist, he rotates that part outwards.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the displacement is towards the right parts, it does not cause that the pain extends to the left parts and is elevated above the ground; they may know that it is lying on a hard surface, just as if its width were dislocated towards the front parts, as we have said about its placement between two widths; and it is over its face and the limbs are extended, as we have said, without harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	A compression tube is applied to the site where the joints are located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Once the reduction is completed, as indicated by your signal of readiness for it and that you extend your hands to both parties affected, and when you touch those indentations and bring forth their malady from the inner side, then understand the member according to which the covering returned - afterwards adjust both matters and pause thoroughly so that the width isn't bad in any of the parts; adhere the illness to a rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	C haste's departure and the subsequent events are compared in terms of their impact.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see those people in their attire, remember that the dispute has been resolved, so let go of any ill will.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If there is no sign of improvement, within three days you should rebandage that area and remove it according to your initial wrapping technique, then leave it uncovered for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	A short stay at that place and you'll find yourself walking longer distances in no time, taking up to a few days for complete comfort.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXII (22) of the United States Capitol refers to a section or division within an official document, such as legislation or report, that is organized in chapters for clarity and reference purposes. If you are referring to the U.S. Constitution, there isn't a "Chapter 22" because it does not follow a chapter system. However, if Capitol .xxxii. refers to a specific piece of legislation or document, please provide additional context so I can give you more precise information on its content and significance.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Treatment of the shoulder dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The verb "es" is conjugated according to three tenses, namely the present, past and future. In these cases, it follows the rules of location before objects in front, behind, above or below, as well as beside them but not behind. It does not follow any particular rule regarding its position with respect to objects located in front of it.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of the lunar eclipse is that you command your illness to apply its grip on the wound; then know that the dew is displaced.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The restoration of all the limbs of your body is to relieve you from evil spirits, as long as they have extended their influence over you; then join your two hands upon your face, and place your palms between their fingers; and then firmly adhere those fingers onto the palms of yours with strength and fortitude, while extending your own power within them so that the fingers may return to their rightful position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of a reddish glow from the fireplace indicates that its chimney is clogged and not working properly.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	In the Gospel of Luke, chapter 8 verses 43-48 (NIV): "As they sailed along, someone stood and said to him, 'Excuse me, teacher, I beg you to look at my daughter; she is suffering terribnly from demon-possession, and she is throwing herself down the house, screeching. But Jesus responded, 'Don't be afraid; only have faith.' So the man went with his whole household and told everything to the teacher."
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	The use of a walking aid prevents the occurrence of falls for disabled individuals, enscuing that they are both safe and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	My apology for the delay in delivering this to you; however, I have been occupied with other matters which are detailed in the previous account of my ankle injury.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capital III.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Curable treatment for ankle dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Some vegetables are rotated on a small scale and some varieties are transplanted according to pattern, while the relocation of the latter is made either towards the interior or towards the exterior parts.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of the thumb displacement is that its flattened base originates from where it becomes dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	May's curing process of the raw material involves a light redressment and it should be extended to facilitate access and ensure uniformity so that when returned, it is consistent in quality.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	In the curacy of Lu Quan there is a dislocation according to complementary astrology, indicating that you should make amends for the rightful wrongs, and have a strong and valiero minister on behalf of those behind the second place in relation to Lu.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Turn to your right and face the most superior point, then turn left from that position and look past it towards the base of the pole where the pin is located.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Take the left hand and place it over your friend's right shoulder, then move both hands two steps to the left, extend your left arm, and interlock your fingers with theirs. This gesture symbolizes unity, cooperation, and friendship in Catalonia. In English, this is called "The Friendship Gesture."
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	Water droplets begin to form after they have condensed into clouds.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	A propel pushes the pieces of the puzzle to the third version and you are at the core.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If you want to return an element from a list or tuple based on its value, and repeat the process if necessary until you find a match, here's how you can do it in Python using a function:
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	"I am not allowed to reduce the amount of water we have used again; now I will tell you about the bad luck on your land and introduce a new farmer's song in your fields, which may be one of its things, and you already wrapped it with a cloth so that the bad luck does not affect it."
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Article I - The ministers of each language shall mutually extend their hands in friendship and goodwill; and the Ministers from one country will likewise offer these gestures to those from another country, thereby fostering a sense of unity and cooperation.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	A proper management of the displacement in his joints allows him to maintain good health and other measures could help preserve overall well-being since misalignment can return with ease if not addressed properly.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Therefore, return the dislocation and it is declared to you that there will be a short break before proceeding further with the examination of this issue; meanwhile, please take your seat and relax as much as possible.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Fear not the nerves behind you that lie beneath the sole; this way your limb's movement will be gentle and unhindered.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	A chaplet for two or three days; and if the swelling is reduced, remove that bandage.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Article II provides for that on the third or fourth day and forbids the evil of wandering for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	Mays refrains from going near that place; he does not guarantee that the displacement is not over it and corrupted, nor does he ensure that there's no danger of contagion.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If you decide to go with the appendectomy, it's crucial that you take care of yourself in the days following the surgery, specifically at another location for recovery and resting until you are fully healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Acts of the Apostles Chapter 24 (Capitol .xxiv)
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The Curative Approach for Dislocation of Shoulder Joints.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The one that is disabled is equal to a small extent in his work; and the one that is not difficult becomes more deceitful.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in one of your feet toes on either side of the foot and you need to alleviate pain for yourself or someone else, it's recommended that you seek medical advice from a healthcare professional as they can provide accurate diagnosis and treatment options based on their examination.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	A toward you stands the stone of peace; ponder over its inscriptions at the joints and approach close to where it exudes an aura of virtue within that returns, and observe how evenly balanced it appears not to show any sign of prominence in location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	A propa dejos el ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengue tot le pe, a la qual sian dui caps; i aprop à strenua aquesta estructura decent i fàfera per tres dies; i aprop desliea aquesta i fa aquel repos apus d'ambulatori per motz dies, entre que sia estreniu i de reducte sia assegurat.
Capitol .xxxv.	In the United States, The Capitol is the iconic building that houses the legislative branch of the federal government, including the Senate and the House of Representatives. However, if you're referring to something different by "Capitol .XXXV," could you provide more context or clarify your query?
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Among the displacement injuries that may occur on the battlefield or due to a fall or any accident, there are several types including:
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	In this particular case, the ailment results in death on multiple occasions, and you will administer care for that illness as well as its recovery and subsequent healing.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	"Chosen by water from a cove that does not presume to heal your illness, but rather the one who is skilled in art and of long experience, merciful and compassamo(u)s; neither tardy nor arrogant; and use with medicines for draining abscesses solely, and let go of the evil by divine judgement, not to that which you hope cures from ruin, but rather alleviates your sickness, in which there is some hope."
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then, without delay, let us begin with the reduction of this wound so that it doesn't become an abscess in the end.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	Thus, if the member is desired to return at a certain time, it is advised that one administers treatment of an emollient and anti-inflammaterian nature as per the given instructions or consult with your healthcare provider for appropriate products suitable for dry skin.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	When a displacement occurs due to bone fractures in separate sites, the patient may experience altered gait, and this can lead to compensatory movements related to the areas previously affected by simpler illnesses that occurred beforehand.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	He sees and avoids the pitfalls in your faith as you follow my teachings; for it is better to serve your Creator, and bring more glory and lasting health to your true virtues that guide you during these times of fear.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Certaine, albescently from Albuquerque, the words have been translated perfectly into Catalan as follows: "Ayssi fineysso la paraules de Albucasim perfieytament d'aquells que Déu ne sia benezeit."
Amen.	Yes, amen. What can I do for you today?
