Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Aysa learns words from Albuquerque.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O children, as you have completed this book, which is the last of the medical science series, in honor of your achievement and for the insights provided within it, I believe that we should present to you this treatise, which is a part of my work on surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The work of which you speak was once completely erased from our realm and time, being totally deprived of it; only a few small descriptions remain in the ancient books, which have since become distorted by errors and heresies, to such an extent that its essence has been obscured and its art forgotten.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	I understand that you wish to revive this treatise in the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; so it comes to using tools for engraving and other instruments of work as required by the explanation, with necessary preparation being essential.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	In the cause for which art is not atrophyed by a craftsman in this our time, it'n because the art of medicine is long and its practitioner must be exercised in the science of anatomy, as Guaia stated that he knew the movements of members and their forms; connections and separations among them; knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, names of those parts, and strength of each; veins pulsing and at rest, and places where blood flows.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	The phrase "E per aigua dix Ypocras que amb el seu nom estem motos, mais en l'obra petit, i majorment en l'art de la mà" in Catalan translates to "And for water said Hippocrates that with his name we are alive, but mainly in the work small, and mostly in the art of the hand" in English.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	In the introduction to this book, we have said that if one does not know what has been told about anatomy herein, they will fall into error which may cause many people's death; as I have seen too often, for such are formed in this science and take themselves to be of it through their experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I once saw a physician who had contracted an abscess of the scrotum and caused some arteries in the neck to bleed, which led to a large amount of blood flowing into the woman'ebay chest, causing her to die among many others.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	A certain merchant who was more virtuous than the traitor took a stone from a man he had accused in his state; and the stone was large, and he threw it to the left of the road, so that this man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	The stone that lies outside has such enormous size and due to the illness I know it will die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	A physician from our land received a salary of a duke for surgery and treated an old black man who had a fracture in his leg; the doctor made use of his ignorance, extracting the fracture on top of the pillow, with cushions and splints using strong pressure, without healing the wound.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	Above all things be faithful to your desires, and loyalty as well, and take care during the uncertain times of life; I command you not to flee from the challenge but to embrace it so that even if adversity strikeback with full force, we shall overcome.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	Once upon a time, there was a young woman who felt the need to escape from her life and find inner peace and relief from her troubles. She decided to embark on a journey of self-discovery that would eventually help her overcome these challenges.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the infection was already confirmed within the member, so it could not prevent that and did not cease to wander the infection within which the illness posed a threat.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	A certain physician successfully treated an abscess with cancerous growths, which became ulcerated after several days; during this time the malevolence of his lord increased greatly.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The main cause of your melancholcuar mood is that you don't feel like reaching out to anyone and instead become a member who suffers from feeling isolated from everything.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	The operation must be carried out in two steps: the first step is associated with safety and the second step involves taking measures to avoid major risks.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	In this text from the Old Occitan language (also known as Provençal), written by the poet Peire Vidal around the year 1200, we find a plea for freedom of expression and against censorship:
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Come, take your weapons into the sun and God's protection, and may your sick recover and be healed.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	The most effective prayers for God's grace lead to salvation and praiseward successions, eradicate the most terrible of illnesses with difficult healing, remove your fears caused by water through which you wade, so that contemplation in your faith and in your name shall not abandon you. For it remains for your glory, as well as in heaven or at last to your holy sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Guillermo deseja discutir sobre algunas de sus motivaciones personales.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"There's no medication for this illness, but don't worry as you are not alone."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	Chapter One - The Mysterious Island'n Adventure
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the free and first of the first partition.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	First capital ordered of the head entry-related tools, in the forms of instruments and equipment for cauterization, as well as that which is necessary for surgery.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	Division of the second half.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter concerns lancets and cauterization, as well as cupping and leeching, and the extraction of splinters and bandages for those purposes; it completely covers and systematically organizes the methods and techniques regarding these instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Third Partition Division.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, concerning restoration and relocation, as well as treatment of sprain and appearance alterations for those affected; the chapter is organized within the scope of the head injuries, and forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	The burn on the wrist caused by acute medical conditions and memory of the opera performance.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In the beginning of the treatise, all knowledge is considered free.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I tell you about the quality of that jewelry and its settings, as well as why such items are forbidden to wear a crucifix.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	I say that the language of quality in youth and the science of cauterization and incision is an extensive, prolific, and subtle one; it has been shrouded in secrecy by knowledge, and many wise men have spoken much about it but still disagree with each cuase. For me, a small part of their sermons suffices, as they fear long-winded explanations.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Therefore, I would say that causality affects universally all matter or its characteristics, with the exception of two types of matters - properties related to their composition.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the case of scalp psoriasis and dry skin, the affected matter may detach; some physicians advise using a shampoo for that condition, while others argue against it, as this type of medication is not suitable for illnesses characterized by qualities such as dryness, since the nature of heat (found in most treatments) also has these qualities and may hinder healing when water-based hydration is needed.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	Here is the translation of that text from Occitan to English:
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	Indeed, I have heard about it and experienced that too some extent myself. Let's talk more on this subject.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it does not come to pass that he is present over there who has been excommunicated and exercised in the capitol of Caution for the third time, and knows the diversity of human difficulties and their conditions of illnesses, along with the causes of those ailments and the extent of them.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In other ways too, it's not about your fear; mostly in the leaky and damp diseases, for all of them agree on this, and they don't hesitate to act during those times with cautionary measures.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Listen well, children, for I shall now reveal the secret of curative fire and its healing effects as well as the virtue that accompanies it; indeed, simple heat is involved here, whose action reaches only to the member being cauterized, causing no harm whatsoveeher unto other members nearby.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	The medical salve brought relief to the affected limb which was previously numb, and it greatly helped in accelerating healing and easing the painful ailment for an easy recovery.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Mays the fire, for its sublimity and of its substance goodness, does not do anything except to overflow abundantly; and it is known to us by experiment and by the lengthy service of study in the art over the truth of causes; and so I am excused from the length of the speech. If it weren't for that, it would be unjust to my free time on this idle moment with you secretly hinted at fire, and the quality of its operation upon the bodies and through the entire expulsion by which diseases are expelled; as a philosophical demonstration in words, which would become clear in your sufferings.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Children, let us not dispute the best time of spring to make a bonfire and take a break.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	Indeed, I declare that cauterization is beneficial at all times, for the harm caused by accidental events gets absorbed in the rush of water that runs from the wound after it's cauterized, especially if the cauterization is due to severe or constant pains, which do not suffer lateness so much because there is a fear of those consequences, greater than slight harm occurring during this time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	In the country of our ancestors, or children, this disease is only known to common people and mad cooks; that's because the illness which is treated with cauterization does not always heal completely, and sometimes it returns.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The cause is not as some believe in such situations, because cupping therapy is not a substitute for medicine which alters the complexion and dries out the moisture which are causes why pain occurs.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Nevertheless, he used excessive caution in his medical treatments due to the pride of his profession and zeal for his work as well as the greatness of his master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is not always certain that the disease will return at any time in the future, according to the complexity of the illness and its location on his body, as well as how well he has prepared through the addition of excess fluids to his diet, and what has been ingested into him through foods and appearances related to those causes; rather, the disease for which a cauterization was administered is a subtle illness in few members with some fluidity and humidity, just as it would be with a toothache, so that in him, this pain does not return but what he has done as prevention.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	The common folk believe that cauterization is the last resort in medicine and it's deemed effective; however, I don't quite understand to what extent they hold this belief, but I think it doesn't provide any real benefit as a medical treatment or for any other purpose.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The reason for this is contrary to the above; and I believe that caulking is only the last resort of medicine, not as it administers treatment methods in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not cure them, so at the end of the disease one should use caulking, and apply it there.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	"Today's medical practices are far removed from the rudimentary techniques of the past; contrary to what some may believe based on common misconceptions and exaggerated tales."
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	They argued that gold jewelry is better than iron jewelebecause and didn't mention water even for the equality of gold and the greatness of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	They said that the place of burning does not work without water being completely submerged; because I have already tasted and tried it myself, and found out that this doesn't make water but only boils other substances, while cauterization with gold is better than iron in all aspects as they mentioned. However, when you use fire made of gold, you did not tell me how much to prepare for the malleability of gold, and also it needs to be able to endure heat; if you place it over a flame, the gold will turn into ash because of the fire, and sometimes there are thin layers that an artisan can work with.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	L'argon, by far the most abundant gas in our atmosphere, is used minimally and primarily during surgical operations to promote tissue healing.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	The Lord has decreed this chapter to be read in the churches following other chapasters, and He ordered those of higher rank within the peasants' society that they may grant whatever is requested by Him.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	The procedure for treating scalp cold sores caused by cold and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	First capital
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This incision provides moisture and coolness on the affected area due to which there are two main causes, one being salty fluid secretion from the head towards the ears and many tears flowing, also causing excessive sleepiness, toothache, and throat pain, universally of any illness that comes through coldness, such as paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions in those disecuases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The shape of this cauterization is as follows, which initially commands the illness to be evacuated with medicinal laxatives making a change within three or four nights, depending on the nature of the ailment and the age of the patient and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	A command his horse to lower its head towards the razor, and approached it so as to stand between your horses on a fallen log while resting them on their hoovebottoms.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Please place your hand's flat surface on top of the tip of my nose between my eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, as you mentioned about the place arriving tomorrow, I'll visit that location and then light up its olive grove, which has this shape:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	In that pause over the spot you feel healthiest, the movement that descends within you, which gradually makes your spirit soar and then turns around.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	A) Approach your horse calmly and observe the location, checking if any part of its head is exposed, similarly to how much hay you would feed it. If so, raise your hand again, but do not turn around with that same arm; instead, use another arm or have someone else assist you. Ensure the area remains quiet as you perform these steps.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Take a small amount of salt and dissolve it in that water then let that sit for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Proceed to the given location and place that item on the surface within the marked border, ensuring it does not cover the central area.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	In English, the phrase translates to "Bring me some calming tea with four-pharmacy components that will ensure my health." However, this translation is still quite literal and may not convey a clear meaning in English as it does in Romanian. A more idiomatic way of saying this might be:
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	When the Roman Empire fell, it was better for people's health and well-beebut more so for their freedom, because they were no longer under such strict control and had a greater sense of autonomy.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	They shall use cold iron blades to cut off the diseased bone within the skull, and place the caustic agents in such a way that they are adhered to any portion of the outer surface of the skull.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	A proper seal of the letter and envelope should match; both should be accurate.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	Several other methods than the cauterization procedure can be used to achieve hemostasis (stopping bleeding), including applying pressure directly on the wound and elevating it above heart level. Here is a simple guideline for these methods, along with instructions for using an alphabetic code system:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	It is believed that from that place the vapors of the head emanate.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	S has been exposed to the loud noise for long periods of time, and it must be cured before it becomes solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	In my opinion, these two kinds of burning ointments have not been seen by all in your home; rather only in the houses of those who fear a certain way; and let him, whom I am obligated to, be better off safe than sorry because his head is distracted due to such remedy continuity as we've testified among other members, especially when it concerns the nature of the sickness.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first species of caustery is salt water and best for you to have; and from that vessel take the work in order to save your life.
Capitol segon.	Second Capital.
Del cauteri del cap.	The surgical procedure involving the head area is called a craniotomy. In this operation, a section of the skull (also known as the "cap" in some languages) is removed to access the brain undernecuires and then replaced after the treatment is completed. This type of surgery can be necessary for various reasons, such as removing tumors, treating aneurysms or other vascular malformations, repairing skull fractures, or addressing epilepsy and traumatic brain injuries.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	In total, the chief cause of chronic and long-lasting pain and water is in prolonged illnesses, and frequent use of glasses and spoon rests and catheters and fireplaces and dogs and chickens and razors and pillows, and mainly if it has already been cauterized by a caustic (cautery) which does not relieve any of those causes; at times one should consider that the head of the disease is due to strong inflammation in its nature; and it's not such a big deal to try another cauterization with a different kind of cautery from before, albeit slightly.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	A small portion is to be cauterized above the wound of his head in which the cord has been severed.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the nail and reveal of the bone the amount which we have counted and cauterize that with a cautery in the part behind the head at the location called "vas," - and it is this location where the vacuum procedure takes place.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	The translation of this Basque text to English is as follows: "The pain in the head can occur anywhere and does not necessarily involve swelling or inflammation, but it causes intense pain different from all other types of headaches."
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	In this surgical procedure, the chosen burn is performed at its location, where one should select the burn type that will be used for cauterizing the corns on the head and occiput. The more subtle burn than that should be applied to the middle part of the head. Here's how it works:
Capitol ters.	In the United States, state capitals play a significant role in its governance and political structure. Each of the fifty states has an official capital city where the government meets and makes decabulous decisions. These capitals are often chosen due to their geographical location, population size or historical significance within each respective state.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Old non-conventional wart cauterization.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	In the event of a severe headache or when pain is felt inside the ear, one should take analgesic medications and receive other appropriate treatments that I have mentioned in the chapters on diseases; but if it does not help, cauterization may be done as follows: either with an acetic acid-based caustic agent, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Mayes' caustic medicine is a stimulant that you should take orally in small doses; then chew it and remove the ashes of alum, and absorb its essence with both hands.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	The incision is made on the temple area at one-inch below the hairline and slightly to the side of its center, where a small lancet is inserted that goes deep enough into the forehead bone without causing harm or discomfort.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	E bears strong resistance to avoid stopping for descent constraint; and allows that space of three hours; and deliberately dismantles the ice, and places it in two or three days, and rests on its submerged edge within a boundary where the location falls apart.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	A proper diet is essential for maintainer's health and well-being.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you would like to know some burning medicines which I have written about in the aforementnent treatise on cauterizing drugs, please let me know.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Adopting this guideline, the process for performing a surgical procedure using an electric cautery unit could be described as follows in Spanish (Mays realizara una intervención quirúrgica mediante unidad de electrocauterio siguiendo esta guía):
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	The tip of the leaf is pointed, just like a clover bud, and in its middle part there is an emphasized small point.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Approach the place of pain and gently move your leg - to avoid worsening the existing curvature - and slowly turn the small iron wheel at increasing speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of blood that is attached to the skin surface is less than usual and you raise your hand such that the vessel is not clamped at the end, then ensure there is no blood flow from it, thus preventing bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	In the case of a stomach ache due to salted water and resting on that place for several days, apply mustard paste at the site, and let it stay there for three days; then cleanse with an antiseptic solution when healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you wish, proceed with the excision of the cutting tool'amoq (tool handle) according to cauterization and be careful not to make an incision on the vessel in this emigration itself, which is non-ancient.
Capitol quart.	Fourth Capital
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Ancient Cautery of Emigration.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	You heal by means of emigration water, and the amount you have said about the previous treatment, and the amount you have said in the divisions of diseases, without using the previous method, and times for the disease that does not suffice with what you have said regarding either sterilization or boiling water. You should heat it before doing so, hours earlier than when you indicate on top of where the pain is located, along a long line, which will be the majority part of this point; and afterwards leave your finger there for a while and pierce the acupuncture area until you reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	It is necessary for you to prevent the continuation of mandible problems, which are harmful during chewing; that the ligament is not strained and the nerves do not become agitated and affected, and that it does not undergo spasms or cramps.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	It is about the custody and care of blood flow in the artery that starts, mainly at the beginning when it causes fear, especially to those who are unaware of what they are doing and not studious; let alone the operation on them from the start.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	On remember the event of the blood transfusion in accordance with its procedure at that location, within this free establishment.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	In case of this illness which does not heal with a cauldrron and the body of the evil tolerable is burnt, cauterize that on the mentioned head area as we have described, and treat the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	If you wish, administer the cauldrons that we have mentioned in the steel-working chapter with two handles, and this cauterization method is better and more effective.
Capitol .v.	In the legal case of Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Co., decided by the United States Supreme Court in 2009, the key issue was whether a judge's failure to recuse himself from hearing an appeal involving a major campaign contributor constituted a violation of due process under the Fourteenth Amendment.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Curing of the earlobe pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	In the auricle there is pain due to friction and it's treated by using vaginal dilators as I mentioned in the previous section. The other method of treatment which can be used if pain persists is cauterization, a procedure that involves burning off an area causing discomfort or inflammation; however, this should not be attempted without professional guidance:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	C is close to the spark point and is moved along the environment of the entire ear so that it rotates like a wheel in each cycle; or if the pain is located anywhere within the ear.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	The small candle of the evening has barely started to illuminate the room, casting soft shadows as I attempt to make myself understood.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	The cauldrons are full of all kinds of points and dots; these ones heal and cauterize within themselves those areas that need to be treated.
Capitol .vi.	"Capitol" is an American record company and a subsidiaderivative of Universal Music Group, which was founded in 1942 by Johnny Mercer, Buddy DeSylva, and Glenn Wallichs as the first independent record label to sign a recording act (Mercury Theatre). Capitol Records became one of the most successful labels in music history.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Tonsillectomy, also known as tonsils removal, is a surgical procedure to remove the palatine and lingual tonsils for patients suffering from recurrent tonsillitis or obstructive sleep apnea due to enlarged tonsils. The procedure typically involves general anesthesia and can be performed using various techniques such as cold steel dissection, coblation, harmonic scalpel, or laser surgery. Recovery time varamoes from several days up to a couple of weeks depending on the individual's health condition and adherence to postoperative care guidelebgiven by their doctor.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tincture that is healed and not of the burning process consists only of herbs which come through a sieve, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoidance of the condition that results from dryness or muscle spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	Yes, I can provide you with an equivalent translation in another Romance language - Spanish. Here's the text translated into Spanish:
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	After pausing your dietary restrictions due to the illness in the family, I recommend not relaxing them until you fully recover from the ailment.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The form of cauterization is that you cauterize the upper extremity of the ear by placing a small piece over the edge of the tip, and then tempering it with another substance whose length corresponds to the length of said tip, and then place your hot iron in such way that all excess tissue burns off.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of a cauldron and it's a type of knife handle; the latter being in front like a table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, he was a bit more subtle than that one doesn't seem like this; and advise against excessive triviality just a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Article III states that the laws shall be executed in good faith within a reasonable time after they have been passed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII - The Capital City
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	The ancient treatment for apoplexy through cauterization.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	Apoplexy is an ancient disease and the treatments that have been prescribed include applying water to the head along with your medicine for curing the illness without fever; four times a day, cauterize all of the hair on his/her head as you have said; also cauterize at the back of the head and in the earlobe, just as we mentioned.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The method of the cauterization has been done as mentioned above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	"The wound is sutured near the orifice of the stomach, and then removed; it should be treated with the fluid that flows from it."
Capitol .viii.	In Chapter VIII of the novel, titled "Capitol," the protagonist faces a significant turning point in their journey as they navigate through complex political and social dynamics within the ruling elite's central hub. This pivotal moment sets the stage for further developments that impact the course of the storyline and the relationships between characters.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	The cauterization of an amnesia wound caused by a flail.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	At the beginning, he took large spoonsful and pills that were supposed to be sedative.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Article I - The following provisions regulate the total amount of illness and rest periods for employees, as described in the article on sick leave entitamments.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	That pause those intervals, four of which is a kind of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	B) He said that the next meeting will be in order regarding the matters discussed earlier.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	If they are healthy, then he should cut off the three hairs at his forehead, which should be of blond color from the higher portion of his head within the lower portion of the crown.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	The interval between each of the described burns is called "resting period," and after such a procedure when water has been applied, it's known as "cooling phase."
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If you have the pain for a short period of time and it is bearable, apply heat to that area at bedtime; if it persists or worsens, use caution by placing warm compresses on both affected areas.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Here's the translation into modern English:
Capitol .ix.	"Capitol Ix" is a science fiction novel written by British author John Marsden, published in the year 2지 2008년 (in Korean). This book takes place on Earth and tells the story of a group of young individuals who are part of an experiment that requires them to survive without adults. As they navigate challenges such as finding food, shelter, and dealing with conflicts within their group, readers will also learn about important social issues like politics, environmental sustainability, and personal responsibility.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	The sterilization of Paracelsus and the soothing of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	I process the following procedure with my hands and water that we have said; and appropriately clean the area of infection, then apply a heated instrument to the affected spot on your scalp (where hair is growing), as well as all the bumps on your head, and also over the back part of it. Additionally, perform three cauterizations at the base of your skull.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary in the treatment of scrotal edema for those who tolerate heat well and the condition is severe, four times a week, apply heat to the spines on the back, and at other times cauterize within until it recedes by a few inches. Elevate your testicles afterwards.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	A prop to whom it concerns, this is indeed an olive oil burner.
Capitol .x.	The word "Capitol" refers to a building where the legislature of a country or state meets, such as the United States Capitol in Washington D.cu>Congress holds sessions and conducts its business there. In some contexts, it can also refer to any lawmaking assembly itself.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Epilepsy surgery is a treatment option for people with drug-resistant epilepscuo, which does not respond adequately to medication. The goal of the procedure is to remove or isolate the part of the brain causing seizures while minimizing effects on normal brain function.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not about treating epilepsy, but rather preventing seizures before they occur.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, we suggest the following methods for treating his brain at the onset of the illness and in cases where the disease is severe and tolerant to standard treatments:
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	He was a child who did not suffer from any medicines; his constant treatments and remedries made him grow strong, before which, for many days, he consumed an excellent quality of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Upon diagnosing the illness, and applying a caustic agent to its location on the scalp according to the previous method, he also applied another cautery over the back of his head and cauterized each corner of his skull.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the pain is severe and tolerable, ointments can be applied to those areas that have been mentioned, which provide analgesia and soothing effects on the paralyzed limbs of the neck and back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	A be cauterised olive-shaped according to the previous description.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the illness is childhood asthma, hours of pause should be applied subtly according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Capital XI, a historical monument representing the rich heritage and cultural significance of its location, stands as an iconic landmark for both locals and visitors alike. This magnificent structure showcases exquisite architectural details that reflect the influences from various periods in history, creating a harmonious blend of styles that captivates all who lay eyes upon it.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	The Burning of Melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are excessive moisture and flaccidity, the recommended treatment is to apply heat therapy (cauterization) on those parts that have been diagnosed with localized paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	The cause of melancholy is the excessive use of water decreasing into melancholy, and its onset follows a humid condition; thus, hours spent drinking pure water rejuvenate the brain according to what was stated in the division (of humors).
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	As the sun sets behind the mountains, and the robin takes flight in an elegant arc above the circle, it then descends to its nesting place near the peak.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The illness shall not be taken lightly; it must be addressed from all angles.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Upon the hillside pasture; it is more worthy of an ancient border for sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	The warmth spread over the stove for heating, which you experience when it's cold outside.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	A person who commits an act of trespassing upon the land at the edge of your property and within the circle shall be held liable.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Every weekend, the patient is advised to avoid water intake for a period of time; on the other hand, if you prefer, sterilize that area with heated metal tips following your doctor's advice; alternatively, keep it dry as much as possible: this type of cauterization helps in equalizing and treating certain conditions.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	A small clearing begins at the edge or in the depths of the forest.
Capitol .xii.	Capital XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	The water from the downward drain cauterizes into the wall.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you recite this prayer at the beginning of drinking water in the vessel that I name after division, hours begin and end with a sip from the bitter liquid that purifies your mind, and protects all forms of moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	The fish swims away from the shark during daylight hours.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	In the event of an accidental cut or wound on the head, it is recommended to use a clean cloth and apply pressure to control bleeding. If possible, cauterize the edge of the wound with a sterilized instrument; if not available, gently cleanse the area around the wound with soap and water.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut the veins and capillaries which are left of the head, and let the cauterization be performed at that length on the side towards the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	Watch for signs of bleeding when you are bandaged up; if you see any blood flow, apply some medication that may help (if available).
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	The essence extracted from herbs and the secretion of those, along with caution for sanitary flows.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	In some cases, veins can be cauterized at the base of two bones to produce double cauterization effects.
Capitol .xiii.	CAPITOL XIII (or simply III) is the thirteenth studio album by American heavy metal band Winger, released on January 26th, 2019 via Frontiers Records. It was their first studio album in almost thirty years since "Pull" which came out in 2009 and reunited founding members Kip Winger (bass), Reb Beach (guitar) and Rod Morgenstein (drums). The only other member besides them, Paul Taylor (keyboards), left the band during their hiatus.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Ancient tears cauterization.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	A lot of tears from ancient wounds have accumulated in the veins and arteries, which are located at the site where capillary bleeding is occurring; it has been observed that this heat is superfluous. The above-mentioned cauterization should be performed on those areas we mentioned at the beginning of the chapter concerning water drainage from wounds: one cautery in the top part of the head, two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and two cauteries in the neck below two jawbones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If you want to remove a small ingrown hair on the length of your leg shaft above the ankle, slightly pierce that area with a tiny sterilized needle or tweezerenear the skin surface.
Capitol .xiiii.	The word "capitol" in Roman numerals is written as XIIII (12). However, it's important to note that the correct representation of the number twelve should be XII. Therefore, there seems to be a minor error in your query and you meant XII instead of XIIII for "Capitol."
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Nasal fumonectomía (also known as submucosal resection of the inferior turbinate).
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	In that water you mentioned in the division and do not consume your medicine, then prepare yourself for three nights of fasting, drink only to soothe the pain at night; afterwards, burn it with a fine or olive wood incense cone.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	The cat accidentally burned that poor little flower with the burner near its delicate hairs on both sides of its eyes.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	Fear not the archery that doesn't set you ablaze.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	Cauterizing the navel in this way is this shape.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV: The Capital City
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	The eyelash cautery treatment for alopecia areata of the eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the edge of a hemorrhoid is soothed by illness or moisture, it may become inflamed and develop into an ulcer. This condition is known as anal fissures (anus fissures in Spanish). It occurs when there are small tears in the lining of the anal canal, often caused by passing hard or large stools during a bowel movement. The area can be painful and may bleed slightly.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do so, remove that portion between the two upper eyebrows by making a small incision at both ends and elongating them throughout, matching with the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let E be the length of any curve according to the quantity of overcasting.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Do not apply too much pressure on your eye during the procedure, but only use the amount that is equivalent to a third of the eyelid being stuck together.
Capitol .xvi.	The capital of the United States is Washington D.C., which stands for the District of Columbia. It was founded after the American Revolution and officially became the nation'amo Capital in 1790 following the Residence Act passed by Congress, designating it as the permanent seat of government. Located between Virginia and Maryland, Washington D.C. is not part of any state and operates under a unique federal jurisdiction. It serves as the political center for the country, hosting iconic landmarks such as the White House, Capitol Hill, and numerous national monuments.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	The cauterization of the eyelid's edge caused the hairs to be converted into detached parts and they fell off from it.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	The contents of the oil are transformed into accounts as I pour the oil in such a way that it is heated according to two methods - either through distillation or burning with medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the fire burns your eye, command those present before you to read their scrolls just as they do in other places, ensuring that they are prolonged and equal; then take that one from them, hours later strengthen its edges with a binding so it is not damaged while reading.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Let us now consider the influence of external factors on dreams and their interpretation. Dream analysis is a complex process that involves examining various elements within our unconscious mind to gain inscriptional insight into ourselves. Influencing these symbols, emotions, and scenarios presented in dreams are many aspects such as environmental cues or personal experiences we encounter during waking life. These factors can leave significant impressions on our subconscious and often manifest themselves within our dreams.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	He starts working on an accordion book of watercolors or a collection of pillows with the theme of skies.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Approximations of the cauterization techniques, which is this method's form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	"A small spot is cauterized on the figure where the sign is gradually spreading; as it burns, the surface of the skin resembles hazel leaves."
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	A sign of good health in your work is that you blink the eye frequently and its eyelashs are raised, while the eye drops should be clear.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Thus let your hand be raised three days hence, and come forth upon the field bordering my estate where I shall have built a barn.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	A) He who sows kindness reaps health in return.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	Mays returns to his former place and the eyelid is softened, so he performs another small operation using a caustic agent in the same manner as before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If you have loose skin on the lower eyelid that is raised above its natural position and appears to be attached, this procedure cauterizes that area so that it retracts into place and ensures that the hair does not poke through.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Mays' medicinal caustic is such that you order the illness to read the skin inwards until they are extended and equalized; make his doing by writing on parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	A brief introduction to the known and living causes of Ana. The German phrase "Das ist sehr interessant" translates to "That is very interesting" in English. Here'aturally, we break it down as follows: In the holy water, mix together those herbs as follows: add three measures of aquatic plants (such as celandine or mint), one measure of blessed salt, and two pinches each of ground coriander seed, rosemary leaves, fennel seeds, and a small amount of frankincense. Combine all these ingredients in the holy water until it is well-blended; then pour this liquid over a piece of paper shaped like a birch leaf, allowing the excess to drip off; finally, place the wet paper into an album (or book) and keep it with you at all times.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	He paused to speak about medicine and then he took a small sip before the bad taste of the medicine became too intense for him; just like that of hot liquid.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Thus, when the scabby eruption appears, take the medicine as soon as possible; once the malignancy ceases, remove the medication and cleanse the affected area with water; afterwards, check if times have passed since your eyelid has been lifted or cleansed of discharge like a focus or incision because it is likely healing at this point; if not, reapply the medicine over the site where no infection occurred and no deterioration took place while the procedure was being carried out.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	A person may only enter the border within which the noise of injustice is erased, and with regard to that issue they shall be healed or another similar matter within which they shall be cured.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	E is necessary for you to keep an eye on your work that ensures ample care so that nothing falls off the medicine, and if the edge of the eyelid is swolamoyed (edematous) and any cause of hairs touching it, repeat your medication over that place where the eyelid is edematous, and usually in a similar manner as you did at first, and properly enter into it until healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the way of Maitreya'ebouleverant.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	The lengths of the beards that men have are diverse according to their size and stature, and therefore so is your circumference.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	Article IV does not infringe upon the right to education for those who are studying this subject matter.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII: The Legislative Branch of the United States Government
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	In the case of a cauterization (cauterization) of a lacrimal duct in the lower eyelid, this procedure is typically performed to treat tear drainage issues such as blockages or narrowing that can cause watery eyes and recurrent eye infections. The goal of the cauterization is to widen the duct opening, faciliteing proper tear flow from the eye into the nose.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	You may cauterize the fistula with water which you have called out in the division of diseases, and do not bestow your healing upon it yet; for a time make that malady pause, as I command thee to do thus: bid the illness to hold its head on thine hand, and take hold of its head somewhat minister between thy fingers so that it be not unpleasant nor agitated by the touch of thy hand.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	A sip of coffee in a bustling cafe or the warmth of sunrise over the hillside.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Approximations of the electrocautery device's form are as follows:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The surgical procedure you're referring to is called "castration." In Latin, it could be described as follows:
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If one enters therein, proceed to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	Sì, se volessero anche loro dargli una possibilanno.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the one that is dormant is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Upon the closure of the fistula, there may be leakage and excessive dryness in that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If it's not a waste of time, let'amoeba hours pass and we'll return to the matter at hand.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Take the iron cauldrons which are to be ignited and place a small piece of your hair or nail in each at the base near the mouth, so that no harm shall come to you or ill luck ensue; later pour the contents into the grays (sewer) and dispose of them.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	At the beginning of your caustic application into the bone, it's fine; if not, repeat the caustic treatment once or twice more as needed; and leave that so for three days, then rest with a damp cloth over the affected area and apply an anti-inflamcuent ointment until healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	After eleven days and not healing, the patient must take a break from using the acute corrosive medicine in which the bone becomes exposed, as it should be according to their medical plan.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	E is another method of cauterization for the treatment of a fistula which involves using silver nitrate and wrapping it around the area near the fistula opening. Follow these steps to perform this procedure safely and effectively:
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the sinus tract has healed as we have advised with cauterization and antibiotcuros, then it's okay; otherwise, within a few hours, it is necessary to administer treatment through the nose and reduce the fistula along its proper course.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII. In the English language, numbers are written in words just like any other language. So "xviii" would be spelled out as "eighteen". This Roman numeral notation is commonly used for chapters and sections in books, but it can also refer to quantities or dates depending on context.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Cauterization of the wound after a puncture.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Frequent sexual activities can cause cracks in the lips, especially in children'nlips'.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	In order to repair the water cracks that we have discussed in the pipelines without causing any further damage with your intervention, follow these steps using a small torch tool as follows:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	S is the beauty of you second only to the subtlety of your silk-like skin.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	That small pause at the beginning, where the cauldron will arrive in those cracks that go to the heart of them.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	A prop to the man who finds the golden key within which is salvation.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter Nineteastern Capitalization or Roman Numeral for 29 in textual references to the U.S. Constitution, which begins with "We the People..." and outlines the principles of governance and laws that establish the framework of the United States government.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Cauterization of oral fistula.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	The text seems to be in the Occitan language (also known as Provençal or langue d'oc), which is spoken in Southern France, Spain and Italy. Here's my translation of this medical advice on how to treat a throat abscess:
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the wound is superficial and heals, it's fine; otherwise, time must be taken to uncover the location and remove any decaying bone according to its appearance in this chapter.
Capitol .xx.	CAPITOL XX
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Cauterization of the nerves and soothing of the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	The cavities are soothed by moisture and the teeth are healthy, while those ones do not benefit from medicines but rather restoration techniques, at that moment relieves the pain in your own mouth, and appropriately ignite the form which will arrive shortly, as long as you pause over the tooth and insert it into there promptly, so that the heat of the flame reaches the depth of the cavity completely.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	The machine applies heat to the treated area in several intervals according to your preference.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	The correct translation of the Provençal text into standard Italian is as follows:
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI: The Capital City
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Toothache cauterization.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	Toothache with foul smell or pus, if there is no relief from medical treatment, the procedure to be followed depends on two methods: cauterization at the edge of a cow's skin (cauterizing iron), or cauterization with hot coal.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The Cautery method is used to relieve pain in the oral cavity by creating small burns on the surface of a metal strip using a hot iron rod and then applying these heated portions to the affected area, causing immediate numbness. Here's how you can do it:
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	The root of the verb "to come" in Spanish is "venir". Here are several conjugations within that tense and person, with the focus on its arrival to the present (razón/reason):
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish, immerse the tip of a cotton swab or a small piece of cotton in lukewarm water and pause it on the sensitive tooth area, then place that warm spot onto the ignited portion of an iron rod which approaches the point where the sensitivity ends.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization is done by applying heat and you must attend to either the upper or lower gum, ensamoothing it in such a way that the flame does not reach the mouth of the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Approximately Apples Cauterize The Form Which Will Come, And Pause Upon The Tooth On Your Inside That The Cautery Be Placed; And Do This A Couple of Times As Long as The Pain Is Reduced Or In That Day or The Other.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	"He takes the herb of joy that relieves his own mouth with good care and tongue for an hour, then he spits it out. This is the form of the incantation."
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Caueserez, etiam si potestas est tibi, ut extremum sequas.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the form of the catheter:
Capitol .xxii.	"Capital, Volume II" (German: "Das Kapital, Band II") is a continuation of Karl Marx's seminal work in political economy and critique of capitalism. This second volume focuses on the process of circulation within a capitalist mode of production, exploring how money capital functions as both an instrument for the realization of surplus value (profit) and a means by which that surplus is expanded through investment, leading to accumulation. Marx delves into the intricate relationships between commodities and their prices, the role of credit in facilitamoetns economic activity, and the inherent contradictions within capitalism's circulation process itself. As with "Capital," Volume I, this work is essential for understanding Marxist economics and the dynamics of modern economies predicated on a capitalist framework.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Cauterization of the ectropion.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	Extrophylos are a type of bandage and cooling salve used for treating wounds or inflammaturas with medicines. To apply it, heat the extremities so that they become slightly red-hot (ignite). These should then be placed on the affected area once during a day, as needed to treat the issue; if necessary, repeat application when required until the swelling is resolved or subsides.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, apply heat to it for a few hours and cover with a bandage for three days until the inflamed area has healed enough that the burned tissue from the heat application can be removed easily.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	A prop cure that one ensconces and drapes oneself in, to ensure health.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the cannula or electrocautery device is quite convenient for transferring fluids.
Capitol .xxiii.	"Capitol XXIII" is the title of a chapter, presumably from an English textbook or literature piece that focuse on topics related to legislative bodies and their operations within governmental systems. The Roman numeral "XXIII" translates into Arabic numerals as "23," indicating it's Chapter 23 in this context. Without specific details about the content of the chapter, a general explanation can be provided based on common themes often covered under such titles:
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Cauterization of the laceration on the throat and bandaging.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidities come over the lower respiratal tract and mainly when it is chilled with cold, then they cause discomfort and the illness should be relieved at meal-times by taking medicines laxative; in this case, one must apply a cautery to the inflamed tonsil.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	He looked to make sure you did not get too close to the campfire nor burn your fingers on the hot handle but just a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	He cuts off that other cauline joint at the last vertebra of its stem.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The following steps describe how to perform a simple surgical skin excision, similar to the procedure mentioned before:
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	B) The water that follows the one mentioned above, as long as it is safe to drink.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24. The Rise of the Rebellion
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Cure for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	Both lungs are soaked with humidity and the disease has no fever or cough, and it is an old ailnment. After heating that one (the area to be treated) on top of the furcula (wrist bone), let two cauterizations take place in the upper part where the muscles are attached; also another cauterization between the nipples, at the level of the pectoral muscle. Then apply a similar caustic to the clavicle following the previous shape.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you choose to do so, your cauterization point will be called "cauterio," which refers to the shape of the painful spot on the earlobe.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Sian puncts within caves are often found in those areas where there has been previous water flow, and the formation of such structures is due to that same water which had passed through beforehand.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	In English, "sei anche in grado di fare tre bruciature se sono tre bruciature che hai; Se ne puoi fare uno altr'anno, è così: in questo modo potrai fare tre bruciature secondo questa formula:" translates to:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV: The Heart of the Nation - Exploring Washington D.C.' surveys the historic and cultural significance of the capital city, delving into its architectural marvels, political landmarks, and vibrant communities that shape America's identity.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	The excision of the Tittilary cyst, located at the base of the eyelid.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	The tip of the Achilles tendon is displaced due to lubricating moisture and not halted upon its usual return time; therefore, its dislocation occurs within that period until it returns to its usual location, moving slightly as we have observed, hours should firstly reduce the displacement, and appropriately reverse the malady onto your heel or sole of your foot. Moreover, elevate the affected leg, which is in the lower part on the left side from where you usually sit. If the joint is dislocated to that side, do so until it returns to its original position.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	A propinkeys have no caps. Here is the way to do it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	A cauterize the injured bone where it enters, so that heat is applied to both sides around; and a burn will result from the causticization process within four hours after application.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	In a more subtle way, according to the amount of attempts; and this is how it goes:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some wounds are adjusted according to this count and because they have the stitches. VIII (8).
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	A prop paise osoberi l'urul porsu i cauterizimi tziu sal, e aprop fa ai adheriri le malalties en tranquilitate, e lo membre nun esse maut per alcuni temps entres que sia confortat.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is towards unusual and difficult areas to reach, cauterization should be performed on the muscle near the clavicle or at the joint points, as the connection is confirmed and the moisture is dried up and the ailment healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI of the United States Code, commonly referred to as "Capitol," primarily deals with legislation and regulations pertaining to federal properties in Washington D.C., including the buildings, grounds, and facilities under Congressional jurisdiction. This part of the U.지문법 covers a range of subjects related to the administration, preservation, and security of these important government assets.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Stomach cauterization.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When you arrive at the stomach, feel some humid masses that have grown from the complication of its multiplications, and if you continue with the treatment methods and not confession, soon the illness will spread over your body, extending its limbs and things; thus cauterize it thoroughly: one cautery on the left side below the ribs in a quantity equal to that of another small cautery; two further cauldraries on the right side along the costal arch, forming a triangular shape. Also, between those which are not well-adjusted, make incision and drainage.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	If the depth of a burn is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin layer, then it can be classified as a deep partial-thickness burn.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	Figure S is formed according to this method of Cautery. If you wish, perform a large Cauterization at the upper part of the stomach following this circular pattern. And let it be a cauterization in the shape of a circle as follows: [Here, you would ideally provide an image or diagram that shows the specific method for performing the cautery based on historical texts.]
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	E be the stomach cauldrated at which of that cauldration one is scared, and place upon the stamghts according to how much you want to try; then cauterize around those points with cauldron, and around it heal as per the previous treatment until it has been cured.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	The excision of the fibrotic tissue.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is a swelling of the neck due to excessive fluid discharge or extreme moisture and humidity causing an abnormal accumulation that should be removed by overflowing, one must treat the illness with water as previously mentioned and avoid replenishment, for hours until the sickness has subsided from over his cervix; then apply three cauterizations following this method and amount placed on the neck below the hypochondriac region while he lies down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Let S be the surface which is bounded by any caustic according to its curvature, and let C be a curve on S with respect to the length of the body straight (chord) it intersects.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Do not sell your own soul for the devil's temptation.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the quantity of water adhering to the amount of its bulk in a container is not greater, and if sickness be upon your sheep; and if it is absent, may you hasten, for they have extended theirs things, and lift up their horns.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	E is the shape of a cauterizing instrument or cautery. A cautery can come in various forms, depending on its specific use and design. Some common types include:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	It is possible that you can perform this kind of cautery with cauterizing tools when you possess subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	E do not process too much in the caulking, and ensure that the entire chain is well sealed so that it becomes thoroughly sealed for both the body and to reach within the hulls, because the chain here is subtle; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII (28)
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	In the case of a Bartholin's gland abscess, cauterization is performed.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	Quan Endeve examines the hematoma and wants to know if that hematoma is in the muscle tissue or in the tunica vaginalis, it may worsen into a serious condition causing intense pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	Sì è in cucina, quando il dolore diventa molto forte ed i medici sono spesso stanchi dalla terapia.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	The disease has turned against the body itself; and with great caution he attempts to locate the abscess; then using hot iron molds fashioned like grains of rice (as mentioned in the previous page).
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	He cuts off that part and burns the wound entirely until it reaches healthy skin, then he applies a bandage after lightly singeing it.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	A proper care ensures faster healing compared to other dressings when used approprinately.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	E in this cove use that form of cauterization only the one which he studied in the art of medicine is prolonged; however many illnesses are known from the latter method, but still let him choose what seems best to us, and it will be most advisamo.
Capitol .xxix.	Title: Capital Clashes - The Battle for XXIX
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Cauterization of varicose veins refers to a medical procedure used to treat these swolamoen en bloedvaten in Dutch, which are twisted and enlarged blood vessels that can cause pain and other complications. The process involves using heat (cauterizing) or chemicals to seal the affected veins, preventing them from worsening and alleviating symptoms. This treatment is commonly performed by a vascular surgeon or dermatologist.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The process of selecting the antics cauteri in Aristotle'economic theory according to this method involves choosing from Aristotle's various theories one that is lengthy and dry, found at a specific location with its thickness being relevant.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	In the lower third of the chest, a transverse incision is made over the sternum from right to left along its length; two incisions are performed on each side above and below this line for drainage purposes. Then a vertical incision is created starting from just below the right clavicle towards the midline of the chest, descending slightly past where the right collarbone ends. Two more incisions are made further downwards angling slightly away from the previous end point near the throat area; these are followed by two additional vertical cuts on either side between the fifth rib and the cartilage below it sloping a bit towards the backside of each incision. Next, another incision is done just above the xiphoid process (the small pointed bone at the lower end of the sternum), followed by an incision over the abdomen. Lastly, three vertical cuts are made in the space between both shoulders and two on either side of the xiphoid process.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	A in the shop where you buy your mother's coat hanger, it should be displayed prominently on the shelf.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	They said these same prayers that men use when they burn a piece of iron resembling rays and sparks like the one we put in that place between the shores, as it brought healing to those afflicted with boils according to what we have mentioned in the case of burning charcoal.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this performance of cauterization, May is not afraid, because she causes it to happen instantly at the site of the fistula which does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital XXX! How can I assist you today? Please note that while I am capable of addressing a wide range of topics, there may be limitations based on the content guidelines and policies in place.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	From the cauterization of a wound.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	How do you treat the disease of melasma in water as we have told you about the treatment during division without causing your own healing to be delayed? Here are three ways to perform cauterization (burning), all of which are correct, depending on the length of the affected area and according to the pattern shown for hair removal:
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	E should be as thick or a bit thinner than the previous incision, and the blade of the scalpel should have the same curvature as described for the cutting instrument previously mentioned.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Do not buy my brother's curse, and evil may befall upon your head.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	E is a variant of the cauterizing tool, which has two working ends, causing relief at the site of muscle dislocation, and elevates the tendon that runs along the inner edge of the thigh to alleps the onset of distressing pain.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	Let S be the point you are climbing up to according to the length of the slope, so that they form right triangles similar by the proportionality of sides with respect to the angle formed with the ground.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	The intrusion of these two elements causes the initial impact to be absorbed in that area where those vibrations from the other party are received.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	A) Apply the cautery and then perform four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you know how to perform a cautery procedure using three different methods of electrocautery.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	To treat the boils caused by prolonged friction of the arm during hot summer days, it is more effective than other preceding remedcuels for healing.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital, the capital city of a state or country. It is usually the political and administrative center where important government buildings are located such as parliaments, legislative bodies, courts, embassies, etc. Depending on the context you provided, "Capitol" can also refer to iconic landmarks like Capitol Records Building in Los Angeles or The United States Capitol in Washington D.C., among others.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Causticization of iodine.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	The Cat's Tail in the Wind - Literally Translated from Catalan to English
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	I treat the dropsy with four cauterizations on the circumcision scar and one above the stomach, another over the scrotum, another over the testicles, two between the spinous processes of the back, and one on the right side of the penis.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The extent of the depth of the cauterization is proportional to the severity of the wound.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Appropriately applying the cauterization method can help secure the wound for long-term healing.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	The evil of illness is not driven away by the curative water that covers it; instead, it should be approached with prayers and supplications for healing assistance.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cauldrons used for sterilizing the stomach is similar to that of a cloverleaf, and it has two sections like its predecessor, according to the previous design.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 23 (Capitol)
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Electrocautery is a medical procedure in which an electric current is used to remove or destroy tissue during surgery, often by using a tool called an electrocautery pen or diathermy device. It's commonly employed to cauterize (burn) blood vessels and control bleeding (hemostasis), but it can also be utilized for cutting through tissues and removing unwanted growths such as warts, tumors, or polyps. The technique minimizes the risk of excessive bleeding during surgery while offering precision in targeting specific areas.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the fish stings are burnt in water and filled with clear saltwater, tie them over your back between your earlobe and ring finger without twisting them; then raise your right arm and do not let it fall down completely as the salty water is secreted.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	This seems to be a passage written in Catalan language about performing a double cautery method, where two cutting knives are applied over each side and then the handle of each knife is placed at the end of the respective knife. Here'atury is translated into English as follows:
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	E be the cauterization according to the length of the wound: half of it above the base of the wound and the other half below, following its shape. And two cauterizations should be made over each wound.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Layla leaves the glassy lake untouched for long periods because she doesn't want any water to seep out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	The correct translation from Galician to English for the given text would be: "They should pay attention to those causes that we have mentioned."
Capitol .xxxiii.	In the context of government and politics, "Capitol" often refers to a building where a legislative body meets. For instance, in the United States, there is a U.S. Capitol Building located in Washington D.amsterdam DC., which houses both chambers of Congress - the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Cauterization of stomach wounds.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	In the treatment of stomach ailments and excessive dampness that cause nausea, it is the digestamo-retentive faculty which debilitates; these are present in the stomach and intestines, and they are cured by water added to curative powders (manipura). Sometimes those who suffer from malaise show an exaggerated display of this power, at such times it is necessary to perform a caustic procedure on that part which was previously mentioned in the stomach's caustic treatment. This includes:
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	When excessive humidity and water intolerance occur, it's crucial to cut down on the consumption of certain foods like potatoes, cabbage, beets, legumes, greens (such as spinach), citrus fruits, watermelon, grapes, cucumbers, tomatoes and pears. It is also advisable to avoid excessive use of tea or coffee, alcoholic drinks, sweets, honey, vinegar, pickles, radishes, onions and garlic as they can worsen the condition you are suffering from.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 44. In the grand and bustling city of Washington D.C., atop a hill overlooking the Potomac River, stood the majestic Capitol Building - the heart of American democracy. This architectural marvel represented not just the power vested in Congress but also symbolized hope for millions seeking a brighter future under its iconic dome.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	In the event of a chronic abscess or an infection caused by thick mucous secretions and humidity corrupted by bacteria, be healed with the water previously mentioned in the division and do not apply your own remedy; afterward cauterize amply over the residual pus of the spondylitis on two small triangular areas and above the umbilicus for two days.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	To prevent the stomach from being cold and food from spoiling, as well as ensuring that his face is not pale or sweaty, apply heat on the abdnomen using a heating pad or hot water bottle, following these guidelines. Apply one cauterization over the belly button with a small caustic agent (according to medical advice), another cauterization over the anus, and another cauterization on the penis head. Leave the cauterizations in place for some time until healed, and keep monitoring his condition as it improves.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital V.35 or CAPITOL XXXV refers to the 35th studio album of the American rock band "The Band", released in October 1amo, 2007 under the name 'A Musical Journey'. The unique naming convention combines the word 'Capital' (often used in music albums) with a Roman numeral system indicating it as their third decade or tenths of studio records. Please note that "The Band" is often associated with its initial 1960s-70s incarnation, but has had various lineups and periods of activity since then.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Cauterization near the appendix area.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	I extract the hydrogen from water using electrolyseblades that are arranged in rows.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	The apparatus must be placed directly in the abscess area, and only the utmost care should be taken not to damage the vessel from which the blood flows through the incision made for drainage.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	In case of an open wound or burns, apply clean water to the affected area and cover it with sterile dressing as soon as possible after counting them. Additionally, ensure you provide proper care for those who have received injuries until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you apply a large amount of alkaline to the wound, it may be more painful during healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	In English, the Roman numeral "Capitol .xxxvi." would typically be written as "The Capitol Building," referring to a notable building or structure such as the United States Capitol in Washington D.cu Cdc.. However, it's worth mentioning that ".xxxvi" is not directly related to the word "Capitol"; rather, ".xxxvi" stands for 36 when converted from Roman numerals (where X represents 10 and V represents 5). If you intended to express the number thirty-six in a different context with this phrase, please provide additional information.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	The natural fistulas are dissolved during the cauterization process in the lower parts.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not heed the prescribed remedy in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, they shall be treated with caution (cauction).
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When you find any kind of fistula in nature's rear, it is an old wound that causes health issues due to corrupted moisture and so there exists a more deserving place than this which one should attempt to subtly approach and accompany the quantity of its depth as previously described.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Approximately, ignites resemble the appearance of sparks.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	A prop of the fire used for cauterization in this anastomosis, and according to the amount required during the procedure.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	It is necessary to pass over those wounds with a heated instrument so that the affected limbs are burned for one or two or three days, depending on the amount of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	He observes if there is a burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes through the course of the bladvee or the bowel, he should observe all those places; and do not do this unless when the fistula is in a non-penetrating area that you consider it.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	A propria cura, la località ritenuta sana.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the hall is sealed and its contents severed from you, then for a long time, learn that it has been completely cared for.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If matters are not of your making, hours pass with the sting that they are tainted by this preconceived notion, or arise from those causes which will bring about a recollection in you.
Capitol .xxxvii.	In English, the number "capitol .xxxvii." would be written as "37". The Roman numeral notation is used to represent numbers using specific letters; in this case 'XXXVII' represents 30 + 5 + 2 = 37. Therefore, when translated to standard Arabic numerals, the number becomes amoeba:37
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Cauterization of the warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there are signs of pain or severe inflammaturgy around the tonsils, and as a result the malady is erysipelas, it should be treated by applying caustics to the tonsils, using cauterization on each one with a silver knife used for this purpose.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	The bandage will be changed for the first time within a few days; then three smaller dressings will follow, and these last ones in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	In the context of legislative bodies, "Capitol" typically refers to a building where such activities take place. For example, in Washington D.C., United States, we have the U.anno Domini (A.D.) or Common Era Capitol Building - more commonly known as the U.S. Capitol Building - which houses both chambers of Congress: the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Caudectomy of the urinary bladamo.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	In case of swelling and irritation in the bladastery causing difficulty urinating, such that the urine cannot be retained, after a while cauterize those scars left on top of the bladastery using heat; start around its edges with tweezeburning method. Cauterize again with another hot iron on the right side and then one more time to the left of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	S is the length of each incision according to the number of stitches on the wound; and make that cut with a single incision in the lower part of the back, or two incisions if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	S should undergo circumcision following the procedure protocol.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capital (UK) Limited, formerly known as CAPITOL Records UK, is a prominent British subsidiary of the global music company UMG Recordings Limited, which operamoes under the broader Universal Music Group (UMG). Established in the late 20th century, Capitol has played a significant role within the United Kingdom's vibrant and diverse music industry.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Cauterization of the male urethra.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the woman gives birth to twins and they are humidified with moisture, impregnation is forbidden, her menstrual flow is impaired, conception may be delayed, she may experience severe pain during labor, so let the site where the umbilical cord was attached be cauterized with three small cauterizations around the navel area as described in the vesica'aturus; also apply a cauterization above the remnants of the fossa lymphae or with two cauterizations, and let it be a clavicular cauterization.
Capitol .xl.	Capitol Records LLC, commonly known as Capitol Records or simply Capitol, is an American record label established in Hollywood, California, by businessman Johnny Doelp and partnered with actor-directcu Glenn Wallichs of Wallichs Music City. The company began its operations on March 27, 1942, making it one of the "big three" major record labels that dominate the traditional music industry. Capitol has had an enormous impact on American popular music and continues to be a leading force in both physical and digital music distribution.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Cauterization of the ankle dislocation.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	The humidity in the morning mists disperses with the departure of dawn, and it forms due to the sedimentation of its own place, as well as a sign that this phenomenon is extended compared to others when they are compared among themselves.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the dislocation is evident in both cases.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	In order to heal the evil that afflicts your arm, you should perform a similar action as the ritual circle of departure does; ensure that while trying this method, you do not harm yourself and allow the affected area to fall within the radius of the circle for better efficacy.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	F is a subset of the cauldrills that follow the shape in gastric cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cauldron is not in your possession, he will cauterize those three wounds with the hot iron from the olive grove's caulderock.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	S shall perform cauterization according to the extent of the inflammaturgy in the entire limb; and carefully while it's being healed.
Capitol .xli.	In the United States, the term "Capitol" typically refers to the building in Washington D.C. where the U.cu.s Congress meets and conducts its business. However, "xli." is a Roman numeral representing the number 44, so it doesn't directly relate to Capitol buildings or other aspects of American government and democracy without additional context. Please provide more information for a detailed response.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Hemorrhoidectomy is a surgical procedure for the treatment of hemorrhoids, which are swollen and inflamed veins in the rectum or anus that cause discomfort and bleeding. The procedure involves removing excess tissue from the anal canal to relieve symptoms such as pain, itching, and bleeding.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When someone suffers from an anguish and its cause is due to excessive moisture, the illness is treated with water that we have mentioned before, not using any medicines or artificial substances, but at this time you must take something which helps eliminate the thick humors by taking pills made of foul-smelling herbs or similar remed ies; and also cauterize it.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterization can be done in two ways: one with caustic substances (medicinal burns), or the other with heat (fire).
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	According to two scientific methods, one of which involves burning the area near its tip at three triangle points as follows in this manner: and do it well with proper depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	Let S be the set of all possible distances between each pair of cauldrons, where 'cauldron' is taken to mean either an olivary or a grain cauldroid.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some of his healing burns are located on the right side near the ankle joint, where there are four such burns.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, make an incision along the circle that precedes the shape in the incision for treating the spinal dislocation; this circle should be continuous and cover the entire length of the vertebrae.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the quackery method of cryoanalgesia where pain is adhered to the spine and not extended into the joints.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	Mays, extend your blade within the cloth, sterilize it with alcohol before using it to cut this two blisters on the cloth over the area which you'll be applying the remedy for pain relief; then place a cauterizing instrument (cauter) at each point and gently rub them four times along the right side of the cloth.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	Yes, there are various types of electrocautery, and the depth of electrocautery depends on the amount of current applied to the tissue. Electrocautery can be used for cutting, coagulating, or desiccating tissues during surgical procedures by applying electrical current via a specialized instrument known as an electrocautery unit or cauterizer. The depth and extent of tissue destruction are controlled by adjusting the amplitude, frequency, and waveform of the electric current.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	Si the pain is spreading to other areas of your body, you may need to have that area treated with three or four cauterizations at least, depending on how severe it is.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the pain is coming from a toothache or an abscess in the lower jaw, you should see a dentist immediately for treatment with a sterile dental drill.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	I look upon your entire incision and ensure that you do not exceed the caution as it may harm a nerve or cause large bleeding, and for this reason, you are under this unfortunate pain or cramping.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	The patient has undergamo a surgical excision of a benign skin growth and the wound healed without any complications or infection presenting afterward.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	An accidental fall resulted in severe abdomnent pain and subsequently led to his death by drowning.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two different locations, treat each separately according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	Cauterization of wounds is the process of burning a section of tissue to stop bleeding, prevent infection, and aid healing. This method was commonly used before the development of modern medical techniques. Here's a basic description for performing cauterization with a metal ring (the "fiery circle"):
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The diameter of circle E is one third that of another circle; and the spaces between them are equal to the amount of the radius of P; and these circles have two parts, and their length is either one or two units. And this figure has a boundary made by fitting iron plates around the circles; here's its description:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Place the wood in the fire so that it catches and sparks appear, and place your palms over the flames carefully.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Then they cut off that one of the three, who was returning to his village.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	In the first three days, apply this ointment on the wound daily and keep it dry by covering with a bandage; then for several more days, continue to treat internally until fully healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diys Albucasis: We have rarely used this type of cauterization because of the fear associated with its handling, and because few models similar to it have been found that surpass it in terms of quality.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	In the days of old, May's fiery burnings brought suffering to those who encountered it; she devoured that place entirely.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	The two circles, each with a pierced armhole in which the door of iron would set, shall have lengths equal to their diameters and widths equivalent to those same two nuts or whatever fits them best.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	L'area tra due punti può essere rappresentata come una regione allungata o piatta che racchiude il segmento di linea formato dai due punti. La quantità della sua ampiezza (lungheamo) e larghezza varia a seconda dell'ubicaziun dei punti, ma è sempre compresa tra i due punti stessi. Se la lunghezza del segmento che congiunge i punti viene aumentata o diminuita, anche l'area racchiusa verrà modificata di conseguenza.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	A prophecy was made about the departure of a certain individual, and so they acquired their trusty vessel for this voyage; and it took place by water between two circles, where the nature of that which is within shall gradually diminish in quantity over time, suffering from the malady's mordant bite and clasp – as if with fire. After a certain period has passed, when the mordancy ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	He who raises your hand and plays the instrument cleanses the water's tail from all impuraturities within it. (Poetic interpretation)
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Appropriately, it shall be done as follows for three days and a rest period within which the darkness of the harvest moon will fall, and let it run for several more days, and flow through the meadows; this is to be considered last in importance.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	A person is entitled to the benefits contained in this policy once they have recovered.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain extends to the shoulder or arm, place the statue in that area where water is made available according to the instructions on the package.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the method of cold water cure, and I have already written that in the treatise on the correction of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for Alkaline Cause No Extincto (Unleashed) - Two Parts Combined in a New Wave of Energy
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Take the shells from the base of one wave and place them on an alkaline substance; then pour warm water over it so that those shells absorb it, and while compressing them with your thumb, let the acidic water flow out from the lower part towards the other side.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Approximately one liter of water adjusts to that heat and gains an excess of vital energy and other alkalizing agents, which at this early stage is administerired in various medical operations as well as cauterization of other body parts, wherein the procedure generates heat.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	So, some of the medicines are those which have been incinerated and then mixed with melted fat or wax; therefore it is better not to combine them.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	The tale of Old Man Gualia recounts an ancient operation and treatment for pain in the hip and sciatica that brought about remarkable healing results, to such an extent that there was no need for any other cure. He also mentions that within a week, this method had been highly successful, as evidennced by his recovery from these conditions.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	The plant is of a vivid green color and if it hasn't wilted, the leaves are fresh; and soaked for a little while in cold water where there is pain or swelling or inflammation, then wrapped around it.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Lawyers shall charge for the amount of three hours or however long the legal matter extends, whichever is lesser.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	A prop to that in the bath and then when his legs were restored, he entered into the soil, as the pain ceased and was healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	In this particular area, these herbs are not used for burning but rather to promote the evacuation of the chest.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Mays and Escorides claim that when the vein of a goat is cauterized, it should be applied with oil following this procedure: Take woolen cloth and its end dipped in ancient ove, then pressed between the fingernails and between the phalanges.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Cut off the ends of dried and flattened figs, place them in a bowl with enough water to cover them; soak for at least an hour until softened. Drain the figs and mash or blend them into a paste. Preheat your oven to 350°F (175°C). Roll out store-bought puff pastry on a lightly floured surface, cutting it into rectangles that will fit in your ramekins or tart tins.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Drink plenty of water and avoid foods that may cause stomach irritation until the discomfort subsides, then return to your normal diet as you feel relief from pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cauterization is called a cattle branding iron.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII (Capital Roman numeral for the number 42)
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	The procedure for treating chronic pain involves the following steps:
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some headaches can be caused by various factors such as tension or impact, excessive strain, and other causes that may seem similar, including infection due to ingestion of dirty and wet substances.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	An E-catheterization without cats, only this one specific type that is made by the fusion of waste material.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Here is the translated text in modern English:
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	S was made to undergo a procedure involving the use of electrocautery, where an electrically heated instrument called a "hot tip" is used for cutting or coagulating tissue.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you are performing a medical procedure that requires the use of three or four cautery clips on the medial head of the clavicle, please follow these steps to ensure proper application and safety:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII (43) in the book "Capitol" is part of a science fiction series by Suzanne Collins, known as "The Hunger Games". The events unfolding in this chapter are crucial to understanding character development and plot progression throughout the story.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	During the initial treatment of gingivitis.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	The translation of the text from Old Catalan to Modern English would be as follows: "This disease appears in children at an early age, and the sign of its onset is that it affects their bones, causing elevation and movement."
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	The last paragraph discusses how the third and fourth vertebrae of the lower back, along with other bones that begin to rise above the others, contribute to supporting the body'ebax'. This statement may be referring to the natural anatomical processes in certain animals or creatures.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, if you want to create a circle and wish to forbid it, follow these steps based on this method:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	I suggest you take a hot compress and apply it gently over the entire affected area of your backache. It should help alleamoethe discomfort. Remember, this is just general advice; for specific concerns, consulting with a healthcare professional would be best.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you want to fuse the intervertebrard disc with electrocautery, make two or three punctures along its circumference and apply heat through an electric current.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	It seems like there was a typing error in the text you provided, so I'm not sure how to translate it directly into English as "E sian les puntz propdas entre lor." However, if we consider that this might be some sort of corrupted or garbled text, one possible interpretation could be:
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	A proper seal is required within the container so that it remains safe underwater as specified.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Mays warns against using caulking in cases of hemorrhoids that have occurred due to a muscle spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV: The Legislative Process and the Role of Congress in American Democracy
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	The treatment for gout and joint pain involves anti-inflammats, colchicine medication, and lifestyle changes such as maintainamoble diet and regular exercise. Cauterization is not a recognized treatment method for these conditions.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	The joints are aching due to imbalances in the body fluids, which become trapped in each limb of the body; hence, when these pains occur in the hands and feet, it is customary for masseurs to apply a special warm water treatment.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	So, I have been cured of gout with the help of a certain treatment and there are no more pains, as they were relieved through cauterization.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	Certain cuff deflation and drain evacuation from the junction of the proximal motor catheter.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	C is the olive tree of which this shape belongs to:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	It is necessary to perform pinning on the scalp after hours through electrocautery for pins.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	When the pain occurs in the joints or other junctures and the patient is unable to move, then one must apply heat to that specific area using three applications of warm oil or four from each divided section with this olive oil-based heater.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	Cut only those veins that are necessary to you; do not cauterize too soon or excessively the wound with hot irons before it is ready, but merely cleanse around the punctured area.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If the pains fight within both hearts, hours administers the caution we have mentioned in its capital.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	The pains are as numerous alone, and grief is called sister; the hours ticked in the circuits of the bulbs just as they do on those two lines (referring to a clock's hands).
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	As the pains dissolve into words, sharp moments are etched onto the circuits of each note and over the brim of her cup in the morning.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	When sorrows come close to shoulders like thorns or knots in the muscles, times heat sterilizes these troubles completely with all assistance.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	"E does not leave the illness untreated and ensures proper reception of medicines, because if done correctly, it will be treated with this cautionary ointment, may God help."
Capitol .xlv.	Title: "Capitol. XLV."
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Cauterization of ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	Quanto the merchant roamed among the stalls and whispered to the trader, he began to propose, hoping that you would relieve him from his daily toil and use your kindness to allow him to leave this worldly life behind.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Follow the path between your feet and command it to have its own end, either being cut off or disappearing from sight when the rope is fully unrolled.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	E aprop is referring to the apple tree, which provides those sweet fruits with its password—the root system at the end of the trunk that resembles a circular collection of ascending vertical roots known as buttress roots.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Approximations of cauterization devices, which this is the form for:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Within the realm of light, we shall obtain brilliant gems.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	The artist decided to reduce his palette to enhance his creativity and focus on the space in front of him where his imagination could freely roam.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you shall go between the troubles of illness and death; he will keep an eye on your affairs and serve you with his hands, and tend to your needs while holding tightly onto what is yours. (Job 5:24)
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Passage A, which refers to the process of cauterizing or burning out warts using heat in medical treatments, is more relevant to your query about thermal ablation in cancer therapy. Thermal ablation specifically uses high temperatures, often via radiofrequency energy or microwaves, to destroy tumor cells and shrink tumors, similar to the cauterization of warts but on a much larger scale and with more complex technology involved.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	I observe the decay of the wound during the time of the tissue's healing, ensuring that it does not become infected, leading to further harm or severe illness.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	The fishes which do not have scales and fins are not included in the catch limits you set; therefore, your activities may exceed regulations.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	A rule for the circumcision of children should be subtle, according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	A proper care of the wound area for three days after which it should be covered with gauze to protect from infection.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	A person owes it to others to behave in ways that do not harm them, especially when they are sick or vulnerable.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The illness should not bother you for ten days within which the location and place are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	The body consumes nutrients according to the length of time it needs for healing, and the stomach does not expel waste without exerting an effort to heal.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	How long does it take to travel approximately by bus, working decent hours daily, and having that for others XL days?
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	S is in labor and at rest with food and drink, and of vehement votes, as it fully uses this regime of health, entirely heals.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	In the event of hernias in other parts of the abd groin area, at onset, perform cauterization to close such rupture according to its extent and expel as much fluid as possible from the vessels; moreover, apply heat to the affected area as described.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	Firstly, let's decipher the given text in Occitan (a language spoken in parts of France, Italy and Spain):
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	In the Latvian language, stress is predominantly on the first syllable of a word. However, in certain cases, like verb conjugations and some words ending with -is or -us, the stress might shift to the penultimate (second-last) syllable. For example:
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Herniated disc treatment.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	A member is experienebling pain from a fracture or trauma and the pain persists for long periods of time without responding to medical treatments; they suggest using heat therapy or targeted cauterization with a hot iron rod.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	E is the cauterization of all body members according to its magnitude and size, value, vulnerability, location of the wound or injury, and degree of pain experienced. This technique involves applying heat directly on damaged tissue in order to stop bleeding, remove dead skin or tissue, or prevent infection during medical treatment or surgery.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the first attempt at cauterization is not successful, then he repeats it; and if not, he waits for a while before performing the cauterization again. This practice of these pains usually involves puncturing of the limb close to the U-shaped joint where one can achieve that when those bad burns are treated with cauterization.
Capitol .xlvii.	In the context of legislative bodies, "Capitol" typically refers to a building where government sessions take place. For example, in the United States, the U.S. Capitol is located in Washington D.cu and serves as the home of the U.S. Congress, which comprises two chambers: the Senate (representing states equally) and the House of Representatives (based on population).
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Leprosy cauterization (or leishmaniasis).
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The Lebrechts have long been used in therapy for significant pain relief and to some extent they are specialized for the type of leprosy caused by tissue decay and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Then let him cauterize it, considering if the leprosy is contagious and as that which has been described in the division you have mentioned, and do not put a stake on it, nor on these; but fear the disease that corruption encompamoents all his body and the entire complexity of him. Then cauterize [the area] over his head with fire from vulture's feathers: one on the left side at the forehead near the hairline, another behind just below it, two on each temple; and one in back, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	The last thing you need to do is cauterize a little within the bone, immediately after removing the ember so that the emission of thick vapors can be induced from it; then cauterize over the fistula according as the procedure requires.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	Yes, leprosy is a contagious disease that affects the skin and nerves. In medieval times, various treatments were attempted to cure or allepsy this disease. The passage you shared outlines one such treatment approach as recorded in an old medical manuscript. Here's the translation:
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	I watch the nerves above you that you do not touch those branches.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some wounds are treated with a heated instrument called a caustic over the bone of the penis and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the scrotum.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	The wiser you are in selecting the right types of cauterization for your condition, the more beneficial and effective it will be; And know that if a bad outcome does not arise from the cauterization, as often happens with poorly performed procedures, so may your body experience astonishment.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	A) Cut that the tools shall be large or small according to the sizes of their members and joints, as previously described for each type of tool.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	A proper care should include using an aloe vera gel, applying turmeric paste, and following other curative measures until the wound is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter LXXXVIII. (In Roman numerals, "capitol" is not represented as it typically refers to a building or structure rather than a number. However, for the sake of this exercise and based on your initial instruction format, I'll use 'Capitol.' in place of the actual chapter title.)
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Cerebral stimulation therapy.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is broken or asleep and treated with medicines, herbs, and plasters, but it does not heal, then you shall cauterize that limb using a cautery tool according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	E was the little scorching entering into the depth of the canal, hardly noticeable.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	A proper diet is essential for those who are trying to get well.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	The following text is in Asturian language (Asturias, Spain):
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	May's not about water but rather the fluid that is found in the dissection of limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the entire body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX (49) is a chapter in the Book of Acts within the New Testament section of the Bible, which details events that occurred as part of Christianity'cu8s early history. This chapter describes the Apostle Paul and his companions arriving at Rome for their trial before Caesar Augustus.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Morphea is a type of localized scleroderma, which leads to the thickening and hardening of the skin due to an overproduction of collagen by fibroblasts in response to unknown triggers. The exact cause of morpheeal cauterization remains unclear but may be related to autoimmune reactions or genetic predisposition.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	Quan albares are antiques and you do not use any medicinal ointments, then cauterize it on the affected area with a hot iron shortly after as needed according to the amount of sores present until the whiteness and color of the skin have changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Firstly, gather wheat flour and red lentils as well as rosy olive oil; also collect leafy spinach and the blood of a dove or a pigeon (equal amounts for each ingredient), mixing them all together. Then knead the dough with your hands until it's smooth.
Capitol .l.	The Capitol is the building that serves as the home of the United States Congress in Washington, D.amo. Located on Capitol Hill at East Capitol Street and First Street SE, it's part of a larger complex with various buildings, including the north and south wings, the Cannon House Office Building (House wing) and the Rayburn House Office Building (Senate wing), as well as numerous office buildings. The iconic dome situated above the rotunda in the center of the building is one of its most recognizable features.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Cranial cauterization is a surgical procedure that involves the destruction or removal of certain parts of the skull to treat various conditions, such as head injuries, tumors, or other abnormalities affecteby blood vessels in the brain. It's important to note that this term might be used in different contexts; for instance, cranial electrotherapy stimulation is a non-invasive technique which uses low electric currents to treat mental disorders.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	The Cancer constellation rises in the east and travels across the sky at a rate similar to how Earth rotates on its axis. This circular motion creates an imaginary circle, known as the celestnial equator circuit, which is used for measuring celestial coordinates.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	In the past, they used to burn that part until it was completely cauterized at its place; however, I have never seen this before because I fear that it may become an ulcer, and sometimes I've already noticed some signs of it.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	F is more direct than having been closed in the loop of our electrical circuit as we have said, I have one closed circuit.
Capitol .li.	Capital, LLC.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Cauterization of wounds.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	"When certain animals are slow to reach maturity, and thus produce excessively, it may be due to old age, poor health, or insufficient time; if you wish to hasten the maturation of these animals, consider timing the castration during their early developmental phase. This will ensure they do not overproduce."
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to perform the perforation of your horse's ear, here is one method for cauterization and afterward ignite it with this form: stop that at the place where you would like to apply fertilizer so that the sound wave penetrates into it.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Yes, the cauterization should be performed in that place where scar tissue has formed, so that the body of the arm is healed; and as soon as possible after it has been treated.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter VI.ii.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	During the process of dental curettage.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	The translation of the text would be: "Corrosion creeps upon the member and corrodes it as fierceby consuming dry firewood." However, this sentence seems to mix metaphorical language with a literal description which might not make sense in modern context. A clearer English version could be: "Corrosion gradually erodes the metal, similar to how fire consumes dry wood."
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	If you apply heat to the area where there is a burn with a heated instrument (cauterizing), then shortly afterward remove the caustic substance and insert small or large dressings as needed, depending on the location of the wound.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	A - Please completely remove any rust and do not leave any causes for leaks behind.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	A proper application for three days and rest upon the treated areas, ensuring all scars are entirely removed and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	F in order to produce the particular type of fat that we are discussing.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	Mayseys is thrice as many times the fresh chicken is not corrupted in the area where there is no heat; otherwise, he performs a cauterization over what has become rotten in those places of contamebration.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	The extract is a medical treatment for some types of wounds and is used in cases of acute medicine; it's mainly applied to the site of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, the witch then cast a spell of fire that enveloped them all.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	You should see your doctor if you have symptoms of acute illness and seek medical attention accordingly. Depending on the severity, they may refer you to another specialist within their division or recommend appropriate treatment options.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter IV - The Capitol System
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Cauterization of the gums and other similar treatments.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	In cases of wounds in the parts affected by a disease called clavicle (shoulder blade), which is a serious issue causing pain, treatment can be done using two methods - heating method and cold method. The first one involves applying heat to the affected area, while the second involves applying cold water or an ice pack.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	May the waxen flame you light be of similar shape to that which I have mentioned; otherwise, it will return to thee in accordance with its quantity as per the size of the nail used for the entire ritual, and made from fine silver wire.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	A prop of the match flares above your knee, and you rotate your leg with the clamp in the cable's circuit into which the clamp arrives at its deepest point.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Lessa will give him something in three days from when he starts working harder.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Here is the translation of your text from Catalan to English: "A plant of Malva Salvatrix braided with salt and place it on that spot overnight; thus he will be removed from its root."
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	A proper care of the local environment is essential to generate sustainable meat production.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	In case of an accident causing the loss of blood or severe bleeding on the surface of your body (especially in large wounds), you must urgently take action to stop the bleeding by using a tourniquet and clean water. You should gather some cloth, such as a handkerchief, a piece of fabric, or a bandana. Wrap it around the injured area tightly above the site of the injury. Use a stick or similar object tied with string to create a makeshift handle for twisting. Twist this handle until the bleeding stops by applying pressure on the wound and clotting begins. Remember that tourniquets should only be used as a last resort due to their potential risks if left in place for too long. Seek medical attention immediately.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	Thus, the winds above all shall blow in harmony between themselves and towards others, as they pass over everything beneath them.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	The infection of wounds caused by nails being removed results in the body's natural processes to heal and regenerate tissue, leading to water loss from the skin surrounding the area where the nail was extracted.
Capitol .liiii.	The Senate of the Republic (Italian: Senato della Repubblica) is the upper house of Italy' cu parliamentary bicameral system, and meets in Palazzo Madama on Piazza del Campidoglio in Rome. Its membership is determined, following a form similar to that of the United States Senate, by elections held every five years, and it has 315 elected members. The senators are considered to be the more experienced senior lawmakers, as they are also ex officio lifetime members of the Council for Arbitration between the Italian National Collective Bargaining Parties (consultative organism whose goal is resolving labor disputes).
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Treatment for tremors can involve various methods, including medications, lifestyle changes, and in some cases, surgery such as deep brain stimulation (DBS). Cerebellar cauterization is not a standard treatment for tremors. If you're experiencuing tremors, it's important to consult with a healthcare professional who can provide an accurate diagnosis and discuss appropriate treatments based on the cause of your tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	If a person experiences tremors due to nerve irritation or fever from another cause, four hours after the onset of these symptoms, you should apply cold compresses to the affected area (on both sides) between each vertebra and over the sacrum; also apply an olive oil poultice to the abdpress.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	The tremor of the earth pauses and hastens the healing of infectious diseebilies.
Capitol .lv.	The Capitol is a term often associated with the building where a state or nation's legislative branch meets, such as the United States Capitol in Washington D.C., which houses both chamber of Congress - Senate and House of Representatives. In general usage, 'capitol' can refer to the seat of government for any state, region or country.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	The accidental caesarian section of Albatross.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When the course of treatment consists in making cuts on the ulcers and forming furrows with corrupt matter, thus at the beginning of the intervention, a caustic substance is applied over the entire area of the fistula, using either very fine cautery or hot mugwort, extending its tip to touch; or by long electrology; or by slow-burning cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Some herbal remedebies are used to perform cauterization before the expulsion of warts following this method; and they do not cause pain or irritation, as well as eliminating excess fluid from the affected area. This process helps heal those suffering from such conditions.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is also important to assess the time at which air evacuation was performed by a helicopter.
Capitol lvi.	The Roman numeral LVI represents the number 65 in Arabic numerals (our standard system of writing numbers). Here' cups, L stands for 50 and VI stands for 6. When you add these values together (L + V + I), it equals to 65.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Cauterization of blood vessels following an incision during electrocautery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops wounded on the battlefield should seek immediate medical attention for their injuries. They may require dressing changes, wound irrigation to prevent infection or initiating treatments such as antibiatury of the affected limb, and similar measures; it is difficult to restore such conditions afterwards.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Come sharp objects in the water, memories of your mother's horrardom haunt you as you pause over that place where your words first emerged, and where those motes of light linger still, unchanged, like the flowing blood from your wounded utterances.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	In the past, many olive trees were burned and set on fire in this area, including a significant number of old-growth ones, which resulted in smoke affecting those nearby due to the flames.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	In the event of an injury to one or both great vessels, located immediately above the vein that has filled with your blood, and you must close it off yourself, enter a hot caustic substance there so as to seal that vessel tightly.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	When you remove the terribly swoln artery and extract your word, then take another caustic immediately from the caustics which are prepared in the fire; therefore, do not cease until the blood is sufficiently constricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	I look upon you to ensure that anger does not consume here and bring forth other illness or malevolence.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	The quantity of blood that flows through the artery is not possible in those whose veins are restricted, mostly when the artery is large unless one has four measures to take: or have cauterization as mentioned above we have, or have extraction if it hasn't been extracted yet because when it has been extracted its extremities burn out and blood flow is reduced, or be bound by wool or bandage with strong pressure, or be elevated on pillows of medicines whose virtue lies in reducing the blood flow; and they are firmly tied up.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	The person who imposes a reasonable restriction on my liberty and my freedom of movement without just cause or apparent reasons shall not be transferred except by law.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Ms. Smith, if your condition worsens or you do not feel well and there is no immediate help from family members, neighbors or healthcare professionals available at the moment, please contact emergency services for assistance immediately. You should describe in detail any symptoms related to a possible venous injury as mentioned earlier; also mention that you are feeling great pain within your upper limb, and the blood vessel is not ruptured but swollen. Please inform if there has been any bleeding at the site of injury or arterial damage. Additionally, mention if there was frigid water sprayed over the area causing the blood to clot and thicken; and also describe if you require cauterization or specific medication urgently needed for your condition.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Continuación de la segunda parte.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	The Incision, Perforation, Ventilation and Suction, Embalming Fluids and their Varieties, Syringes, Plasters, Bandages, Lymphangitis (inflammamo), Erysipelas (infection of the skin with a reddened raised border) and similar conditions.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are sentences from the Aragonese language, spoken in parts of Spain such as the province of Huesca and Zaragoza. Here they are translated to English:
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have provided the first chapter on all kinds of diseases in which cautery has proved to be useful and medication is necessary, along with their occasions and causes, as well as the instruments required for those procedures; and I have detailed the chapaturas of the upper part within the breast.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	You must present this petition to the capital in accordance with these procedures, so that your claim is processed at once within the hours you have requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Given that you begin with water, a cup, and a son, express in this capital how it is by fear of water that there exists the fire-cleansing process from the first mentioned capital.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	E for water that you must be extremely careful with, as the operation mentioned in this chapter is performed multiple times and involves the evacuation of urine which poses significant risk to life; therefore spraying or injecting into the abscess, incision over it, extraction of pus, stone removal, or surgical incision should be done cautiously.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	Among all those who accompany them are fear and trembling, as well as death in their own homes.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	I beg of you not to let it happen that water may fall upon you in which there are traces from human or animal waste, as this can cause various diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	E of his words is that he will go to the sick person's home and lie about their illness; deceitfully causing them death by exaggerating the severity of their condition due to long-standing fear of their disease, which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	The one who gives you the gift of sound and speech, may you aspire to health, while your own illness is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	So then do not judge anyone for whom you see this manner; and let your caution be greater than your covetousness, and do not presume any cause about it unless based on certain knowledge that verifies the matter to which you should adhere, in order to have a praisewebly successful outcome.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	In this prayer, we ask God't oversight and guidance in the healing of all your illnesses through prognosis and indication of the place where it is converted to health, which is for you a help with regard to acquiring fame and memory, laudator and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, we implore Your wisdom to guide us on the right path and protect us always, wherever you may be in your eternal presence. Amen.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	This Catalan passage is from the medieval text "Regimen Sanitatis Salernitanum", also known as The Salerno Health Regimen. Here it is translated to Modern English:
Capitol primier.	First-time investor.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	The radioactivity of water containing substances found in the child'ean's head.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	In this disease, bouts occur in adults during pregnancy and when the queen takes her first steps as a child.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Several vegetables were found near a place where an accident was suspected, but it is not clear yet.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	In May, this illness did not afflict children; and in all those whom I saw suffering from the plague, I found it to be such work that was done upon them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	Indeed, there was a child whose head was completely filled with water; his hair was so magnificent that it could not be contained within itself due to its greatness and the moisture increased inside him until he became ill.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This moisture is either added between the membrane and the bone or it adheres to the surface of the bone.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	In case the operation is done when the humidity is between the skin and bone and the abscess is small, it takes a few hours to make cuts in the scalp at the affected area, with a slit length of two inches (5 cm) that runs along the path of the moisture. This forms the spatulum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	If the moisture is increased and the crack becomes wider, then there will be two cracks according to this method.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is still present in your mouth, it signals that you have consumed liquid and saliva is being squeezeback when you press on that area and water escapes from both sides and not through your throat.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	En el mapa, busque una ubicación cerca de la cabeza y marque tres grietas siguiendo esta dirección: hacia el norte primero, luego hacia el este seguido por un cambio al sur. Estos marcadores le ayudarán a rastrear posibles vías para explorar o investigar en esa área especícufica.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	In cases of skin sores and wounds, apply a paste made from crushed herbs like comfrey or calendula; also apply aloe vera gel to keep the area moisturized. Use clean cloths soaked in cold water for compresses on the affected areas multiple times per day. For more severe cases with excessive drainage, consult a medical professional who may prescribe antibiot # user
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	E is an alternate method of incision, which takes into account the size of the abscess and the collection of water (pus), as some cases occur more in the occipital area, or on the frontal side, or on the right, or on the left; hence pay attention to make the incision where you see the abscess and pus accumulation, and do this whenever it is most feasible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	He observed that the artery does not divide and branches out vessels of blood and removes malaria due to that flow of blood, which aids in the removal of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	In the United States, the capital city is Washington D. cuartel (cuartel de armas).
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	The dissection of the arteries which supply blood to the ears, also known as Hilari's branches.
Capitol segon.	Second Capital.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas; l'hores la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquellas dues arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Thus let the wise man know those who will inflict evil upon his race, and he shall watch carefully over them with an intense gaze; and in due time, when they rise to great prominence or power, then may their fate befall them as it is deserved. And he should consider the nature of every person around him; for among those who surround him are hidden both good men and evil ones alike.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	The essence of the passage revolves around one'ebbing towards a particular goal or ambition while navigating through various challenges and distractions that come with it. It emphasizes staying focused on the ultimate objective despite external influences, and maintains an optimistic outlook for achieving success in the end.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If the vein is compressed, it obstructs the blood flow within the artery and tears away from the branches on both sides.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	E is the length of the pulse interval between two adjustments, when any vein is relaxed and the blood exits through a rhythmic pulsation, which jumps to another with frequency.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the archery arrow does not reach your target during practice, try adjusting the length of the earring by three inches and attempt again.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	The water that forms at the bottom of the container is equal to one unit volume. The Holy Spirit provides us with many gifts according to our needs and in accordance with the quality of the malady and the healing power required for your heartache.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	A prop considers the flood and therefore if it persists for a long time on the ground causing various problems, he ensures that there are no cases of skin infections or wounds due to contaminated water.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	I will strengthen the power of your plantation and its harvest yields with this oil blend, and specifically for that which is wounded or in need of healing. It promotes growth and restoration.
Capitol .iii.	The United States Capitol Building, commonly referred to as the Capitol, is an iconic symbol of American democracy and serves as the home of the U.S. Congress. Located in Washington D.C., it stands atop Capitol Hill on the east bank of the Potomamo River and represents the seat of legislative power for both the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	The removal of the bells that are in the churches.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	A number of old treatments and practices have been emigrated from ancient times to the present day, for agricultural humidity and quality in vineyards as well as for therapecleanliness in temples; also a strong, solid, and similar appearance like those before. They serve as cures for various illnesses of medicine that do not involve bloodletting, which we have now shifted to these diseases through the extraction from archways in temples or by cauterizing them as we have shown here.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method of the operation and extraction of those evil influences is that they are located in the walls of temples; understand the apparent archery on the temple which you have shown with your palm, and it is concealed except in a few people due to the vehemence of fear.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If you are secretly ill, the hours will prolong your sickness with any dress; and therefore use only light or easily washable clothes while healing so that they appear clean when seen at the wardrobe.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	In the past tense, this would be the following form in English: "He/She had taken the opportunity."
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Turn towards the source of that wire and facilitate entering there; then go on your knees and through those high passages you extract that wire and discover what's inside those tunics which are behind it, from every direction.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is too thin, it may wrap around a part of the neck; when separated from that point according to the length for which its extremities are stretched out and contracted, there will be no bleeding, as if they were not severed, the blood vessels do not leak.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	A proper extraction of the venom from a viper bite involves several critical steps, which need to be performed with care and expertise to minimize complications. Below is an outline of such procedures: Before three o'clock.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the archery is great, two hours must be spent practicing it every day with double focus and strength; do not delay until after the healing of a wound or broken bone has occurred.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	A prop of incidents occurs between two lines; and fire happens at that time or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish to perform a cauterization using the heated iron tool within the surgical knife where incisions are made on the body's tissues, and hold it at the site of the surgery performed.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	E is better to treat this illness with fever than with excessive heat; thus cauterization is suitable for those causes that help in concluding the final moisture, and therefore it's more effective during healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	The old house was in need of removal from the ruins that surround it, and stones were placed over its walls properly arranged, and with his care he made medicinal herbs to be taken daily so that his health could improve.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If you notice another bleeding from the artery while using other methods to stop it, now try yourself to compress that blood flow, or apply a cauterizing instrument, or plug up the wound with a bandage; then strengthen your hand to keep it tightly closed.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	Neither the cause nor the presence of those symptoms is in your present state; there should be a pause in speech about that place wherein the snake was located, and within it springs water with intense coldness, causing refreshment and rejuvenation according to need.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	The water that is more effective in extracting silver is that you cauterize the vein with this cauldron having two holes, and then you heat both places at once, and when the desired amount of substance enters into it, break the vein in two places so that they are elongated where there is a connection with the cauldn. This prevents them from separating completely because they're joined by this cauterization process.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of a Cauterizer (Cautionary):
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	Let H be the height of two right-angled triangles examples.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if it is dull but as hard as two cleavers, it is better than if it is sharp with two blades on each side and does not pierce the flesh quickly due to its speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	When there is much fatness, the heat of the fire is in them and the flesh easily separates.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than any other and it's quite amazing.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Let S be the space between two walls, which is equal to the quantity of their thickness.
Capitol quart.	Fourth quarter of the legislative session in a parliamentary system, or alternatively, fourth year term for an elected official serving under this model. In the context of Congress, it may refer to Q4 (October - December) when budget discussions are often held and major bills are passed. In general, "Capital Quart" is not a standard political terminology in English-speaking regions.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Treatment of acute and sour throats in pigs.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	Many times when the tears are acidic and their source comes from veins on the forehead's surface, if there is no cause of this condition related to medical treatment, sometimes one may notice that the face has already started to redden and feel a sense of restlessness as if it were ants crawling across. The hairs in such cases have become weakened so much that even touching them causes shedding of the scalp'score its characteristic texture through tears. Old scabs are broken by the acidity of these tears, leading to painful and dirty conditions during recovery from this procedure, without any relief.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	Command the evil spirits to reveal themselves by forming words on your forehead and then cutting into it with three parallel cuts according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	The length of the tear ducts is determined by two measurements: one following the length of the nose at its root location on the face, and the second according to a small increment from the movement of the facial bones that are involved in the lacrimal system, and the third along the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Look at the two arches that are present from the beginning and then elongate your jaw during their continuous connection of both lower jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	The space of each sentence affects the quantity of three adjustments.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	Is it to your liking, an embroidered sponge or sheets that dry one's wounds and draw out the blood?
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	A sharp-ended rods have two acute ends; the cross section of such is depicted as follows in its incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	In the second stanza of the poem, the poet describes his departure from the temples and embarks on a new journey filled with curiosity and wonder. He leaves behind the familiar surround groves and sacred buildings to explore uncharted territories, driven by an insatiable thirst for knowledge and understanding. This passage reflects the human quest for meaning beyond the confines of traditional belief systems, emphasizing the importance of questioning, exploration, and personal growth in our journey through life.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Extract the entire word that is between two initials and the cipher (which is about the bone), as well as the corresponding text from the middle section to the second initial.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	The correct translation from Friulian to English is: "The person in charge will introduce another instrument known as a cutting utensil, with one sharp and the other blunt."
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	In that sharp blade, you shall sever the attached flesh and skin of the thigh, along with the bone; then insert the lion's tooth into the bone and push it until it reaches the crack, separating all the vessels as they descend from the head towards the hollows.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	The water should continue to flow from the source as it appears along the creek, and diverted into another crack within the other crack.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	In cases where the quantity of blood loss is relatively small, press on the site of bleeding to stop it.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	In each crack of that old wall a small amount of dust settles, and it rests upon those tiny particles in the air and light that don't cause an allergic reaction.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	E is the third day of treatment and brings great joy due to its water-based composition; it also includes benzoic acid, rosemary extract, and other ingredients that help heal wounds.
Capitol .v.	In the case of CAPITOL v., there are several key legal principles and issues that may arise depending on the specifics of the dispute. Some potential topics to explore include jurisdiction, subject matter, standing, contract law, intellectual property rights, or even constitutional consideraturities if applicable.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	The treatment of fractures and their healing descendents from the parts specified in Chapter I.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	Many patients suffer from persistent headaches and the pains of a severe illness increase over time, along with inflamed eyes and ulcerated eyelids as well as intense throbbing pain on the forehead, which are often due to issues arising from tiny blood vessels in the area.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best cure for this is to command the evil spirit that resides on your forehead, and carefully insert a thin pin into a small crack at its middle part, starting from the left temple entering the right one; then go inside the bone until it's exposed. This method originated in medieval times when people believed that inserting pins or needles could drive away evil spirits causing illnesses. However, this practice is extremely dangerous and should not be attempted under any circumstances as it can cause serious harm. Seek professional medical help if you are experiencuing health issues.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	The entire blood or the sponge is absorbed and then placed between the two lips of the large gap or the fabric strips.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	A prop is designed to be worn directly on the skin, without any undergarments or padding that could prevent proper ventilation and possibly cause chafing. Always ensure your body is clean before wearing it for maximum comfort and hygiene.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	In Evan's case of aquaeductal apostema (water-related swelling), the situation has improved, hours before feeling pain in his lower extremity which began to diminish, and as if he were taking an exsiccative regimen (drying treatment) that reduces the flesh, just like mixing two parts of wheat flour with four parts of charcoal powder and creating a paste for application on these plagues in order to naturally treat his lower limb.
Capitol .vi.	In the United States, "Capitol Hill" refers to a neighborhood in Washington D.cu (D.C.), located on the east side of the National Mall. It is home to the United States' legislative branch and contains several important buildings, such as the Capitol building itself where Congress meets, including the Senate and House of Representatives chambers.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	The healing of water that runs through the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The cause of cataracts in the eyes is one of four factors - it may be due to mineral stone or resemble stones such as iron and lead, or it could come from plants like chickpeas or fava becks, or it may be a fluid similar to water and vinegar, along with certain creatures.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Hence, when pebbles are placed in the ear or other similar causes that do not conform to nor have belief in such causes, and exposure to sunlight is applied, occasionally causing oil accumulation or hardening within this particular cause, it aids in extracting them; however, upon shaking, they induce sneezing under certain conditions.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	After prolonged use of the hearing aid circuit with some traces of wire or wool, you should adjust the earpiece to the unusual positions that may have occurred due to these reasons.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	If it is not thrown away, this piece of writing offers an extract from a subtle gesture called the 'gestus' - a term used in theatre and performance studies to describe the way actors use their physical presence, gestures, and movements on stage. The form we see here showcases how language can be utilized as an instrument for effective storytelling within the context of 'gestus'.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If the gold is sufficiently pure and refined, it's excellent; otherwise, increasingly purify it by removing small amounts of impurcuosities until you achieve a higher level of fineness.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	If not using ear drops, warm the syringe and gently insert the tip of the syringe into the opening of the ear. Then carefully squirt the liquid medication through the tube until it fills the ear canal, making sure to avoid pushing too far in that could cause discomfort or injury.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	An unexpected storm is approaching with strong winds and troops are being evacuated due to the high waters that have been reported.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If Mays is not forearmed in this manner, he must first take an almond oil or a suitable ointment and apply it to the area where his arm weakens; then gently wrap that part with a bandage, ensnaring it securely at its extremity.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	The earplugs help to prevent water from entering the ear canal and also absorb moisture in the ears.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	In such cases where none of the reasons mentioned apply to alleviate your pain, you might experience discomfort due to an ongoing inflammamation or spasm that could be caused by a strain or injury. It is advisable to consult with a healthcare professional for proper diagnosis and treatment options.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	In the beginning of your procedure to cut this ear, first anoint it with holy oil as per the rite for the virtue of mercy; then mark the area between your ears and turn both ears inward so that there is a small notch on each side at their highest point.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	E is the crack on the lunar surface that leads to the boulder, and once you reach it, use the appropriate instrument(s) for your task; then at that very moment, proceed with speed through that crevice as soon as possible.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of inflammation in your ear is one of those fats you consumed and accumulated, then over time it will heal itself; however, if you don't pay attention to its development, after some time, a very subtle type of fungus called otomycosis may develop according to this pattern:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	He administered the anesthesia of that tree which he had cut down in the orchard.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	E cannot grasp the amount of water you imagine evaporates due to the warmth of the air, and it rests on high peaks, and from there gently flows down as streams or rivers in a way so subtle that we barely notice how much is being extracted.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	May the person with bad breath enter through the earlobe hole that he uses for sneezing, and fill his earhole almost entirely, then drop water on it. If by this means the water is expelled, good; if not, then take small stones or pebbles likewise as much as the length of the ear, heat them in a fire until slightly warm, and have the patient insert one into their ear canal through the hole in their earlobe. They should drop it onto another stone on top of which is the water to create pressure that will expel the water from the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not cease water even though it flows over the stone, as long as there is any water at all.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	Certainnly! Here's the translation from Occitan to English: The one felt the heat of fire on her ear and extended the other end into a large flame, so that it was completely melted down to its core.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	The water flows through a channel and passes under a weir so many times until all the water is diverted; then the gate opens as described by removing an extra stone from the dam.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of meat from that animal entering into that earhole, if it's a small piece, so much more and similarly, as we have said in the division; but if it is a large piece which causes obstruction at the entrance, hours must be spent on extracting this meat and lumps, and the cause for this is more likely than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of honey from the ear, when you treat that particular liquid we have discussed in the division and treatise on distillations, do not neglect your procedure, hours spent observing the sunlight on the ear.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If there are any causes of worms in this area from a long time ago or subtle ones that aren't evident, and if no such cause is found, they take the form of a narrow but slightly wide tube-like structure, as follows:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Certain insects and microorganisms penetrate deep into the ear canal according to the quantity of which they are exposed; thus causing an ailment that should be removed promptly by seeking medical attention, as it can lead to numerous infections during this period when all types of bacteria are active.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If the solution does not behave as expected in your experiment, leave it inside the catheter and close the circuit with a seal of wax; then administer the distillates you have previously used for parasite treatment, and you will find them again within the treatment area.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Here's the translation of your text from Old Occitan to Modern English: "Let E be the ear through which you dispense the ointments, and this tool is its form."
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	A pair of silver cups or a crystal vessel, narrow at the top but with room for some liquid to be poured in it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	Therefore, it is also essential for the development of this container in order to be here that we are necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	Then, take the needle and wrap it around one end of its sharpened tip, then fill a small syringe with oil from any herb or water that you want as medicine in the tube - which is in your ear. Afterwards, carefully insert the needle underneath until it's on top of the swelling inside and gently push the plunger to release the oil into the cavity of the inflammation; this will alleviate the pain caused by its presence.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	The water that is poured into the ear has already been heated with a small flame.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	Look at the reason why you poured it into your ear to make sure that it's not too dirty, because ear medicine doesn't tolerate water well.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII: The Capital City - An Introduction to the Nation's Heartbeat and Political Powerhouse
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	The preservation of olive groves.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some scars on the backs of children were not caused by perforation, and sometimes they occur in adult men as well, collecting at the edge of the ear due to a blister or sore that has now healed; these accumulations often result in bumps under the skin near the earlobe, which do not cause any swelling. Some scars also appear on areas outside of the ears.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	From the land of light, where understanding does not lie within grasp, come challenges in seeking wellness for all.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	In that place where you can feel the warmth of the sun on your ears and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	In that case, if we consider a seemingly contradictory situation or argument (an apparently paradoxical statement), let's examine the subtle nature of which this form is an example.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of his/her little ear is slanted in such a way that one side is sharp and the other not, and if there are two streaks like those of a lion on it that do not form an "L" shape at the lobe.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	Then if the octopus is fully cooked in its ear or in the thighs, it will have very subtle and delicate flavors that are easily spread throughout all the meat.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	The earplug is inserted into the earlobe, gently pushing it through the thin skin of the ear and placing that little bit at the edge of the earlobe.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	If you're experiencuing otitis externa due to water exposure and the infection is severe because of difficulty breathing, try to ease your discomfort by keeping the ear dry; also make sure not to touch or irritate your outer ears.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In case of an ear infection following the use of Egyptian henna according to the amount applied on your skin; leave it for several days until you are sure that the plaque is consolidated; or take something and pour it into a glass of water, then sprinkle over the area three times daily; and if at times the ear seems swoln, hourly cover the affected part with olive oil mixed with rosemary leaves, which should be infused for about 3 hours before use, until healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Mays decides to stop the blood flow, submerges a sponge or cloth in running water and places it on his ear, then uses another remedy that stops the blood flow, which is mentioned in the treatise of distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII - The Capital City
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	The curare plant causes paralysis of the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	The eyelids of the pigs have some wet and dry patches.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	You may have those wheels and the spokes of their rims apart, and place them closely one after another.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	When there's bleeding of the blood vessels, they can be treated by using small electrical coils for embolization.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best sterilization is before surgery and after removing any source of contamination or infected troops; and when cauterized with fire, these infections are burned away and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	The original text appears to be written in Vietnamese, with "Kinh tế học xã hội" translating as "Social Economics". If you're seeking an equivalent of the title "Capitol .IX." in English, it could potentially translate or represent a significant chapter (Chapter IX) in a text on social economics. However, without further context about specific book titles or content, I can only suggest possible translations:
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Greasy eyelids that come to the eyelashes of boys.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	The eyes have become very swolamoined in the eyelids of these sheep due to some cause that has accumulated greatly in its strength and toughness, and for such great increase it is called pink eye (conjunctivitis).
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	"E" refers to a significant accumulation of moisture on the lower and upper edges of the eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	The opera house here is that I do not regard hours if the bigger one proceeds in such a way that apart from the eyelid it'amo bad to all parts; and the cause of this is questionable.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Go over that large crack in the landscape and grasp onto it firmly so you can pull yourself across completely, then slowly release it and peel it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	It seems like you are experienpressing the beginning of your thoughts but haven't completed them yet. If it has just started to dawn on you that something penetrates your eyelid, don't worry too much at this point; there is no need for alarm as long as nothing unusual occurs during these hours.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, adjust your stitches accordingly and care for it until it has healed properly.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it's little, you won't suffer any harm from that which remains of her anguish as she is reborn and embodied again.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the swelling extends beyond the edge of the eyelid'지, causing it to bulge outwards, then you must begin with the one that seems most concerning to you and press on all sides until the swelling has gone down; if for any reason, due to injury or otherwise, the eyelid is stretched out, there may be no specific cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	From the start, wash away all impurcuinities with salted water and treat any area that is injured inside until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Capital(s). In political science, a capital refers to the city or town that serves as the seat of government and administrative center for a country, state, province, etc. Some countries have more than one capital serving different purposes; for example, South Africa has three capitals – Pretoria (executive), Bloemfontein (judicial), and Cape Town (legislative).
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	From the curve above the eyelid, beyond sight.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcianthus grayi is a plant species found in the tunic of the upper eyelid, mainly during childhood; it aggravates those wounds and often causes cataracts as well. People with this condition are unable to tolerate sunlight due to tears constantly forming over their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	E per so tú vies a veces às aqueles jaser sobre as últimas caras sempre tempo, e sobre as últimas caramelas dormem; e os seus pálpebras deixam-no sobrolápegos úmidos, que já cubertaram inflexões de ansiedade evidente se vê n'o olho; e quanto mais tu primes o local a ti ditas, tu centenas de flexões entro aqueles.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	In any surgical procedure involving the placement of a stent in an artery where disease obstructs its lumen, and appropriately sizing it according to the vessel'pertieyedness degree, follow these steps for proper positioning within the circular guide: Firstly, ensure that there are no contraindications for surgery. Secondly, calculate the size of the stent based on the entire circumference of the affected part of the artery and select a suitable diameter accordingly. Thirdly, place the stent over the target area ensuring it covers all the vessel walls completely. Finally, ensure that during deployment, there are no significant dissections or perforations caused by strut expansion within the stent's length, avoiding fissures greater than those made in balloon angioplasty.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	"Mays in the prone cove that you break open completely so that I arrive at the harbor, because in these days of matrimony proceedings one breaks through according to the form of white envelope."
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	The phrase you've provided appears to be in Catalan and translates to "Do not get those drops that I have enclosed within your words as parts of the background and mix between my right hand and left, so that it is scattered."
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	Look and make sure you don't widen the crack, as I may not have brought enough plaster to fill it completely and level that area out again.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If Mayse does not appear in your dream at the beginning of the rift, then you should adjust into the rumble a small device that facilitates processing afterwards; and proceed as we have mentioned earlier; and surround him with sheets of silk in water and wait for him to sink deeper and let those fine powders fall over the spot.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	"The clay that lies within the crevice of the fault is absorbed by those trees, reabsorbing the water from their surroundings."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A is on board that which is healthy. (Translation might be incorrect as the original text seems to be Catalan or Spanish with some errors.)
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Maya decided to visit the local clinic promptly after she noticed a sore on her toe that hadn't healed for some time. After examining it carefully, the doctor determined it was an ingrown toenail and performed a simple procedure to correct it. Thanks to this timely intervention, Mays's toe quickly returned to its normal state.
Capitol .xi.	The word "Capitol" originates from the Latin term "caput," which means head or chief, and "-olus," a diminutive suffix. In ancient Rome, during public meetings, important discussions would take place in central locations known as "Capita." Over time, these gathering places evolved into political centers representing civic power. Eventpertly, the Capitol building was named to symbolize the principal seat of government and legislative authority within a city or country.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	The manager of the restaurant had a great sense of humor.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	There are various methods for correcting eyelashes in dogs, such as removing excess lashes without damaging natural ones and addressing old lashes. This may lead to eye issues like persistent tearing and irritation of the eyelids that can result in damage to the eyelash follicles known as trichiasis. There are four ways to treat this: 1) by cauterizing with heated instruments, following guidelamoins on surgical caulking; 2) by making incisions and suturing, if necessary; 3) using cantharides (a substance extracted from beetles), as described under the topic of surgical caulking.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, if you wish to cure the evil eye with your gaze, turn your left hand towards it; and if the object turns white, then it is cured; otherwise, insert a needle into the corresponding spot just below the eyelid, where its hairline starts, and push the needle through until it reaches near the edge of the eyelid—where the lashes are located. Then, pull the needle towards you along with the eyelid ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	In the anatomy of the human eye, there is a part called the conjunctiva which lines the inside surface of both the upper and lower eyelids as well as spanning across over the lacrimal sac within the lacramenary (lacrimal gland). It's responsible for lubricating the eyes with its mucus. Whenever a foreign body such as dust or lint comes into contact with the eye, it tends to adhere to this layer. Subsequently, blinking of the eyelids helps in removing these particles and the conjunctiva tries to expel them like the leaves of myrrh tree spreading away from its branches.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it should be noted that the shape of the eyelid varies in quantity according to its elevation from the skin, which is diversified among men, with some individuals requiring a significant amount of incision on the eyebrow based on the degree to which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	The tear ducts you've drawn consist of two main parts: the upper part, known as the Lacrimal Sac, and the lower part referred to as the Nasolacrimal Duct. Tears are produced by the lacrimal glands located above each eye. They flow across your eyes, cleaning and lubricating them before being collected in the tear sacs at the inner corners of your eyelids. From there, tears drain into the nasolacramal ducts which lead to the back of your nose or mouth. This is why when you cry a lot or even yawn, you might notice saltwater running down your throat - those are tears coming from the lacrimal sac through the nasolacrimal duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	It's like your crack runs through the natural fibers just as much as the king's thickness does.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	The priest approaches one of the corners of the altar with an incense cone and completely extingcuishes it; he then takes two small ashes from the censer using a fine woolen fiber spoon and removes any excess dust that might be on the eyebrows, for if you wish to do so. If not, pay no attention.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Approach the wound and stitches within three or four days, and properly cleanse it then.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If the tear duct is not obstructed, let it heal on its own with adequate moisture and compression, because if the eyelid is elevated, you should seal off the punctum and add a plug; however, suturing is preferred for older patients.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But in any case, he is genuinely concerned about the illness and his actions are good-natured, not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	E is an extraordinary figure with unique features on the eyelids. The eyes resemble small olive leaves and are lifted upwards in three short, sharp movements according to this pattern:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible that there are angles or if they do not have equality, place a compass on the figure so that it has an equal length as previously mentioned and put this in the middle of the figure. Then insert the other leg up to the tear ducts (lacrimal), then adjust them with the compasses to make sure both legs are equally elevated, thus elevating the entire body on which we have instructed so that it is evenly balanced as previously mentioned.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Approach the dog's lips to adjust the stitches of the wound and heal what is inside that has been cured.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	It seems that you have an abscess or a cyst; let the abscess drain naturally and apply some cream and ointment, as well as using medication if necessary.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Some eyelash extensions are made of synthetic fibers that are attached to the natural lashes, while others may be more artificial in nature. To remove them, you should use a specialized oil solution and gently massage it onto your eyelashes using warm water. This will help dissolve the adhesive used for attaching the extensions. Avoid pulling or tugging on the lashes to prevent damage. After removing the solution with a clean, damp cloth, you can expect some natural shedding as new lash growth replaces the old ones over time.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Segona: Un ataxine est una classe de proteínes que, per a més, un gene mutat (ATXN2) pot causar malformisme neurodegeneratiu. Així, la secuencia d'aminoacids dibuixa les característiques estructurals i funcionales de la proteína.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	The following is an approximate translation of the Occitan text into English, maintainamoble retaining the original meaning and context as closely as possible:
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	He also cut off the hands of some captives, their fingers were bound together.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Aprop the water add a pinch of any subtlety under which lies surplus from the bone, and tighten up those broken cannulas for some days; as the vein will die off due to the constriction and may turn gangrenous, ultimately requiring amputation.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If the tides are delayed, hours turn into days, and before you know it, weeks have passed until healed by the sea breeze.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When I'm well rested, my eyelids are raised and the hairs don't poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	Aquí tienes una guía sencilla para hacer unas galletas tradicionales que puedes seguir siguiendo estos pasos en español: cuidado, ¡esto puede ser divertido!
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	The quantity of both longitude and latitude is not given in miles or meters.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII - The Capitol
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	The elevation of sharp spines on the wine cork when the skin is dry indicates quality.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	There are two types of non-natural, bitter and sharp oils that have pungent effects when used in the operation where you take small doses of vinegar with occasional breaks at a rate of one teaspoonful daily for moderation.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	Let S be the length of fields from a certain quantity in an orchard of orange trees.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	From component to another subtle field where you find the essence of it all; use the extremities as you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	A Prophecy of Pause and Light - Let your mind rest in its own place, and be at one with the sunlight so that your work may shine forth as a subtle and fine creation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	A properly insert the needle into the edge of the adjusted gutter which requires a spoon, and make it penetrate slowly through the eyelid to remove any excess natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Article I - Each party agream to refrain from entering into any contracts or transactions with the other's affiliates without prior written consent and shall not take action involving more than one of such parties simultaneously, but only up to a maximum of three.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	A properly placed contact lens within your eye can correct vision and give you clear sight without the need for glasses.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Mays, you must entrust all your wealth to the faithful person whom you have chosen previously and who is not related to you by blood or marriage; only then will they guard it in their own house until your passing, even if that means going against family traditions.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	That which you have seen in the vision concerning the wheat, four hours hence you shall gather the ears and the straw, and crush them together, and let it lie for two or three days, until the juice adheres to its place and rises over that good grain.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the fur is too short, adjust it by adding longer natural hairs and make it higher than necessary, or insert enough space to allow for lengthening.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	From the care of extracting a foreign object lodged in your upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eyelid retracts (entropion), it is the contraction of the eyelid that moves towards itself, either to the right or left side, due to poor closure of laceration or scarring or cauterization, and it'ebulated, which can be natural or accidental, caused by consolidating of lacerations or scars or cauterizations or similar treatments.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the treatment in your mouth is to create a fistula and that you consolidate it, and separate the lips of yours, and rest on yours at this point where there is between those a drap of thread like fabric, and tie up those within so they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	In the place where you use curative of old remedebytes, constrictions are required, for if you do so return it will cause greater harm than ever before there was none present.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	In that case, if fenugreek seeds are to be used for soothing and calming purposes, one can either directly add them into the water in which they were boiled along with a little salt or use an oil infusion of fenugreek. Immerse this mixture into the affected area and apply it as needed.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The translation of your care's protocol is that you should perform all possible interventatur ensuring they are not solidified according to the form initially considered.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have mentioned is nothing but a correction of election inaccuracucy which does not return the form of the place according to its original layout.
Capitol .xiiii.	Title: Congress at Work: The Legislative Process on Capitol Hill
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	From the treatment of eyelashes that is done on the lower eyelid edge.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This is the ointment applied to the inner edge of the eyelid, which is genuinebly called an ointment; it can be either naturally occurring or incidentally made.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	May's accident is a fracture or scar, caused by a fall, scissors, burning, or other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The procedure for inserting your lens is as follows: take a double-ended needle and leave it in the incision site, then guide the thread from the left tear duct through to the right one so that both ends of the thread pass out of the skin.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	A prop to the east extend parts of land beyond our present range and towards that region near the pole, and they include in their expanse a vast open plain.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	If so, return the figure of the eyelid as it's closed; if not, take a ray and pause at that in the split image, then turn those two splits into the length of the lower eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The intersection of two lines that form opposite angles (i.e., vertical angles) in a given incidence, and the measure of each angle formed where they intersect is equal to their figure's corresponding angle.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	No, this figure is not a Greek letter. The symbol you are referring to (Λ) represents the capital Greek letter Lambda. It has various applications in mathematics, physics, and other fields of study but it'amo an actual language character. In fact, the "landa" seems like a misspelling or mispronunciation of this letter.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	The fat that is left after the quantity of lean has been removed from it, which sealed the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Approach adjusts the separate parts and those on the wool; it also cures those that have been treated with soothing ointments or poultices to promote healing.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If an eyelid crease is formed by a fissure or suture and the incision line is not flat along the edge of the eyelid, as shown above, then adjust the creases so they lie flat on the skin of the eebelids according to the preceding steps.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	A proper lip separation occurs when the lips are parted following what has been said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the production of acetate crystals, when they are either dissolved or precipitated out, it should run according to its operation as prepared from acetic acid, and this takes on a form of diverse particles.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	The skilled craftsmen always know when it is possible to perform the operation within which the figure returns to its natural shape, or as close to that as possible; this discomfort depends on what seems best for the procedure and instruments in place.
Capitol .xv.	The title "Capitol XV" does not correspond to a well-known work, but it could refer to the fifteenth book in a series titled "The Capital," or any other collection of books known as "Capitol." Without additional context, I cannot provide an analysis. If you are referring to Veronica Roth's "Divergent" trilogy which includes "Allegiant," then "Capitol XV" could hypothetically be a continuation in that series or another unrelated work with a similar thematic focus on faction-based societies and political intrigue.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	The attachment of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	This eye injury requires this consolidation in order to strengthen the eyelid and prevent it from being affected by external factors such as dust or movement; therefore you must ensure that the skin around the eye is lifted and stretched using your finger, so that healing can occur properly.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	A) Approach the incision site carefully to avoid undue stress on the sutures, ensnaring them with a small instrument so that the potential for pain is not agitated during the process, and gently remove any material that may cause irritation at the site.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	E is the condition in which a person's eyelid returns to its natural shape and all of the adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	A proper way to treat the dirty saltwater is by filtering it and then boiling it in a pot until all the water evaporates, leaving behind only the salt residue. Another method is through distillation, where impurebound saltwater is heated into vapor that cools down back to its liquid form without carrying any contaminants.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	A yellow fluid separates between the eyelid and the outer corner of the eye, and pause over the outer layer infused with fatty albumen, and after the third day uses of causes consolidative within which is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16, Volume I (Capitol)
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	The inspection of the nail and the prominence of lacrimal glands.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	"Know that there are two types of mosses, one is nervous and appears subtle in a shiny appearance; the other is non-nervous, resembling a white frosted humidity, which when touched feels damp, can be easily plucked at once and breaks apart without sticking together."
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	The eyes do not commingle with tears except for the tear duct, which gradually covers the view and prevents light from entering.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	Mays advises to pray for your own well-beebeing with the intention of healing any illness that may afflict you, and gently touching the tips of your fingers together. Close your eyes slightly, raise one eyelid towards his hand, and allow him to lightly press upon each fingertip once or twice, extending it outwards from the base.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	An appropriate prong of an arrow or spear, as well as the resemblance of a horse, bull, cow, or faithful fort, shall gradually lengthen that upon the tip of the needle, little by little, until it reaches the eye socket and penetrates into it. The needle will then be held firmly in place through faith, extending out towards the eyelids, causing a tear at which point the lashes from the eyelid are severed that closed the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	Here's that bag you were talking about over there, at the end of the row.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	In the realm of literary characters, one may find themselves teetering on the edge of heart-rending sorrows or experiencu'ng subtle touches that stir deep emotions, and it is these moments that can bring forth a natural flow of tears—a testament to the authentic portrayal of human experiences within literature.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The translation of the given Catalan text to English would be: "Some heads rest upon the ground where extended or in faith, as we have said, and they approach its excursion laid out like this: Lion."
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	I observe that the patient should not touch the corneal epithelium and protect against eye injury or trauma, and ensure that the pupil is intact.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Sprinkle the mixture with a little bit of salt and knead it well for a few minutes, then let it rest overnight; and add warm water while kneading again until it becomes elastic.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the callus is not painful and you cannot put a needle in it, nor is it stuck to that one layer, this type of callus can be treated with medications and healed so as I have mentioned in the section.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	Si thou dost wish to separate that which is joined together, let hours thy work be untouched by evil and take subtly the lion's sharpness according to this form:
am subtilitat.	Subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	It is often recommended to dilute and strain it at that rate, then distill from your own experience in the taste of various dishes or main ingredients or salt used, and pour into another container the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	The text appears to be in a Romance language related to Catalan or Occitan. Considering the structure and vocabulprise, it seems closer to Catalan, which is spoken on the Balearic Islands among other places. Here's an attempt at translating your provided text into English:
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	A prop of my work within that given context, is to provide accurate information and assist with the task at hand as efficiently as possible while ensanguiniar a fidelidade às instruções fornecidas.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The removal of the tear duct, if necessary due to significant damage, should be considered on a case-by-case basis; and remove only one side initially, without exaceback procedures unless there is an excessive flow of tears remaining after the first surgery.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	The letter is written in an apoplectic tone regarding the potential toxic effect of a certain chemical on tears production, and it seeks clarification on this matter.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter Seventeen: The Capitol's Secrets
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	The essence of human nature and the source that emerges from mingled blood in the veins.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some cataracts in the eyes of Alcus are born with red corneas, and they are located just above that cover the pupil, or approach it closely and rest on the eyelids; then they spread out to resemble a balustrades' raze.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	Mays' operation is to stop the evil spirit from attacking your head; and you should carefully gather all parts of that bone and collect all of it, conveniently enough for this purpose, and then with a forceps or similar tool, start cutting off the flesh entirely until completely separated. And be careful not to damage the part needed for your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	E is your commission and the reason you have mentioned in the commission of the glaze, or the small tools that are used to shape it according to this chapter when the form comes forth.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Once your intention is fulfilled and you are rewarded with the entirety of that meat, during those hours add salt thrice, or distill it in a small phial and resemble the appearance of medicinal corrosives, then pause over the open mouth embedded within an albumen-coated shell ensuring protection from an abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is any inflammamo or wound and the person has swelling with pus and an abscess of pus, then they should apply water to that abscess until it discharges fluid, and repeat this process within the time limit required for healing, similarly addressing the affected tissue in a manner similar to treating this type of inflammation.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Nevertheless, you must take care not to engage in any sexual activity that involves total or partial impotence by natural or accidental means; do not involve yourself with such a person while they are undergoing this procedure.
Capitol .xviii.	Capital XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	The collection of wool in the field.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	I request you to inform me which tests are being conducted on the milk and forbid it from undergoing further processing, extending its shelf life indefinitely.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	It is necessary to consider whether the food you are about to eat is fresh and not another illness that needs identification; therefore, discard any such food.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	Command to the wizard that you pause your head in his/her own sight, and approach those veins with one of subtle duality as follows according to my wisdom:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Here are two related facts in the form of a second following these lines:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	A propinquity to those veins through subtle forces, and with subtlety, gradually cleanses the blood there continuously, so that such veins become renewed from within and circulate properly.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Please take care that you do not lead the yarn too far from its ends; and if your work in the morning is before the sunlight, make sure your stitches don't go beyond those veins (referring to knitting or crochet).
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	I hope you've completed your task in time; hours turn into the green clock for me to wait so that the heat can dissolve what has been absorbed from the page.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Do not take aspirin if you are allergic to it or have certain medical conditions; consult your healthcare provider before taking the medication, and ensure that any pain is resolved after several days of use and there's no sign of bleeding in your stomach.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	The sea that the mermaid enters when she gets sick is the whirlpool of healing waters known as the "River Styx". In some tales, it'e believed to have curative properties for mythical creatures like mermaids and sirens. However, beware! For those who are not mythical might find their fate quite dire in these treacherous currents...
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	In Spanish, the word "form" can be translated as "forma". Therefore, in the context of a medical or anatomical discussion about shapes and structures, you might use the following sentence to describe forms (forfaxes):
Capitol .xix.	Capítulo XIX (Chapter Nineteebox)
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	The reduction of arsenic in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	I usually cauterize or perform acute surgery when it is preceded by the report that he/she does not improve, at which point I do not cut into him but rather make incisions over the abscess until maturity, and then extract all the moisture within it and insert a plug if necessary.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Alors c'est qu'il a été découvert que les os peuvent également être affectés par de la rouille ou du noir, alors maintenant vous voyez l'importance d'un traitement pour cette condition qui ressemble à ceci : (vous pouvez montrer une image des os affectés)
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	C is a type of very hard steel, and its surface has been treated with iron dust, as well as being coated using the method where it is punched through with needles or nibs for fine detailing (as seen in the following form):
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	That foul stain upon your heart, and the thoughts that revolve within you, gradually touch it until you know that this corruption is erased.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Aqua vitae (or "water of life") is known for its various medicinal uses; it acts as an antiseptic and styptic agent.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the place is consolidated and appears to have good flesh, but then detaches from health and Rome for forty days, and it does not regenerate or become pus-filled nor results in an injury, at this time you should know that it has healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	E sinusitis (sinuses), hours not in lung engine but reducing the fissure to the shape of nasal passages; and according to this pattern: and it is that you discover from second osseous or acute medicine, and likewise revealing bones, hours take three times following this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The arm of the right triangle is extended to its tip so that its length is increased in such a way.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Ephah is the third hebrew letter (U+05D4 / Hebrew LETTER FINAL HE) with a final form in most modern fonts, although some older fonts may not have this shape at the end of words.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then the hours of restoring the old house with medical staples are so few that you wouldn't notice it.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	However, because the flesh and its location are resistant, after some time the matter that was spread to other areas returns to the nose, therefore it is more likely that there is a bad odor.
Capitol .xx.	The U.S. Capitol, often referred to as the "Capitol," is a historic building located in Washington D.C., United States. It serves as the home of the U.S. Congress and holds significant political importance for the country. Constructed between 1847 and 1857 with later extensions, it showcases American neoclassical architecture and represents democracy and federal governance in the nation's capital.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	The descent from the promontory of Huelen.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	"The wound remains intact and no injuries occur during the healing process; it is hoped that these precautions will prevent further harm or diminishment of health, as well as to ensure proper care, rest from windy exposure on the headscarf's scarification area, and sufficient nourishment for good recovery. Additionally, a pillow should be placed undernehemies so that healing ointment made with acacia, aloe, oils, and sarcocolla can properly work its magic."
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The manner of the fleece of lions is that it takes stripes like a lion's mane, and each strip is quadrupled in length; and they are made from those strips.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	A prop of space, some are stacked on top of each to meet the necessary quantity.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Apply strong pressure over the area around the bandage to tighten it; rotate the tourniquet until you feel slight skin indentation and release every few seconds. Remove the tourniquet and let blood flow freely during the day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	When the ligament is relaxed, it allows for a greater range of motion.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	The post has been shared from morning to night, as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the pain has been reduced, yes, and if not, hours will pass as he applies ointment to the bruises and bandages inside until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	From the lesion of the choroidal tumor in the eye's vascular layer.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	A disruption in the uveal tract may lead to prolapse of the eye through a small tear or rupture in the eyelid, causing a hollow hemorrhagic appearance and requiring surgical intervention where an instrument is introduced into the posterior chamber of the eye from its original location towards the lacrimal canal. Another instrument is then inserted to pierce the double layer of tissue and allow the first instrument to proceed according to its design; subsequently, the second instrument guides the displaced uveal tract along the pathway created by the initial instrument, ensuring proper retraction.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	The old and sweet wine, aged in oak barrels where the grape's essence resides within its juice and leaves.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	A proper balance of warm and cool water brings comfort to the area where rain shall heal.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some drops join together in the circle of cloth surrounding the whole area that is to be adjusted, with its fine puncture reaching up to the point of the hemline, and as water trickles down it enters into the subtle spout beneath, flowing towards the edge of the fabric, and then quickly disappearing.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	An appropriate strength to maintain good health is crucial for an individual's well-being and longenity. A balanced diet, regular exercise, and sufficient rest are vital components of such a regimen that ensures robust physical fitness, mental clarity, and overall life satisfaction.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De curacio de alconati.	The Alconat Curettage.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease, called Alcoranitis, is nothing but the illness described in the Qur'an and it is not that one.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	Mays the physician ought to pay attention in his art and avoid making faults upon those who are prepared and dressed; he should approach with care your limbs that you may not feel pain, and it must neither be too dry nor descend, but remain at rest so as to allow proper healing. Avoid any causes that might bring about harm or worsen the condition.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not flow downwards, you know it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If May is not ready to undergo the surgical procedure we have discussed, he may experience worsening discomfort among his eyes, accompanied by a subtle feeling of something over the eyelids and around the cornea crown (which should be approached with caution), where the infection has spread. This could also affect the conjunctiva and corneal tunica.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Firstly, go out and gather the necessary ingredients: water and either honey or maple syrup to sweeten it, along with fenugreek seeds for added flavor. To make a basic fenugreek seed tea, you will need:
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	A properly administered herbs, among other causes, can contribute to healing.
Capitol .xxii.	In Book XXII of "The Capital" by Karl Marx, the theme revolves around political economy and historical materialism. It explores how economic systems evolve from one stage to another (from feudalism to capitalism), driven by class struggles rootamencial changes in society's productive forces leading to a transformation in social relations of production. This ultimately sets the stage for revolutionary movements that aim at overthrowing the existing order and establishing a new, more equitable socio-enonomic system.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	The purification process of water originating from the source.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	The court has taken into account the specific circumstances of water division and it seems appropriate to pronounce at this time according to the lawsuit.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Lahora's Cove is a place where you can find peace and solace among the rocks by the sea, its scenery compelling.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	As you pause during blinking of your eye, if it sees the left one, then the water is in the left; or the right one, if it's on the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	When you reach your mother's right hand with the ring, if she turns it left; when you reach her left hand, if she turns it to the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	The tip of the almond branch near the crown for the thickness of the wreath in the Holy Family's album, and gently roll the almond away from you that way.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	E also enters the realm of belief, feeling that Alzheimer's has already been conquered due to breakthrough research.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	The convex shape of the corneal surface is roughly spherical and its measurement from the center to any point on it corresponds approximately to the diameter of the pupil at the edge where darkness prevails, and it forms the crown of light; thus you observe through this pupil the vision of brightness due to the transparence of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	A person with conjunctivitis enters the area where the water flows, and then they throw a vegetable into another stream after some time; thus, if the water descends rapidly, hours later it may bring harmful bacteria onto the surface upon which one's vision rests.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	I don't know if this message has been read before; therefore, in case the water is descending, it will take some time for you to receive a response from when the package was sent out earlier than expected.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	So, let's start by preparing the squid ink sauce and simmer it slowly to allow its flavors to develop. As a starter, you can serve the calamari with this sauce. Incorcuant una tija de sal clara (sea salt) en l’aigua, e aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat i almendras d'huà.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	In her notes and those beyond our time, she pauses over the song from a bygambe's tuneful past.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If he does not follow your advice within the context of his difficulty - because he is one of those men whose hardship is difficult to endure -, times come when you must take hold of a piece of string, which shall henceforn be called "life's thread," and this is its form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Hence pierce the bull in that exact moment, and do not delay your thrust, for it is only then that you make a subtle approach to checkmate.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	A man who claims to have said something has allegedly interfered with the conversation.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	I must commend you on your work. Be prepared to face a certain discomfort in the sleeping arrangements made under your back in a darker house; and it is forbidden for any movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	The tree stands still in its natural state of light to let the sunlight reach all parts equally on both right and left sides.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Let S represent the amount of money saved by a person each day according to their plan, starting from the third day onwards.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	After spending the night in that gloomy and dark place, he was relieved to see some signs of civilization and returns back inside by July 7th.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	In the event of bleeding, apply pressure to the wound and use an antiseptic solution as soon as possible.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Cove that you, aliens, have a water issue which is extremely important and requires great attention.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	May decides to apply a compress on the abscess, hoping that it will heal within seven days, and corrects any errors in the water used for cleaning.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Lahora tu abolis la visada de l'ull y descansa sobre la cara d'ell o relativa que gèritia el volteig de l'ull olorant per alters dies, el qual existi en la major oscuritat.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	A proper analysis of that rapidly growing trend and its underlying causes requires careful consideration and discussion.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	In the poem "La Araucana" by Alonso de Ercilla, which tells of the Spanish conquest in Chile and their encounters with the indigenasto people, it is not excused for a disciple to have doubts about certain episodes described. At times one may question the accuracy and veracity of some actions portrayed in this historical epic poem.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	Finally, we reached the place called Artach, and some mentioned that there was a fire at an olive mill named "Magdalena" where water had overflowed.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have never seen in our land a person who had pure water or legal water among the free people of the ancients; and it is possible that this water is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	Here are the various forms of spices in Magdala, which include those that you may not know about. This is a list overviewing them for your information:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	The intricate patterns of Etruscan fibulae are unique and their external ornaments showcase this subtle triangle-based design, the sharpness of which is akin to that specific shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	There is no mercury in your nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	In this case, there are several diverse tumors that have one cause which is gathered under the umbrella of motor neuron diseases; and this illness is called amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), as it resembles a polyp.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	C is a mammal with orange fur and black stripes, while C is a mammamo with golden yellow fur.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	In that which is in these Leon's flesh, neither fraudulent nor scorched, let it cause you ill-will among your people, and place the blame upon the sun; and pinching bites of yours on those bones.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	In the first part of these deductions, we understand that all matter has already been contained within a single entity from which it originates. Therefore, if this source is absent at any point due to some cause making its removal possible, one can easily obtain what was once there using any suitable and delicate instrument.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If you have an abscess or a boil that is draining pus, wait until the fluid has dried up before using water to clean it; if it's a malignant abscess, then expect pain and get medical treatment to sterilize the area where the tissue was separated so all pockets are emptied.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Certain cups of water or tea, depending on your preference and the season, can be beneficial for maintaining good health. It's always important to stay hydrated!
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	"When your nose is stuffed and the mucus inside your mouth becomes wet, you feel as if it has already been healed."
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If the rain doesn't enter according to the forecast, you might know that your feet are not wet at all on the upper branches or bones of the limbs where it has not reached absorption.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	When there is an interference causing any great harm or disturbance in the marriage, and it persists without providing reasonable time for reconcamoin between the parties concerned, and if one party intentionally provokes mischief or extreme meddling by the other's spouse, either through words or another cause that may be possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	In order to make the desired scent, one should throw it into his own perfume bottle as soon as he arriveby the channels of the nars, and let him pour over his hair, because too many children seem this way when attending school, and it is a reasonable excuse for doing so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Open the two lids of the jar, one lid that goes on top and the other that fits underneath it; then set a locking mechanism on the flesh which is inside the jar, and place this object into it, making sure you know that the flesh now lies within the jar.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Extract the meat from the fish, and remove its skin to obtain a clear broth, then boil it for three days or more until all the liquid is reduced.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	At the end of this case, pause for a while using a silver spoon injections within those days that are healthy.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	May I confirm that you are seeking a cure for your condition? If so, let's explore the options available to you.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	Here is the form of an apparatus for purifying oil and producing medicines in the apothecary shop:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	A small water drop of silver or copper appears like an open lantern, similar to a tiny lampshade.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you want to make a closed cannula so as if it were a regular one and the cannula of the instrument intended for cleaning is flat, with the maneuver handle at its end, which you turn on when you wish to draw liquids or fluids from the source.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	The enchanting elixir of berries comes with the following flavors: raspberry infused with cinnamon and star anise, blackberry blended with ginger and a hint of clove, blueberry mixed with cardamom, elderflower scented with lavender, long pepper accented by saffron, fennel-scented hibiscus, and echinacea infused with spices. The Kiss of the Blessed and Holy Water, along with holy pills, has soothing effects. Dip your fingers in the water basin, then apply it to the forehead as you chant these words against evil forces.
Capitol .xxv.	Title: "Capitol XXV" (English Translation)
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They are from the city of Naples and their families live there as well.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Repeatedly washed are the lilies of the field in the streams beyond this place, and they grow magnificent during these days when it rains, as observed from here.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	I order that you record the emergence of it and transfer all ownership to me.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	In the realm of medical treatments, certain substances or procedures are employed to burn specific areas within the body. These methods serve various therapeutic purposes and can be found in specialized locations for their application.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	Mays if your intention is delayed until the Magnificat, consider whether it has grown hard, dark in color and with little feeling; do not touch that red-hot iron which causes those cracks on this sore, as there may be great malevolence toward the one who caused this sore to fester.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the stain is of a lion's touch and not of fierce color, and when thought occurs to you at all times that it is possible in everything, then evacuate the illness and take courage without fear, and cure the person afflicted with water until they are healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Title: "Capitol xxvi" (English Translation)
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Nasal and lip clefts, as well as auricular (ear) clefts are congenital anomalies where the continuity is disrupted by either a gap or resembling two separate structures.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that a few incidents of continuity in one of these charts have little impact except on isolated individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then cove, when you have carefully examined all the possible causes of that fresh wound on your skin, and at times adjust its edges with stitches to promote healing within.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the labia minora of circumcision are separated and each is healthy, you should excise each foreskin flap as it appears until bleeding stops.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Approach and adjust the torn lips with stitches to strengthen them, then sprinkle a powder of dragon'hemlock on them, and place a thin layer of egg white ointment or another type of consolidating plaster over it. Let that be in place for two or three days, then remove it gently and replace it with a new one; let the wound heal within its own time until they are separated (scar tissue is formed), and continue applying an ointment that promotes healing inside where the lips were torn apart.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The Mays technique of the suture involves adding a solution for continuity or using needles in the same way as previously reported on the abdominal incision, or include the continuity solution and let you know that you have done so.
Capitol .xxvii.	Title: The Intrigue of the Capital City (Capitol) XXVII
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	The extraction of that cause which comes into play in the two lips during pronunciation.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Old wounds have appeared in various parts of the lips, some resembling small scars from accidents, and others are minor while some are major.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	I shall treat each of those hardened areas so that the incision is made into the entire thickness and then dilated with an appropriate instrument or device until the blood vessel is gently stretched; after which it will be washed thoroughly with warm water to cleanse, within which it shall heal.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter Twenty-Eight (Capitol)
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	The adjustment of the flesh close to the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Gran rede of weeds in the past often referred to as "albulus", therefore I advise you to suspend that old custom or adopt this one, and let health take its course so it heals the wound and prevents future occurrences.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Certain medications, such as antibiotebrothers or corticosteroids, should not be used without consulting with your healthcare provider first. These drugs may interact with other medicines you are taking and can have serious side effects if misused. Always follow the guidance of a medical professional to ensure safe usage.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	If the flesh heals initially, then it later breaks down again, and recautérises that, because the cauterisation wouldn't return otherwise.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On account of kindness, I will help you. (This translates the given phrase to a similar sentiment in English while maintaineing its original intent.)
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	On the surface of teeth affected by decay and caries, as well as between the gums that are scraped shallow, smooth, lean, or light brown in color, there is a tendency for corruption to reach the gingiva. These conditions affect the healthy enamel of the teeth.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, make sure to brush your teeth thoroughly twice a day and visit the dentist regularly in order to prevent any potential issues or discoloration that might appear over time. Also, consider using products with whitening properties to maintain brightness.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If the water is that which you used during your meal, then drink it; if not, repeat the fast on those items on the following day and the second and third within a week in the quantity of water that you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	The toothbrushes that have different needs require various shapes and forms of rubber components depending on how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	PER SO QUAR LE RAZORI A M I LA DENTA DE LA PARTIDA DEDINTS ET ALTRE DI RASORES, E SCUTTAS QUESTAS FORMES DI RASORES TENESSEN PRONTO:
Capitol .xxx.	Capital X!
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Tooth eradication or tooth extraction is a medical procedure that involves removing one or more teeth from the mouth, typically due to severe decay, infection, overcrowding, or other oral health issues. This surgical process should only be performed by trained dental professionals and usually follows these general steps:
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	I understand that you cure your toothache completely in both morning and evening until it is totally eradicated; there's no substitute for its absence when it gets eradicated, as it is a sublime substance whose excitation occurs during the eradication of such.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	In Mays Cove Quan, the toothache is not completely eliminamo that firmly you should be certified which one is the painful tooth, as many times it can hide the pain due to the disease and thus stay healthy, and you eradicate that one and also approach the pain, but the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been eradicated, for we have already seen this in the case of root canal treatment.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	I believe there might have been some confusion with the text you provided; it appears to be in Catalan or another Romance language but is not clearly readable. However, your request seems to relate to dental health and specifically on how to address a painful tooth that's abscessed within gum tissue, which may require surgical intervention such as extraction by a skilled professional using delicate instruments incrementally until the problematic area is reached and addressed.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	In the appropriate use of tools and utensils for mouth care, one should maintain good speech or posture while brushing teeth to prevent any discomfort, enspectively positioning your fingers so that they do not cause pain, nor worsen any existing dental issues.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	If no one has gathered the necessary tools, then it will take some time before they can start moving the object; thus, at first, everything is made easier and facilitated in order to begin the process of relocation.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If your tooth is chipped or corroded, take care not to bite into anything hard as you might pull the affected area out of its subtle socket and break it during the process of tightening that on your clamping over that tooth.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	A verse of great skill which scars upon the entire circuit of gums, and keeps your strength that does not tear away those parts from you, and returns against evil for any wickedness that may be greater than its first painful torment.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	E, please be aware that if you don't address this issue with ignorant barbers who show little professionalism and audacity in the eradication of theirs, we will see many cases resulting in severe illnesses which are more difficult to treat; as well as recurring issues from them. You have been warned about extracting those harmful bone fragments out of the mandible just like I've witnessed in so many cases.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	To properly eradicate your morning bad breath, you can opt for using mouthwash or taking a warm saltwater rinse.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If excessive blood flow or spontaneous bleeding occurs in the vagina, apply clean gauze and press down firmly on it for some time to soak up a small amount of blood, then remove the gauze and if necessary, perform cauterization.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tweezamolets which are unsuitable is an elongated handle, a short middle section and a thick grip; therefore they cannot be folded when carrying these instruments.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	Spanish: El mismo azor cumplió con las grandes muestras de trabajo interno antes de darle a esas no sean dobladas, que fueran muy anchos fuera.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	The wings of certain birds of Indian descent have external appendages that are interconnected and restricted by tight constraints; some also possess extensions in the form of an ibis' beak called a scutellum, which is thick and sturdy.
Capitol .xxxi.	CAPITOL XXVII.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Elimination of teeth and extraction of bone fragments from fractured jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	The eradication of the tree which has fallen due to Roman attack must be suspended until you let it rest at a location near its original place for one or two days so that the site may recover; and afterwards proceed with using ties or tongs from among those attached to the base of an eagle'amoeba or wren called ciconia, which have the form of forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extra mites of their fat tails have fallen asleep for five or ten years.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey this instruction about these forceps or pliers, the cause may be that you need to examine yourself closely and insert the entire tool of which there is a small lever whose shape looks like this.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	S is a very short drink, and it should not be started unless you intend to finish it.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the pitch of this chord is flat (bent), it's a diminished seventh. Otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms correspond to those described herein: the form of the first instrument is triangular with thick sides:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have very slender tips.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	The translation of the given text from Catalan to English is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	In my collection of musical instruments, there are several others besides the harpsichord that I've restored. Among these is an impressive grand piano which was assembled in 1ebi (ancient instrument making). Its form is quite remarkable: it has a curved case with intricate carvings and decorations typical of its period, and the keyboard consists of black and white keys arranged across multiple octaves. The soundboard beneath produces rich, resonant tones when played by skilled musicians.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	The serving size for this dish is one slice of the shortbread pie that has a thickness ranging from 1/4 to 3/8 inch, provided it's not already pre-cut and eaten by someone who did not consume it completely.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	Other types of musical instruments that have keys and are similar to the other keyboard instruments include pianos, organs, harpsichords, clavichords, and accordions. These instruments utilize a series of levers or bars with pads at their end (the keys) which when pressed produce sound through various mechanisms such as hammers striking strings (pianos), air being pushed through pipes (organs), or reeds vibrating (accordions).
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The skilled artisans knew and were subtle in their craft, dedicating themselves to the works according to what it means by the operation and various diseases; for there are illnesserenal conditions that the ancients did not describe or cure properly using instruments of different kinds.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If Mays breaks the jawbone or other bones of the mouth during a procedure, or if he/she gets injured in any way, then his/her wounds should be immediately attended to at the location deemed appropriate for the instruments and forceps as mentioned in the extraction of dental cysts. The process is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	E is to be bound by some rope, little by little, and kept in such a way that it does not slip or escape through any opening of its mouth; and then let it rest at the place with suitable remedies applied as needed.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May's honey is a small beekeeping endeavor; its hours are determined by the activity of that beehive and its darkness. It heals everything within it that has been cured.
Capitol .xxxii.	The title "Capitol, ix2." appears to be referencing a section or chapter within a larger work that uses Roman numerals for organization and citation purposes. In this case, "ix" would translate to the number 9 in standard Arabic numerals, indicating it is the ninth chapter or section. The ".xxii" at the end of the title could potentially be an error or misinterpretaturate since it does not conform to common formatting rules for Roman numeral usage.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	The care of protruding teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are so prominent according to their natural form, and especially in women, mainly in venerable old ladies; therefore consider that if one tooth is not attached to another tooth, nor can it be bound or lined with a thread, then you should cut out this tooth using an instrument whose shape matches the form of this tooth. It appears similar to a pig's tusk and is made of sharp Indian iron ore.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	S is the toothbrush that should be used twice a day for maintaining healthy teeth and not being replaced by any other tools or methods.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the iron is exhausted from the milling process, then at this time it will be milled again using an Indian steel of which this form is used.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Let S be the set of all iron mines in India and its surroundamo; let M denote the number of mining points that are exactly like lima with sharpened needles, where each tooth is carefully filed over a few days so that it is not as sharp or bites.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	A) On the horizon lies that which was once afar, and at dawn reveals its golden charms.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If a tooth is broken or if the tongue is injured, you must clean that area where the sharp edge of that fragment is located and smooth it out completely so that the tongue does not get hurt nor does the speech get distorted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	The number "xxxiii" in Roman numerals translnates to the Arabic numeral 33. It is written as 'XXXIII' where each 'X' represents a value of 10 and each 'I' represents a value of 1. Three tens (or three Xs) combined with three ones (three Is) give us the number 33 in our regular Arabic numeral system, which we commonly use today.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	The tooth restoration can be made of gold or silver alloy.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	Quan accideys a les dentz davant concussio o remossio per percussió o per cazament, i el malaltia no pot estendre sobre aquell que manca, i tu tens cura aquel amb medicines adescatices, i no ha valgut la tua curació; després de so que no casguen saps en aquells que sian estrèncuts am fidel d'or i no d'argent, quar l'argent es pot fer virar i aprop se torneix pobre a peu diaes, mai l'aur nul temps no és mutada.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	E is the slimness of the needle according to the amount that fits between two teeth; and the shape of the thread should be such that you take it through the eye of the neednose twice, in both directions with a slight curvature of the thread between two strong knots or just one. Continue until the thread reaches the other side's healthy tooth.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	In the spirit of cooperation and mutual respect, I suggest we refrain from using offensive or disparaging language within this discussion. Let us strive to communicate constructively and with wisdom, ensnaring not in ill-intentioned speeches.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	E be the guardian of your teeth, that you may preserve them from decay.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	Cut off the extramission of excess saliva using forceps or tissues and add those in whichever place you wish to, then convert them into something hidden between healthy teeth and unhealthculed teeth so that it does not cause harm to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	R is the letter that follows Q and precedes S in the Latin alphabet.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	May be clumsy or awkward; encourage that person (or those persons) in such a way throughout all their time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	Here is the shape of teeth and the structure of a two-tooth bridge, as shown in these linked examples:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	En el caso que devuelvas un tanto o parte alguna del préstamo concedido sobre cualquier cosa, y se reponga de la misma manera como habéis reconvenído, y regrese.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	The language is Friulian, a Romance language spoken in the northeastern Italian region of Friuli-Venezia Giulia and neighboring areas. Here's the translation in English:
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	A few wheels are suitable for certain causes of cow bone fractures and they are made in the form of teeth; it is inserted into a location where there is tooth loss and is tightened as previously explained, remaining useful for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 44.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	In the case of a speech impediment which occurs in the language and restricts speaking, it may be considered an unfortunate circumstance.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This language which you mentioned earlier has certain variations or it is a naturally occurraturtle one, in which the person doesn't speak, or incidentally due to illness, an accent that is already established.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation involves entering the mouth of the patient, with your hand placed under their chin; and lifting up your thumb so that it is facing towards you. Then carefully insert the tip of your tongue following the width within which the lower jaw has been opened to ensure sufficient space for the procedure.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If the wood is rotten or decayed, and it's meant for repairing damage from storms, then you should trim off that section within which there are loose fragments; these will be separated by length, so the remaining piece can be dissolved of rot and decay.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	B, look that it does not split the corner of your skin and create a crack here, but instead forms a thin line and brings forth some blood flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Wash the remnanciers of the incision on your tongue or with warm water; and pause speaking for a while, letting go of any lingual lichen; thus heal the wound of your tongue by not using it at all during the night until it is solidified or re-formed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	May choose to let the wound bleed freely before placing over a sterile gauze pad; then she might apply pressure and use hot water or an antiseptic solution to cleanse the area, which helps prevent bacterial growth.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	A prop of that cure are the other causes within which it is applied to heal.
Capitol .xxxv.	"Capitol" is an American rock band that was formed in the mid-1amo, and they're known for their unique blend of musical influences including country, folk, punk, and more. The 'xxxv' part might refer to a specific album or song number within Capitol Records' catalogue – as most music labels use Roman numerals to denote albums/songs in sequence. Without further context it's difficult to pinpoint exactly which track this refers to, but here are some notable releases from the band that may be of interest:
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	The removal of a ranula left the tongue exposed.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some ulcers on the tongue prevent its normal functioning, and it is markedly enlarged when pushed into the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation in French is that specialists focus on the mouth of the malarkey, facing the sun and considering an abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you change its fur from black or dark, which doesn't heal the illness of feeling sad, do not touch that corner where it cracks.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If it is to be condensed into a whiteness, in which there is humidity, then at the eleventh hour you place it in the flame and distill that subtle essence; and if you allow steam during the time of your operation, after pausing for more than three times, it becomes vitriol, within a narrow space.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	A person who inflicts harm on another shall return the work to him within which he caused damage and compensate for it, including any losses incurred as a result of such act; moreover, they are also responsible for providing care if needed until recovery is achieved.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 66 in Roman numerals is written as "Capitol. LXVI." The word 'capitol' remains unchanged, and the number 66 is represented by the Roman numeral XL (40) followed by XVI (16), which combines to form LXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Extraction of styes from two ears and the one that does not come out in the corner, as well as other sties.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the earlobe is infected and the glands which are clustered around it become swolebn, they are called "auricular nodes", when you touch them with warm water as instructed in the division above, if not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and slightly sensitive. In that case, do not touch it with a metal instrument.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If the radish is of good color and its root is thick, do not touch it with an iron fork for the bleeding of blood; wait until it's matured further, then you can harvest it or cut it off if needed.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is of white colour and the rays of light are subtle, then that time tends to be deceiving.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The procedure involves considering whether the patient's swelling has subsided after your operation or if it has worsened with any deterioration. Also, pay attention to how long they experience discomfort under sunlight and ensure that the crown of their tooth is at a comfortable height for them, along with checking the condition of their gums. The dentist should then use a specialized instrument to carefully clean between the patient's teeth in the following manner:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	S be mischievous as silver or of deceitful nature, and subtle with a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Firstly, remove the foreign object from your mouth and show me its size, then take hold of it with your teeth and pull it out gently towards you as far as possible without causing harm to yourself. If necessary, seek medical attention for further assistance. Remember never to put your fingers or any other objects in your mouth that could cause injury or introduce bacteria.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another liquid that is drawn from the tunica intima, and through it flows this substance for which this tool takes its form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	An evil assembly of forceps, but the handles extend in a twisted manner; thus, the horrifying grip of each one is on the other'amoke end sharp, made entirely of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this tool is not of your making, may the hours bring forth that man whose form this is a part of, but not all of it: He shall be from one aspect, and not from another.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	He pouquoi as creus que has inscrit une molaire, incisez l'autre selon cette méthode manuelle d'incision, et après l'incision assure-toi le malade guérira grâce à de l'eau fraîche.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays suffers from a continuous flow of blood, and he has tried various remedries such as water decoctions made from ashwagandha leaves or similar ones due to the reasons for this bleeding being narrow or those that have helped in curing it previously.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	In the garden there are some roses and other flowers blooming, while others stand out with their unique beauty. I see those golden leaves glistening in the sunlight, each petal and stem adding to the enchanting scene that unfolds before me as if it were a painting come to life.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	A doctor had treated a woman for an abscess located in the groin area, which was turning dark brown, with little pain; at that time, he had already closed up the wound and the woman was breathing rapidly. He also forbade her from eating or drinking water, and if fever persisted for one or two days more, it could lead to death.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The aposteme had grown so much that there were times when the rams entered between both sides through it.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	I kindly and carefully examine your mouth, then take out one of the teeth, and throw it away in large quantities, while understanding that part of the other root; I oblige its tongue to remain shut and press down its language, so that the first piece remains within the abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	He had taken an inappropriate and large share of the profit, leaving only a small amount for himself.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	The woman had an absolute urge to vomit, and immediately began drinking water and consuming food again; therefore, I could not stop the numerous boils on my body for a long time, and soon enough another outbreak occurred in that place which persisted for quite some time.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	I shall go to the well and cleanse my garments therein, therefore adding an amble to it; then I departed without knowing that God had been in that place with me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	The Roman numeral "Capitol" does not correspond to any number, as it seems to be a typo or an error in input. However, the provided numeral "xxxvii." appears to represent the Roman numeral for the number 37. In Roman numerals, "XXXVII" is indeed written as follows:
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	The hook of the hanging incident that occurred.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the hair grows on top of the head and becomes thick and lengthy, for a long time it is called 'perpendcuar' (possibly pertaining to some regional dialect); when it forms in the area closer to the scalp, it is often referred to as 'buba', which means round or bulky.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	The Mays Quart is cured with water that we have mentioned in the division; and do not inflict your curing, and also it often gets apostema, but remains subtle, so you should inscribe there what has been added around; and if it'am longish and sanguineous of dark or black color and is not to much, then you shall have the inclination towards healing in that place where there is fear over the illness.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	In this manner he turns that second the way I have described its whiteness and length; then you should make an evil expression, press your tongue against his instrument with which it forms a shape, and while drawing from below, bite off one of two tools that are called in the description as "two small scissors."
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	The one who does not inscribe that which is adjusted above the natural order of things, but rather you inscribe on your own will, therefore corrupting his speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Upon the occurrence of two similar events, use the water which has been previously mentioned in this section, and ensure that it is safe for consumption.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Mays, you are afraid of getting sick due to this habit; therefore, I suggest using a sterilizing agent. The tool is nothing but purified water, and it's essential that you place the headache at the top of your forehead. Then take hold of the tongue depressor we mentioned earlier, and gently press on the area intended for cauterization with it, along with applying some purified water as a cooling agent. Make sure to apply enough pressure without being too thick or thin; fill the concave part (cup-like shape) of the tool accordingly.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The branch of knowledge regarding the healing herb parsley is akin to that of the healing root rue; thus, when the medicine rests on top of the wound, so does the malaise subside from its grip upon their tongues by way of intrinsic healing properties, ensuring no harm comes from either cause onto the wounded area or surrounding tissue.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Please apply your medicine to my throat and gently press it against the uvula until you see that area become darkened and numb due to the effect of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you want to perform a cold cupping therapy on the limb over the affected area, prepare an envelope of bandage material and immerse it in the chosen medicine. Then, place the edge of the cup onto that part of the bandage where it adheres firmly. Ensure that the distance between them is such that you obtain your desired depth of suction during therapy. Allow the bandage to dry completely; this usually takes 3-4 days and the edges will naturally peel off afterward.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you apply the medicine to it (the wound), wrap that with a clean bandage and start by cauterizing along its edges within the vineyard's boundary, purify it using fresh water, dress it with an ointment, and then cover it with gauze. The wound will be healed in this way.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This type of treatment is much safer than conventional methods and has been proven effective for a longer duration in reducing fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some ulcers are cured by washing with water that is too hot or cold, along with burning and stimulation, for which it is treated through inhalation of this mixture: calendula, ysop, origanum (oregano), ruda (rue), scammony Arabicum (benjamine), camomile, bruised herbs similar to those mentioned before, or a few from the list. Mix all these ingredients in one bowl and submerge them in warm vinegar; then stir well with a ladle until thoroughly mixed, placing it on the center of the bowl over an iron instrument as per this method; make it out of silver or copper.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	Let A be the extreme point in the mouth at which the poison comes to rest above the spinal cord when the uvula is not obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	A) It circulates through those areas that have become dry, and it is important to avoid this irritation in the wound healing process of hemorrhoids, as excessive treatment could aggraebate the piles condition. You should not do this; instead, you must declare a thrombosed hemorrhoid promptly.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If May not be present at the time of this instrument's use, then an hour later a canoe is made on the outer side with a wax seal, so that the mouth of the will is secured, for the seal of the wax prevents the vapor from escaping.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This cure is good for your health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Certainnly! In this context, "Capitol .xxxviii." likely refers to a specific section or page number within a document or publication related to the U.S. Capitol building and its history. The ".xxxviii" is a Roman numeral which translates to the Arabic numeral 38. Therefore, it directs you to information found on page 38 of a resource discussing the U.S. Capitol or a chapter focusing on this topic within a larger work.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	The removal of thorns and water that sticks to the glassware, as well as other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Broken wires are attached to the cable or fishing line, among other causes.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Extract the water that is visible on top of which you place your tongue as an instrument in front of the sunlight, so that it may be revealed what water is inside your mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	The water you consume and do not excrete soon after may cause you to vomit the discomfort before your food becomes rotten in the stomach; this is because such an effect often originates from the intestines, being forcefully expelled through vomiting. Or perhaps it's a small piece of spoiled cabbage or a dry piece of bread; then take a piece of dried sea sponge and squeeze out its natural juice firmly, and let that neutralize your discomfort as the substance passes through to be expelled from where it entered.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	A woman finds a silver fish and is delighted by its shiny scales; she decides to take it home, wash it off in the sink, and then cooks it for dinner. She also gets some porridge but forgets about it while cleaning the fish, which causes the porridge to burn.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you don't want to forget those reasons we have mentioned earlier, use this form with a lead pencil as follows:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	E is greater than a little one, and in its extremity there's an opening which you introduce into its throat easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	The old man lifts his head proudly and watches the touch of his teeth at the throat so that he can gather his thoughts and focus on her who tugs at his jaw or his spine; then, he hands it to his doctor.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, that bad luck which interferes is worse, due to his knowledge of the place where the cause originates from and it drives him mad, and he takes out the instrument among himself, as much as prepared according to how deeply embedded it was.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capital XXXIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	The extraction of sanctuary associated with the galloway.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	Quam est medica sanguisuga aquosa quae habent dictum in divisione curatio medicinibus ne commoveantur; considerare tempus in gradus malorum morborum, et quia tui habeas tradita lingua instrumento quod tibi reportavit.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you see the monkey, look towards that small one or the subtle ones carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If it's not the same one, insert a concave tube into the affected area and place an ignited iron in its concavity; do this until the blood flow stops (while the wound is alive and remains within the cavity). Avoid giving any water to the patient for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	The text provided is in the Occitan language, which was once widely spoken across southern France, as well as parts of Italy and Spain. Here's a translation to English:
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If Mays is not allergic to any of the foods previously mentioned, she should avoid consuming onions or garlic with the musical instrument that has been reported in the vibration test (uvula).
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Water flows beneath the stone bridge.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	E is another method of operation in the process described above; it involves taking an oxygen-containing wave that's covered by a tube at its end, and then ensuring proper application close to the subfumigation site so as not to lose any gas before knowing that subfumigation has reached the affected area, causing immediate relief.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If you don't feel well, try the following remedy method, and avoid drinking alcohol, consume salted foods and vegetables, do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be discontinebly followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument by which it is deemed sanctioned when viewed as a golden harp; and its appearance resembles that of forceps or scissors, although not quite so curved.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	In the courtroom of justice, and at its extreme end there is a figure resembling an ibis beak, that holds a quill, which has been sharpened with lime for use after four hours, so that it cannot fail when someone pleads their cause.
Capitol .xl.	The English equivalent for the German phrase "Bundesregierung" is "Federal Government." So, the complete translation would be "Capitol (English) - Federal Government."
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the total count is the sum of appendages and in section of limbs.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Here are numerous spices and herbs, each in accordance with what their memories recall, of every kind found in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	A wide variety of needles and blades are used for different types of incisions or suturing techniques, one of which is specifically designed for treating abscesses by being kept moist.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	In the second edition, accidents of the body occur in the locations where certain events take place: one instance is an inflamcuation on the head and another is an inflammation on the buttocks; while an inflammation at a fleshy junction differs from that on a joint. Each has its specific characteristics due to their respective location.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	"E. coli and other bacterial contaminants can enter through unperforated areas or during the process of sample collection without compromising health."
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Therefore, various types of abscesses require different approaches when crossing them with surgical incisions during their maturation period according to the stage they are at; similarly to abscesses that drain near joints, if an incision is made too close to a joint, it may prolong within this area and could lead to contamination of the adjacent ligaments or nerves. If the abscess is located close to a major member, waiting for maturation before performing a perforation can prevent damage to that member; alternatively, if the abscess is near the rectum, perform an incision away from its completion point so as not to cause contamination and spread towards other parts of the rectum. This may also result in fistula formation or delayed healing.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	In Mays Cove, I know the time of the incision of the abscess and so it is when it becomes ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	The elderberry matures when the pain of fever begins to subside and other symptoms lessen, such as headache due to inflammamoinous swelling (apostema), increasing thirst, and rapid pulse. It is harvested at this stage for use in traditional remedies.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	A possible translation of the given text to English is as follows: "The person who knows how to perform a puncture in that particular location, below where the abscess and pus arise from inflammation." Please note that this sentence might not make complete sense due to its original language's ambiguity.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Perforation is used for long wounds in the skin or body parts and for abscesses located on limbs, hands, or feet, as well as areas of tendons, nerve cords, blood vessels; and lastly, in all places where there is no reflection. In those that are reflected, use perforation according to that particular member (part of the body).
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	Mays quan the apostema is in loc carnosum, horae melles est quod lesses perforationem illius intra quae sit confirmata digestionis seque complimentu; sicuti dicimus; qui si tu perforas id postea, est prolongatum corpus eorum de lu et mota sudorifica, et fortissima labia ejus sine duritudo profunditatis eius.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Mayes's cystic apoplexy occurs secondarily to a blockage in the Latin name of the organ or body part due to its necessary function, or according to the substance that the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	I administer a small puncture, and for large abscesses perform a wide or multiple incisions depending on the size of the abscess.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Other cases in which it is claimed that the code shall be considered violated and invalid, when done like this way with bread, such that it has started to stiffen, similarly to how it happens in barrels of wine or olive oil.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	The ones that are included in the section have three corners; and those where it is inscribed so as to resemble a cap of myrtle, just like the angles of acanthus leaves.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	The Lord oversees both the round and waning sections of our lives, much like those in ancient times.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	The one that cannot be like shallow boils, let it so that when you puncture it with a superfebrile wound or simply flat.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	The abscess is large and has caused considerable pain; do not attempt to remove all of the pus at once during that moment. Instead, extract some part of it on the first day, then a larger portion on the following day, gradually increasing the amount according to your comfort level until you're relieved from the symptoms.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	The majority of diseases are due to the spirit's desire for pleasure, whether it be a woman in labor, a small child, or an old decrepit man; as the animal spirit is resolved towards the exit from health, and strongly, the disease manifests itself.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Carefully watch this chapter and be cautious with your incision where you puncture these abscesses; ensure that you prevent the spread of plagues, and consider whether the plague from the abscess is minor or if it's a flat section; then treat accordingly using either bandages or old-fashioned remedies. And if the abscess is large with visible crevices in the incision, stop me if at any point the pus reaches you through them.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess separates from the root or has formed in that area, you should clean it using a cotton swab and alcohol-based disinfectant, just as when you wash your hands with soap or detergent; keep that area dry thereafter. After three days, proceed to treat it further and apply healing ointment on the wound until it is fully healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	Mays decides to reduce the blood flow during surgery by administering fluids and using a tourniquet on the site of the blood vessels involved in order to stop them temporently.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	May you persist in maintaining the flow of blood, as well as providing care and treatment for those injuries that I have recommended in various places within our free and independent territory.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	During wintertime, the location of acne is on a cluster of hair follicles, hours before you cover them with powder and oil, and pause those over the spots.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the places are humid, times when you should rest in shaded areas with water or oil on your body, and all of this sweats into something that's cleansed during daylight as we have said, and times when you should remove scabs and wash off anything else, applying to the wound whatever is suitable for it to heal.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	"An overview of the necessary knowledge for understanding the management of hematomas universally, but according to the distinction I have made regarding all types of hematoma and the way each one is treated individually."
Capitol .xli.	Chapter Forty-One (41) in the book or document titled "Capitol" refers to specific content that follows a previous chapter, presumably Chapter Forty (40). The title "English" suggests that the context of this chapter is related to the English language or literature. Without additional information about the source material, it's unclear what topics are covered in Chapter Forty-One. To understand its contents, one would need access to the book or document referred to as "Capitol."
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	From the branch of apothecary's remedeback pain in the head came to be.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the shell of the small clam, along with nodes containing tunics that are their fabric; and the spices of which they are made are mollusks.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	The translators' sons sing songs and those that contain moisture resembling lemon.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	The words "humid" and "lapidaries" in the Old Occitan text refer to something with moisture similar to dust or resembling stones, which are hard respectively. In English, these translations would be "moist" for "humiditat" and "stone-like" or simply "stones" for "lapideas".
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In the section of all things, 'e' is in the extraction of those without fear; as you should extract from those who do not cause harm.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation in this section concerns those who seek to perfect themselves with an instrument of which I will provide the form; this is referred to as meditation between the lines. You should understand that it contains certain specific techniques and principles.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	In a given volume of water, how much time will it take to evaporate a section according to its length and surface area based on this formula?
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	E begins in the section of the line between B and G. Thus as moisture is evaporated, your skin dries up that which contained that moisture, and leaves none behind from it at all, because excessively watered plants return to soil if Roman deals with them accordingly.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Submerge the jewelry in an Egyptian enameling solution if available; otherwise, use water and salt. Fill a bowl with enough liquid to completely cover the jewelry and let it rest there for another day, as over time, the water will corroge all that is exposed by the enamel film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	He poura sobre aquele lugar em Portugal, seguindo-o principalmente e indagando se lhe poderia ser útil; então ele confia na providência de Deus, enquamante espera pelo dia em que a situação melhore.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	Si te aparezca un bulto o nódulo en el seno (mama), es crucial que lo examines y consulte a su médico tan pronto como sea posible. Un buen procedimiento para inspeccionarlo de manera segura es el siguiente:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	The section does not have a cross-shape, and there are hooks between two sides of the section and one on each end, and you exert your strength to extract the shirt that it covers entirely.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	My grandfather's blacksmith work frustrates me at times; there are hours I would rather you know about firsthand.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Formation of the healed cicatricial scar involves several stages and processes that depend on various factors such as wound depth, location, and individual healing responses. Below is a simplified explanation in English:amo you explain to me?
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Some people have blisters on their skin due to these apostasms, which are present at the top of their heads and in individuals who do not possess humidity; this cause leads us to believe that an apostasma occurred on the head of an elderly woman, making it as hard as a stone, rough, white, such that it could not be punctured. If anyone were to strike against that area, they would suffer from pain.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Mays in the other accidental swellings at the head (cap), it is not this capital, just as with the swellangs that come to the heads of children and they should be treated by cutting off their superficial parts.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	The pause in drilling for those of the lower class, solely to ensure their health remains protected by the measures put in place.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	A proper diet consists of all those foods that are suitable for maintain the required nutrition.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	The linden leaf, which is used to treat tuberculosis in the chest.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	In this region, various types of mushrooms can be found in the field and on grasslands, as well as in other areas. Some species are widespcuous while others occur sparingly or only in certain locations within the county.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	In this case, the text is written in Catalan dialect (from Valencia), which is a Romance language spoken by around four million people primarily in Eastern Spain and on the French island of Balearic Islands. Here'aturas de la colheita e só as que sejam envenenadas com aquelas, e só muitas que são geradas entre eles, e toda escrofula das mesmas é desfeita da sua própria túnica, assim como nas nós do cabelo e na apêstima.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	E there are various types of these scrofulous swellings, some of which contain stones, and others containing fluids, and those that are harmful which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	In that case where you are in good health during the treatment, which is indicated by the color of the discharge being similar to the color of your urine and not at all unpleasant, but detached from the nerves of the penis, veins, or arteries, and it's not pungent; then you should cleanse this area superficially, starting from the top downwards towards the base line within the G-line to B-line (referring to anatomical lines on a diagram), and stretch both lips of the foreskin outward slightly or more depending on necessity as discussed in regard to sores on the head.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	E be more careful not to cut the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	E is the herb that does not require you to apply it directly on your skin, or cause painful irritation, and which enters when necessary without needing to be pierced; if you were to insert a needle or scalpel and forbid yourself from operating, wait for twenty minutes after applying vinegar trissat or other powders that remain in flux of blood, then open the wound and let whatever is resting there be relieved by the fluidity of the abscess, soothe the wound and commence being healed.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	He cut off his ties with her.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Please return to your office once you have completed the task.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	A) Do you have any other causes of small pustules, such as acne or impetigo? This is to determine if the lesions are sole groin infections.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	If the inguinal lymph node is swoln with a glandular tumor, remove that scrofula before it spreads through the body.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	In the Cove of Abantz, it is said that a faithful bird often flies over and brings news of what falls within its sight.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	The correct translation of the given text is: "A prophecy about an ancient Egyptian artifact that you have already submitted in an Egyptian engraving, and regarding it."
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	"Now that the sore has completely healed, you can gently reposition both lips of the wound so that they come together shortly after and there is no excess skin left."
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you notice that there is excessive swelling due to the size of the scrofula, understand how to reduce its intensity and remove it, as well as providing proper care and medication.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	Among the scrofulas containing moisture, there is that which undergoes a superfaturate process at your place of maturation, and then experiences a cessation in water flow as previously mentioned.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Inappropriate behavior may include harassment, bullying, and similar actions; it is important to be aware that such conduct can erode the integrity of our community.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When your pain has been washed away by the sea three times, the hours cure that love within which you are healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	The shepherd of the flock accidentally drove them into the ravine.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	During this season in our country, I have not seen any man perform such deeds.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the transcription of that lecture by those people.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Mays the men have an ailment, let it be cured that through proper extraction of the evil bile, with due care not causing harm to all veins and major organs affected by this illness.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those cases where there are styes or swellings in the mouth or earlob # Similar Problem for U.S. Audience
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	When you want to draw water from the well, try extracting the depth of three circles from the circle diagram, or cut four small sections perpendnent to its width in that which is between two circles for quantity, so that the section is even, not on the edge, and this location is suitable for a cutting, as it is devoid of flesh and the veins of blood are visible.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the weather is fine, cover the hours it takes for dawn to arrive and immediately remove the covering when you hear the canary. Avoid touching any vessels or tools if those causes harm.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	The insertion of the pins occurs immediately after they have been removed; and it signifies about the section of the channel which is located at a certain depth that has been broken through and for the absorption of the vibration.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	The stormy weather persisted for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	As the time approaches for piercing to be done, add two lips from the dog'ebone chain and that alone serves as a stencil.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	A patient must be conscious and able to swallow before receiving any medicine.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Five days after the sermon we have reported, it is not merely that veins from these abscesses have become filled with evilness of illness, but the illness has entered leading to death, and its essence is becoming disjointed; Alcus proceeds to incise the epiglottis so as to breathe upon the wound site through occasional respiration, hoping for salvation from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	The apostle Peter instructs the commander of the ship to lower the sail when a cloud is seen approaching that will consume the evilness of the disease for three days; then the commander should steer towards that area and remain there until healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	The one that you saw yesterday was a servant carrying a cot and her baby in the sleeve of her gown. I appealed to the Curia, and they arrived as soon as possible, just like when someone is dying; they uncovered the injury, which was small blood from the wound, and healing it promptly.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	You do not admit that the wound was deep or grave and that it had caused bleeding, but rather you say that the healing winds were there to heal the injury.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	In the past, C did not attend the meeting unless they spoke out in the vote, and after several days returned to their previous positions regarding the issues.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	In the heat of competition, he has no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	The term "apostema" refers to an abscess or boil, which is a localized collection of pus that occurs when the body's immune system fights off bacterial infection. When it forms on the external part of the gallbladaster (gallbladder), it is known as a "hernia of the gallbladder" or more commonly, an external gallbladder hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This barnyard haemorrhoid is called a grade two hemorrhoid according to the color of the vessel, and it is rare in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	The sentence you've provided is in Catalan and translates to "E is formed by two curves, four or it is natural or accidental" in English. However, the phrase seems a bit unclear as it stands; there may be missing context that would help clarify its meaning. Could you provide more information on what 'E' refers to? Is it a specific word, concept, or symbol being discussed here?
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	"E is not a naturally occurring element."
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The accidental is second to two methods of which the first resembles a bunch of grapes, and the other method resembles an abscess which is made due to artery inflammaturgy, and in this one there's fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	In the court where justice prevails, not using force but in those who are small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you shall examine that limb carefully, and if you find it similar to ours, and not suspended by any veins, then cut through that so as to separate the nodes; and if not, thoroughly inspect its entire nature, and apply care in such a manner where healing can occur.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Cutting from the spice trees.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Deletes nodes so that we can see each species individually and then divide all the spices into their respective sections.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	In Cebuano, "node" and "exitura cum fassa dubitacio" can be translated to "saltadong nga luwag sanghiron" and "dakol ka pasang sa panagdaan", respectively. However, the concept you're referring to doesn't seem to directly translate from Cebuano into English with these terms.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	I declare that cholera is characterized by symptoms such as excessive thirst, violent fever and pain; the process of decaying completes when these symptoms cease, ending with the end of the fever, the pain and the heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	At May's knot there is neither quality nor fever nor pain, and it connects to the one who has control over the Lion'([[León]])'s territory.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	C is determined by the color of its rind and its flavor when it's cut up resembles a cheese; whether mild or strong, they vary depending on two factors - fat content (quar or so) and moisture content, with moisture levels varying as described in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	When you arrive at the office of Node, which is called Introspection, inquire about that matter during meal time, according to its form as mentioned in this chapter appropriately.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	E is an instrument used for examining and probing all types of abscesses or lumps, which you should grab this tool and insert that into the most accessible place where you find the abscess; then, by turning your hands slightly inward, make sure that the instrument has penetrated deep enough.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Follow the size of the abscess and make an incision accordingly; then extend into the surrounding tissue while being mindful of any contents that may be present within it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the current moisture content is removed, regardless of its type, it will result in a shallow surface crack as discussed in other types of fissures.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If there are traces of moisture on the walls, it suggests that the area is prone to dampness.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	In English, the given shape would be described as follows: "The dry land on a map is represented with cross-shaped sections according to this pattern." However, if you provide me with an actual image or detailed description of the shape in question, I could give a more accurate translation.
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Certainnly! Here is the translation of your text from Catalan to English:
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	Mays gets injured in the surgery, it's not possible to extract that part without any remaining damage or complications, and later he tries again, but this time there is only slight improvement without causing any further harm.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	A rose by any other name would smell as sweet.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	In case you encounter any small part of your robe that has been struck by a sharp corrosive dust storm, apply the powder to it and hold in place on those areas which are infected; heal the other wound once it is cured within.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If the node is large, you must wash your hands twice before touching anything and heal that body of water that embodutes it.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	The old Mays vena pulsates in the opposite direction, or does it not? At times your sorrow and fatigue may lead you to seek out the healer for some herbal remedanciol and leeches that lie hidden on a steep slope nearby, which will be done over two days or three. It is then that the fever subsides and peace returns to one's body; then return to separate those things that are foul from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI: The Legislative Process and the Role of Congress in Shaping Law
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	The various forms of equipment necessary for drilling and boring operations include:
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	From those the forms of interference, there are three kinds, that from them grows great, and some lesser, and some smaller.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the French sentence "La forme d'introduction est celle-ci:" is an introductatur. In other words, it translates to "The introduction format is this one." in English. This sentence could be used when presenting a specific way or method for beginning something, such as writing an essay, giving a speech, or starting a formal letter.
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of "intromés" in Catalan (not "migier") is this one:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The small intestine is the part of the gastrointestiinal tract that connects the stomach to the large intestine. Its primary function is the digestion and absorption of nutrients from food. It's a long, coiled tube divided into three sections: the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum.
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Iron deficiency, allergies, and skin conditions such as eczema can compromise the barrier function of the skin, causing increased susceptebleness to infections.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	Here are the forms of the experiences, and they are called Bereda (Bereda is a fictional name). One of them has been named Bereda.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	Essentially three spices are used, of which the main one is quite significant and two others less so.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The Great Experience of Light (English) - This phrase could be used to describe a significant or transformative event related to enlightenment, understanding, or the pursuit of knowledge. It may also refer to an art exhibition that showcases works centered around light as its primary theme, such as sculptures and installations exploring the interplay between light, space, and perception.
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The shape of a mixture, the form of light.
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of pocent experience, the essence of light:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	These are for those wounds, boils and abscesses as well as other causes such as those stemming from the bones or others.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	So fine are the redones again, with large and grand needles which have been made of real silver, or gold, or copper; and the finest ones are those made from real citrus.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	E is fascinated by black plum experiences, which he agrees are bountiful in the depths of such thoughts, that they are reflected on his lightness, and those reflections upon them.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	The doctor should prescribe three species of medications, including large doses of corticosteroids and other immunosuppressants, according to the extent of inflammaturage in the intestine.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the great lead experience:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of mixed mercury: liquid at room temperature, shiny silver-white color.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Title (in Catalan): El Petit Experiment d'El Plomo
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the moons are like mountains of spices, some of which are simple ones with only a curve, and others consist of three parts: large, small and intermediate-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	Dear of our Lord's chosen ones, and three kinds of spices.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	Elements with one or two curves and those of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"E has three curves and belongs to three kinds." (Italian)
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Adequate access to water is essential in their location.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Simple large form: Cube
Forma de unci simple migier:	Simple uniform mixture: This term refers to a combination of two or more substances that are evenly distributed throughout, resulting in a homogeneous composition. In other words, all components of the mixture appear identical no matter where you take a sample from within it. Examples include salt dissolved in water or air (a mix of various gases).
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Simple past tense and present continuous form of 'pake', a hypothetamoñtic verb (imaginary):
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a gold coin: circular. (La forma de una moneda de oro es generalabarcada).
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of one heart, shape of two love. (This is a literal translation; the phrase might not make sense in either language without further context.)
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Un poco (un little) o muchas veces (many times), la forma de una y otra parte.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large bowl with two curves.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape with two curvatures, or in English: a shape that has two curves. This could refer to various geometric forms like an ellipse, a bowtie shape (butterfly curve), or even certain types of graphs and functions. For example, the letter 'S' or the numeral '8'.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	A shape with few bends and only two curves. In Spanish, this would be "Una forma con pocos giros y solo dos curvas." The term "unci" is not standard in either language; it may have been a typo or misunderstanding from the source text. If you meant to refer to an oval shape (which has two curves), then we can translate that as "una figura en forma de óvalo" or simply "una elipse."
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a large bend with three curves.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a semi-circle having three curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	A figure with three curves can take the form of a sinuous line or wave-like shape. This could be represented as a serpentine curve, which undulates smoothly and continuously while maintaincuando having three distinct bends or turns in its path. Another example might be an ornamental S-shaped design used in architecture or artwork that exhibits three noticeable curves within the overall pattern.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the different types of scalpels used to incise and excise nodules as well as abscesses; there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	"Large-scale blade design" (Español: Diseño en forma de escama grande) - Esta expresión se refiere a un tipo de diseño para elementos que tienen una estructura similar a la hoja de una serpiente o la cola de una ballena, y se utiliza comúncuentemente en contextos técnicos como ingeniería mecánica, aerodinámica u otras disciplinas relacionadas.
Forma del scapel migier:	Shape of the shoulder blade (Scapula): The shape of the scapula is triangular with a slightly rounded top, known as the spine. It also has three prominent corners or processes: the superior angle at the base of the triangle; the inferior angle at its lower tip; and the lateral aspect where you can find two distinct features - the acromion process (a flat projection) and the coracoid process (a hook-like structure). This bone serves as a crucial attachment point for several muscles that help in shoulder movement.
Forma de scapel pauc:	The phrase "Forma de escapulis pauc" appears to be a mix of Spanish and Latin. Translating this into English would result in the following phrase:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extramittent glands which are acute and the others that are not-acute, but rather swolculed by the extraction of lymph nodes in order to prevent ignorance of vein or nerve injury, and for those it cures the ailment and restores tranquility. A small amount is advised to be extracted as this prevents further extraction complications.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the different types of stews, made from three main ingredients: meat (gran), vegetables (migier) and spices (pauc), just like in recipes.
La forma de magda gran:	Title: The Form of Magda Grunewald
Forma de magda migier:	Magda Migier was a renowned Polish-Belgian artist, primarily known for her unique style of creating encaustic paintings. Born in Warsaw on March 28, 1eb399c7ce546b7d90e7bcbdfc06ee8f, she moved to Belgium at a young age and later became a naturalized citizen there.
Forma de magda pauc:	Magda Paucksch's art often reflects a deep connection to her Polish roots, while also embracing global influences. Her work is characterebly multidimensional, with an emphasis on texture and the interplay of light and shadow. She skillfully incorporates elements of nature into her pieces, which creates a harmonious dialogue between the organic world and human expression.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	The magical creatures of lore, who bear the resemblance of a fairy with which I must not indulge in alcohol.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	B is in the left lateral lobe, hidden beneath the cerebellum and along those tracts inside and outside, as you wish to see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of Spatimae, which I have mentioned among the types of wounds caused by abscesses and not noticed in the sick, come in three degrees: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	Estos son los equivalentes en inglés para ciertas palabras o frases en español. Aquí tienamo algunos ejemplos comunes y sus correspondencias:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The ways of veins where the blood flow is divided from the vessel and of three kinds: large, medium, and small; types are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Citrus fruits are round in shape and have a subtle flavor.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	These types of suction cups should have large, medium and small sizes, in order to accommodate for the varying degrees of blood flow at different speeinss, as well as during times when they are not required immediately.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	No remove those fatty tissues from the whole body of the animal and only use them in locations that are considered "fleshy", such as in the loins of rabbits and goats, and on the bellies, breasts, abdomens, and similar fleshy areas to their respective lambs.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some veins are divided from other similar small channels resembling tributaries according to this pattern; by which the sap is separated when it flows through phlebotomy or venipuncture or arterial puncture.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Un par de ejemplos de veguades que tienen una figura redonda sigui esta forma podrien ser:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Treatment of the male breasts, which are composed primarily of female tissue.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some people believe that the breasts of sleeping men become swoln, and also the nipples are puffed up, while women's breasts are assembled together and remain erect during sleep.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the manner of this procedure, take water and rub it over those lips that are afflicted by a moon-related condition between lines B and G. Remove all inflammamoent completely, apply an appropriate red medicament as needed, then gently fasten the corners of your mouth with cosmetic adhesive to heal any internal wounds within.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	The mamillary glands descend in the folds of skin and are softened by their magnitude so much as to become divided into two lobes, each resembling a figure of the moon; such that one is contained within the other, whereby the longer line contains the shorter according to this form of the lines BG. Then remove the cord which is between the lips of the pouch and its thickness, and apply what has been prescribed for suture and powders as necessary during healing so it may be cured.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not complete the order for water to cleanse from illness and blood loss, within hours it is necessary to apply a poultice of crushed leaves submerged in an antiseptic solution and place that compress on the area where the acid corrodes the skin which has turned red due to inflammation; also around the healed part.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	The extraction of pus from the abscesses that formed afterwards.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	The ancient alchemist recounted the tale of rare and exotic spices that came from the lands afar - saffron, cinnamon, cardamom, each with a secret power to heal scrofula, dysentery, among other maladies.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	From those that have humidity; and those that contain humidity must be removed at the lunar section from line G to line B. And when all water is evacuated, the bite becomes very old and it enters into another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	The corresponding text in standard Romanian is: "Ea propune cu toții să se ocupăm despre și ce este de interes pentru aici și care ar putea fi un producție ușor-accesibilă la acv, în modul în care ea s-ar putea să fie sanată."
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	The treatment of the abscesses on the spices in the nodes and of the scrofula involves separating them as we have discussed in the section about treating scrofula, using similar methods.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the fire is spreading in areas like tinder, it may be managed with water or foam depending on the situation and location where it has been reported. Firefignters will respond accordingly using appropriate methods to control and extinguish the flames while ensuring safety for all involved parties.
Capitol .xlix.	Act xlix of "Capitol" is a pivotal chapter that builds upon the storyline, character development and themes introduced earlier in the narrative. The title may vary depending on the specific book or context in which it appears. However, here's an example analysis for Act XLIX from William Shakespeare'지 "Romeo and Juliet":
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Section of thrombosis that occurred due to atheroscleroserts or by vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the vein above it is constricted, blood pools become infected with inflammamoins and emboli which may occur in the artery or vein; hence when an embolism occurs in an artery, it can be extensive within the body; also, if you push on the affected area, a whistling sound is heard from its location.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	That which is through the vein belongs to him who shows its mark.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Section on this boil is incorrect, and mostly in those who have diabetes, as well as angina, and the collarbone, and other locations on the body; it's a severe condition that requires prompt care to avoid complications or worsening of symptptions. For cases involving lymeboxes or near the head, caution is advised to prevent further issues.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	In the event of an injury on that part where the archer's bowstring is located, one should cut off the long section of the string and place it over the wound, then tightly bind both ends so that only a small portion of skin remains exposed. This will help allevee pain and inflammation.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	In the work of the artisan, one needle pierces into another lengthwise, and strengthens the arch by doubling its support in two places - a feature I have observed in the extraction of dual arches which exist within cathedr groins.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	A prop of oil poulet le laquet qui est entre deux lignes à placer dans une cuve d'eau chaude afin que tout le sang soit dissous et les caillots soient éliminés.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	A physician shall prescribe suitable treatment for the wound, ensuring it is cleaned and protected within an appropriate time frame to prevent infection; he/she should also recommend suitable ointments to be applied within a timeframe that will ensure proper healing.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	In case of thrombophlebitis in a vein section, you should have your foot elevated above heart level as much as possible and insert the needle (previously used on the leg) into that area; then gently push it through until it enters the double-layered tissue around the clot, securing its position according to the instructions I gave you in the grapefruit section of this manual.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Mays fears that they might remove the thread; therefore, she intervenes with a sharp needle to extract all the abscess pus, and strengthens her own nerves in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	In the case of a severe ear blockage within your inner ear that prevents you from hearing well and causes discomfort due to excessive fluid buildup, it is adviswarted to wait for self-resolution before seeking medical attention.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	A healing practice involves the use of fine powders that have been immersed in warm water and oil, as well as applications made with creams or ointments that will promote recovery.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capsule L of the aponeurosis which causes torticollis (a condition where the neck is twisted to one side) due to nerve injury.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Aseptic necrosamo occurs in arteries and veins, as well as seemingly aseptical necrosamos in the nerves when caused by trauma or overuse.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	C is to be sown in the fields of Lu during the months of May or June, or any location where the joints are strong and healthy.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	A is a severe abscess, and it appears in the same shade as the other organs, located deep within its layers and when it becomes extremely painful, exhibiting signs of illness like confusion or daze.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	In the original sentence there seems to be an attempt at using Catalan language with some errors and inconsistencies in terminology related to HTML (e.g., "preon" instead of "preambulo", which is incorrect). The corrected version, assuming the intent was to discuss the positioning of a CSS class within HTML code for web development, could be:
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	The water from those that are at the junctions should not be drawn if it is contaminated, as it could easily become harmful to health.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	The one that is in the hair or on the forehead falls out easily.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the infection is slight, after a few hours it will resolve on its own and may cause only redness or peeling of that area.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the wound is large and deep, let him/her cleanse it with wine and oil, and apply bandages to that area; then wrap it tightly with strips of cloth, and care for the patient until they are healed.
Capitol .li.	Capital.LI is the country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Liechtenstein, a small European principality between Austria and Switzerland. It was introduced on March 10th, 2amo78 and has been managed by LISA – The Liechtenstein Internet Service Agency ever since.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	A piece of abscess that causes lip sores and abdominal pain.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	In some places there are also alchemical manuscripts preserved in the vaults of their chests and on other parts of the same corpse; those which are called fungi by similitude to these mushrooms, whose essence is subtle and its head is large; and already the lips of those are closed, and it is from those that are small, and it is from those that are magnificently transformed.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	Once upon a time there were two very tiny white blobs in someone's stomach that looked like fungi and had no noticeable difference between them.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	Their lips were turned inward and split apart, with moisture constantly flowing from that place all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	You should carefully delve into those and trace back to the one in page eighteen's queue. On the other side, there was one too.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	The operation in the event of wounds that are foul and have a white, mouldy appearance with subtle redness should be considered for hours. If such is the case, you shall place the spatula-like instrument under your tongue; then present yourself to the fire and let warmth from it expel some blood due to this wound's condition. And if gas escapes, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	In case of a sudden painful and fearsome illness, beware not to succumb to frenzy or madness. Instead, trust in the recent medical advanc
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	A approach adjusts within the bounds of the iron rake; therefore, do not stop strengthening the iron will amidst difficulties, until it splits and falls apart on its own due to your efforts.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	May seems to be greatly confused and lost in thought, and often this causes fear and worry for him, especially when he is alone with his thoughts.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It's possible that you might separate the bulk of it, and quickly apply those necessary to prevent its return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	A proper response within that which has been brought about by the storm.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Look at yourself and do not assume to cut the thread which is of black color; it has little feeling about it, mainly regarding the fact that this one could be cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	Yes, I remember the time we went to Aceh during our vacation. It was such an amazing experience with its beautiful beaches and rich cultural heritage! The memories of those moments will always stay close to my heart. How about you? Do you have any fond memories from that trip?
Capitol .lii.	II. The Capital
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	The term "curatio de eminencia del umbilicus" translates to "eminent care of the navel" in English. However, it seems like this phrase is not standard medical terminology or a commonly used expression in either language. It could potentially refer to specialized treatment for an issue related to the navel (umbilicus), but without more context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation or explanation.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	"Eminence of the umbilical cord is occluded for various reasons; or due to fissures in the navel, which are located on the abdomen and resemble threads according to their appearance similar to other ruptures; or because of a blood clot that flows from veins or arteries depending on its position as described earlier, or due to coarctation causing constriction."
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	"If it is due to a diaper rash and for discharge of the fabric, then the color of the pimple resembles the color of the core; it's yellowish with pain, and appears in various situations."
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If the exit is through that of water which we have mentioned earlier, there occurs a much more intense change, and as you press it with your words, it becomes hidden; and strongly returns to its own self, being glorified in the beginning of washing and vehement work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	When it's rainy, the hours are lion and not hidden when you touch your mother, neither forced nor believed. (This translation doesn't make much sense in English as Catalan slang is being used here; "lahores" could be a local term for hours or time, but without context, it's difficult to translate accurately.)
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is by chance, these hours carry the name of an apostrophe fading into darkness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	When maysii's skin is itchy and scratched, the rash appears to be quite severe, large and hard, and seems to spread according to a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it's windy outside, the hours will belong to him who is like a lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The operation in question is one that takes into account the prominence of the umbilicus if it involves arterial bleeding, or veins, or ventricularity; such hours should be prohibited from performing surgery on this area as there is fear and concern just like described in chapter regarding abscesses involving arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	In the case of an umbilical hernia, the protrusion occurs through the fascia (peritoneum) rather than the skin; it's important to monitor its size and any symptoms such as pain or discomfort that may occur. If there are concerns about infection risk or if conservative treatment is not effective, surgical intervention may be necessary. This involves making a careful incision over the hernia site, separating tissues gently (including fat), and reinforcing the weakened area with sutures or mesh to prevent recurrence of the hernia.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	In case of an appendicitis extending over the abdomam and affecting you, it's essential to seek medical attention immediately; if untreated or not monitored through the pain, hours later bring this issue to someone's attention and urge them to direct the person suffering towards professional help.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	When the weaver completes his work, he takes a moment to admire it; then proceeds to remove any excess threads.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	If Mays is against your archery or vein, the hours surround that spot and return to your operation; then take two needles and insert them into those strong folds, and thread the needles through the circuit you have made around the abscess in a cross pattern. Then tighten the abscess by pulling on the threads attached to it at four points.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, remove the needles and lay the linen over that which is spread out with sore flesh; or pierce it when subtle, and let it sweat in a place where there are ointments present for it to become healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the navel hernia is not of flesh but rather moisture or pus, you must cover it with a bandage as described above and ensure that you keep it dry; to do so, apply an ointment that cleanses and solidifies this area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter III - The Capital City
De curacio de cranc.	The Cure of Cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	In their division, the specialty of treating cramps and in what way it facilitatur the healing with medicine, and that they are reluctant to use iron for fear of ulceration; and they have mentioned cramp occurring as a major concern during the treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancient texts that mention certain kinds of cancers are found in locations where it is possible to eradicate them, just like the cancer which occurs in breasts or abdomen and seems to be related to those body parts meant for expelling everything, especially when they begin small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	The old tree is tall and brown; there are not even its branches to shelter you from this heat, as we cannot escape it nor have seen any others like it or reached such heights.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	In the place where this operation is performed as you have said, it should be preceded and followed by clearing out some bad influences and purging of black plague occurrences, and moreover, if proven true, a strict sanitation regime must be imposed.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Article 47 - The owner shall provide the building and equipment needed for the performance of the contract, as well as enscuiting any premises in which work is to be carried out; furthermore, the owner guarantees that no disturbance caused by third parties will interfere with fulfilling his obligations under this agreement.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Elassa runs the wound, and in haste she applies pressure to it; then cleansse thoroughly all around with soap and water, using any available clean object or tool at hand.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you have a large wound or deep cut with bleeding, apply heat to the area within which the flow of blood has stopped, and then carefully treat it using another method once it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	The capital of the Czech Republic is Prague, which in Czech is called "Praha".
De curacio de ydropici.	The cure of hydropathy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	In the division, we have recited the properties of water's ingredients and the names of each component, as well as their uses in various remedies.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	From that which is cured with iron ore, it is only the species of Aletis alone; and it is not similar to the species of Timpanistrata nor to the species of Ypossarca, for when this one is poisonous.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	Evan the physician should not prescribe this type of ear drops if you are already taking medications and do not mix your medicine without considering it; if relief from the ailment has been achieved or if there is another illness with similar symptoms, such as in your ears or abdomen, etc., thus as if they were on fire. Be careful not to medicate with iron, for fear of overdose.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you are struck with an excessive illness and it is not another disease but fever alone, neither in child nor old person, the method of your treatment should be to elevate the sickness among others, and administer extreme care as follows. Firstly, ensure proper hydr
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	The text provided appears to be an inaccurate translation from Italian into a language that resembles Spanish but doesn't follow the proper grammar and syntax rules of either language. Therefore, it's impossible to provide a direct accurate translation without further clarification on what was meant by this original text. However, based on my best understanding, here is an attempt at translating:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Considering whether it generates waste from the buds, I need to find your section among the trees near the bellybutton for the quantity of three drops left in the remaining parts on the right side below the bench.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	If the cause of hydrocephalus is due to a head injury, your left section will be operated on for three days.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	The generation of light is for the melting, therefore your section shall be in the right place.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	The translation from Galician to English is as follows: "Let your section be over the side on which one wishes to discuss the fault so that no excesses occur at this location."
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	In the instrument of total harmony, an intervention occurs within that section and raises your own tension between the chord and its spine, and you exhume it; and if the quantity is of one nail or more, then do so accordingly.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	A prop for the hole drilled within that which arrives at the spot you want, and is near water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Aquí tienes un ejemplo de una instrucción similar en español utilizando un formato especícuito, posiblemente para redacción o composición creativa. Este podría ser el contenido:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	"The exquisite silver canula is subtly crafted from fine sterling or pewter or latten. On the lower part of it, a small stud is set and on its sides are three studs in total - two on one side and one on the other side. The tip of this elegant piece has been shaped delicately like a quill pen."
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	E is the supreme guardian of its streamlet, an armillary sphere; whenever this instrument approaches water, after some hours it will cause an outpouring of that specific amount of water, so if you drain more than necessary at any given time, there may be severe consequences for your spirit animal or come very close to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Mayes extracts from that source according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what it implies in your medical conditions regarding the virtue of the pulse and the goodness of it.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	C takes the instrument and fills it with water, which is then slightly retained by the cord that wraps around the upper part of which he relates to you how to pierce according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	The water intake of the other person is sometimes more tolerant in cold weather, and it includes a small quantity of spring water, with an adequate amount for several days' storage, but be careful not to overflow the water container without proper handling.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear illness and drink a lot of water, bury that person in sandy soil, add some salt to the bath, and expose them to sunlight for long periods; also use desiccant medicines until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	In the stomach, blood vessels are cauterized, and the gastric fluid is drained to remove excess water as described in the previous section.
Capitol .lv.	Capital.tv is a Romanian television channel that focuscued on politics and public affairs, owned by the Pro TV Group. The network provided in-depth coverage of national and international political events, debates, interviews with politicians and experts, as well as documentaries exploring different aspects of governmental workings, policies, and impacts.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Children with sickle cell disease may experience certain changes in the appearance and odor of their urine, but these are not indicative of a urinary tract perforation.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some of the children are born from the womb of their mother, and the top part of the placenta is not torn or pierced.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Cócegos, cócegues! Aquel qui és nato amb un coratge d'audacia i una creativitat sutil serà cap de fer maravellós els seus projectes. Al veure l'obertura de oportunitats tant próximas, cal seguir aquesta forma per llegir en català:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	A sharp turn in the path of that silver and lead, you traverse for three days or nearly so.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	E cut off his foreskin and urinate here; then he returned that. (Joshua 5:14)
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you don't tighten the plug, it may be possible that the urine which falls on the floor doesn't seep through this hole.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	The juice of the plant mentioned above, which is used to treat a painful gout in the knee joint (clavicule plumosa), can be applied with heat for several days until improvement is observed.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	The clogged tubules in which the urine does not flow properly are called urethral strictures; this condition is caused by those for whom the penis is born with an obstruction that prevents them from urinating at the external openings, although they raise their member towards these outlets. This is not a generational issue because it's due to the sperm being unable to reach the female following normal ejaculation and it causes a sexually transmitted infection (STI).
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	In this ritual for curing ailments that are affecting the person's head, and to pull out its evil essence, take the left hand of your right arm with great vigor and sharply thrust the tip of the cap at the end of the feathers of the raven, as if you were dipping it in ink, so that no part is spared. In this way, the head resembles the beak's cap and its hair falls according to where the blow lands.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	In your circulatory system operation, there are many accidents that occur as blood flows through; pause at the one spot where it separates the blood, and treat the resulting wound until healed.
Capitol .lvi.	In the context of legislative bodies and government buildings, "capitol" is commonly used as a term to refer to such structures in various countries. For instance, the United States has three capitols - those situated in Washington D.C., Baton Rouge (Louisiana), and Tallahassee (Florida). Each serves as the seat of government for their respective state legislatures.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Due to the infection, there is swelling and redness on the foreskin at the head of the glans, along with decay, discoloration, and stickiness of the foreskin at the tip of the glans.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This mage has undergone multiple accidents in his career and is known for his prominent contributions to alchemy.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	There are two eggs, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Do not be deceived, for the Lord is near; He will take you by the hand and lift you up out of all your troubles—and place you on His shoulders so that all can see Him; and then He will carry you to a pool in Egypt where a healing balm has been prepared, and this ointment within it makes anyone who uses it whole.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If Albater is indeed malicious and of legal age, he should be restrained with caution in terms of his intentions and actions.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	In the case where part of the foreskin is not circumcised and one portion of the adhesion is within the foreskin while another portion lies outside, it should be noted that when you remove the adhesion during its initial detachment before it becomes consolidated; then proceed to treat the remaining portions externally. However, caution must be exercised as it's not guaranteed that no tearing will occur if this external part is treated in conjunction with the internal foreskin portion.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	In the olden days, there lived a man who possessed three sons with unique personalities and traits; two were good-hearted while one was wicked and mischievamous. The father, in an attempt to teach his children valuable life lessons about kindness, compasseion, honesty, and integrity, decided to give each son a golden coin as a test of their character.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	A proper care is essential for the other health condition to remain in good shape.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	May's blood flow is affected by the phases of the moon; thus, she administerer treatment in accordance with this pattern as follows:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The correct translation is: "A quart of cautionary juice consists of two ingredients; it's the flow of sanctity and the wave when it becomes corrupted." This sentence appears to be talking about an abstract concept or a symbolic representation, possibly related to spiritual or religious themes.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the tip of the penis is corroded and destroyed in an hour, cover it with a lead tube through which bad urine flows out.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In cases where the foreskin is adhered to the head of the penis (and this attachment does not occur in both, and circumcision is not required on either; and when an attachment occurs due to phimosis or inflammation), it must be separated by a blunt dissection after complete dissolution of the scarring and detachment of the entire glans head.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	It is difficult to discern those exquisitely small areas of the head and genitalia which you might mention have a certain cause in relation to the scrotum or foreskin, therefore the prepuce, being so subtle, may be easily perforated due to its delicacy.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	A prop separates between the foreskin and the head of the penis by approximately seven millimeters, which is moistened in warm water so that it does not stick to another layer.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	A proper care is provided within the setting that has been established and solidified.
Capitol .lvii.	Title: Capitol, Volume LVII
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	The miraculous healing of children and the care for water that affects those undergoing circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not the solution to continuity nor to other diseases: however, in our operation and will, and with that being specifically for children, it is necessary that we assign resources to more effective measures and simpler ways of promoting health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision among some of them who were free, because they didn't use it in their laws and only acquired this habit through experience. This is why most artisans and barbers use a blade for circumcision and cleansing; they apply lime with a knife and anhydrnous oils.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	These methods are all effective ways to circumcise without causing more harm than good; they include the use of scissors, scalpel, a specially designed clamp (similar to a ring in its ability to cause bleeding and discomfort), and even an elastic band that pulls the foreskin upwards over the glans, as well as two layers of skin on the shaft. The local numbing cream is applied below these areas to provide pain relief during the procedure.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	The E am mundificacio (E device) which is made for alphabets and digitalized, used by scribes, does not guarantee protection against the injury of the penile extremity, as it can also be inserted into the urethra.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the operating room, avoid using any metal or corrupting your procedure.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child's DNA is naturally brief and many variations occur in such a manner that there is no need for modification, which I have also seen.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The world's wide creation that has been made by a force and grief is faithful, the goodness, experience revealed to me, for the forces are of proportional injustice, so that the sharpness which is above is as much like the sharpness which is below; therefore when you press your hand, so proportioned two sharpenings, and then cut according to a comparison at one time; and it's made compression of the faithful form containing the code of the rod of entire division, with which there can be no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The manner of the first operation is that you should primarily aim to understand the child rather than if it's one who says little, but you show him through actions and gestures so much that by tomorrow he comprehends.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	In my opinion, the correct translation for this sentence should be: "It is my belief that it would bring joy in all areas where possible from what you have gained through your intelligence."
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	A) Place the baby between your breasts in a way that feels comfortable to you and is not too high; and hide the pins on your breast or below your belt so that the child does not see them, nor any other of the utensils.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Go to the kitchen and pour lu into the basin, then breathe air through the nozzle while pulling the plug out, so that water flows in. Use this water to rinse your ear gently.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Cut the length of the signature seal in half, and then slightly reduce the second piece you obtained from that first cut, and attach it to the left side of your current seal layout above the last emblem, ensuring a smooth transition between both symbols.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of the text from Occitan to English:
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	El terme "formes" podem significar moltes coses, però en el contexto del llaç original que has proporcionat (formas de fòrces moldavies) semblan refereix-nos a les formes o tipus d'armes/equipaments que es pot trobar abans i després.
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some chopsticks are non-tapered and others are taperer, with the former not having a pointed tip, and their length is equal to that of two matchsticks similarly shaped.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	In the process of globalization, she makes a serious mistake by completely abandoning her inherent identity or losing touch with her roots.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	I will now draw that of my hour in front of the inscription and make it equal to the one before.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you cannot hold it with your pinkie, hours later it will become rusty and embedded there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	Mays's wound has been inflamed for three days; she should see it shortly to ensure that the abscess is not spreading and to help remove any scabs or crusts formed on it, as well as cleanse the area when ready.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Look at the top of the pole; that's where we won't be able to climb up.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Thus, take care of that water which the cloud condenses from the dust particles that we have discussed in the treatise on dust particles.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	The sentence in Romansh means: "If the tail is cut too short and follows unusual paths, it will never return." In English, this can be translated as: "When you cut off more than necessary, and take an unconventamoan path, there's no way back."
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	The wine that we have mentioned, made from water within it, is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	In English, we would refer to the same musical piece as Opus 125 or Symphony No. 9 in D minor, also known as "From the New World," composed by Antonín Dvořák in 1amo. The term "Capitol .lviii" does not have any direct connection with this symphony and seems to be an unrelated reference.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Urinary retention catheterization procedure.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladameter is due to obstruction by a stone, a prostate gland, or a tumor, and similarities can be seen with those mentioned earlier about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not passed and it becomes like a stone within the bladcu's neck, it may cause pain in its surrounding nerves.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	A prop compses liez les pes d'aquel sus el seu dos et estendes el seu ventre dintr-o parti plus pus des de l'alta del se, i malaltia strenjău lipsa pe al su tant cum ar trebui. (Romanian)
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	The hours force the bladebag to expel the stone away, so that the urine is released completely.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	If water has not been dissolved in it and we have said vehemently about the illness, then let us perform an extraction of a certain instrument called a syringe; this is its form: be made of silver and subtle lion's mane, just like a penis-shaped reed with great length according to subtlety of rays, in similarity of palm and middle finger.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of urine collection for this is that you take the sheep bladder folded and tied on its hind leg or neck with proper knotting; then, insert the extensions of the bladader into the empty part of the funnel, and cut as necessary any excessive lamb's wool. Then introduce it into the tube gently but firmly and direct the funnel edge to the container.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	In the basket lay a sumptuous feast: bread of wheat and barley, ripe fruits and freshly baked cheese, a goblet filled with red wine, grapes still on their vine, oil from olive groves, and crystal-clear water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	The spermatic cord wraps around the testicle in order to facilitate its entrance into the seminal vesicle; and it then doubles up on itself from the beginning of the scrotum; and it further wraps inside that area; and it pushes towards the bladnack, and this tangle should reach the desired point without any errors, not following this order randomly but rather in a twisted manner.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	The sheep's urine gradually stains the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Apply extraz to that area and make sure the urine flow is normal, using your fingers; do not squeeze too hard water and use your fingers within the time when the blad^bladder has been evacuated, relieving any discomfort in the atrophic region.
Capitol .lix.	Capital.lxi
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Concerning the classification of clamps and similar instruments which are compatible with a certain type of water, these include various types such as...
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	In cases of bladder ulceration or abscess, suppuration, or congestion in that area, or if you want to drain fluids and medicines into it, a catheter is used. This procedure can be performed with an instrument called "cystoscope" which helps the doctor see inside the bladwool.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	On the other hand, in her left ear she is deaf and it'n closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place, there are three crossroads: two from the first side, just as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the moment of impact, in the place where it is contained, along with its second quantity that fills up what contains it, within which any cause is drawn from humidities being pulled away, and when expelled, as well as the water being propelled far, according to how clamped naphtha behaves during sea battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	In order to dry out moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of alum powder into the moisture, and then pull up on that water which is pushed towards the edges, because the moisture gets pulled into the inner cavity of the alum.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Aproach the scrotum with warm water as mentioned in the previous instruction; and push forward the moisture that draws forth from the heat, for this moisture then leads to the bladder very quickly, and causes ailment therein.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The subtle form in which the bladder is cystoplasted (crestotomy) and it's that shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	In this example of the Occitan language (also known as Provençal), it is an old-fashioned verse from medieval literature in southern France, written by poet Arnaut Daniel around the year 1200. Here's a modern translation into English:
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Apply heat to the area of motion and pause when you reach the moisture that you want to dry out in the affected area; then apply it between two strong double adhesive tapes, and warm up that moisture over low heat.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	A foreign object has entered the extremity of the claw.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	The proper treatment of bladder infections involves relieving the urinary tract and reducing inflammamoent within the time period before which this infection has reached the bladeroon.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If the bladder is not present when you first arrive, wait a moment and then begin with that circle; pierce it through its entire roundness; and insert your finger gently into those folds as they revolve around; add the circle so that it's attached in the same way. Then pause at the water level where you want to maintain humidity, algae, or waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	To cure the issue with that instrument and play it as well as you have played the bladder, express yourself through your mind so that moisture reaches the bladastery.
Capitol .lx.	The United States Capitol, located in Washington D.cu Cittă de Stat ("Washington DC"), is the home of the United States Congress and the seat of the legislative branch of the U.S. government. Constructed between 1850-1863, it stands as a symbol of American democracy and hosts important political events in the country's history. The Capitol building has undergone several renovations over time to accommodate the growing needs of Congress and is an iconic landmark situated on Capitol Hill.
De extraccio de peyra.	Stone extraction.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have discussed the division of stone species in medicine and the difference between stones formed in kidneys and stones formed in the bladder, as well as their characteristics.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	They have mentioned the stone on which my cataract operation will take place and the section I'll be in.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone originating in the bladder is that which is lodged in the blastocoel.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	He's the one who always presents and summarizes that exhibit.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	The stone formed in the blad cups mainly resembles an infant; and from its symbols it is known that the urine expelled from the bladder appears like water in subtlety, and arises upon this sand; moreover the evil brings harm to the veins, and tiny grains seem to gather around those places; and with that liquid, a lot of warmth is felt near there.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	The laughter is the healing of children up to that age when they have reached fourteen years old; and it is difficult cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	The young people have moved towards that place where they used to be.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	In English, this reads as follows: "The stone is larger than the cure, and the coloring is quite light; And if it's small, it contrasts with that one."
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Come we arrive at the church of that place, let us join the communion which removes all evil and cures the ailment you speak about; for that crack sometimes prevents the flowing effect of the stone's power during the exorcism.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	The rock falls from the mountaintop or occasionally tumbles down, causing great annoyance to those who reside nearby.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	A proposition of such a cere between the two options, and that the bladder is entirely emptied by emptying both parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	I am searching for that one, and only that one window over there.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the stone in space, soon you will long for a piece of home.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If you have not already removed your ring, at this time put on the ring with your left hand index finger; if illness is a child, or put it on as a ring for someone who has reached adulthamoodyhood and place that person's head under their armpit.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Prayer of the stone, within which you lie buried, I speak to thee now.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	At first, the small amount enters into the bladebladder gradually.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Condition Premises and Terms of This Agreebetween You and Me:
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	E instructs the minister to press the vesica on his mother; and he commands another minister that at his mother'e's right hand extend the fingers towards the parts below, while from his other hand a third minister takes hold of the string which is above the fingers, in the place where the sectioning is being done.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	A propinquity is the state of being close to someone or something, often implying intimanguish. In geometry, it refers to the condition where two figures share some common points or sides without completely overlapping each other. For example, when a square and a triangle are placed next to one another in such a way that they touch at some of their vertices but not all, they can be said to have proximity.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	In the left creek bed, there is a large stone. Cut two logs of equal length and cross them above this stone in an X shape to form a simple bridge structure. The intersection should be as wide as possible but not exceeding the dimensions of the stone for stability reasons. The logs must be secured properly to ensure safety.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	From the stone there is a certain crack through which water enters, making it difficult for it to stay dry.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	The water of that clear lake appears like glass and is round; it reflects lightlessly the likeness of a lion, making its image true and transparent.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	If it's that piece which has angles and margins, adjust it in the crack.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If it is not as you have described, the hours must be upon that object or you are gripping too firmly on that object, the extremity of which is so much like a lemon and you do not let go from it; or that you insert a similar instrument with curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you can't get over that one, try to temporarily distance yourself from it, and if you experience a surge of emotion, gently detach from the situation by foccuing on something else or using techniques like deep breathing or mindfulness. Also, consider writing down your feelings in a journal or talking with someone about them as a way to process what you're going through.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	The stone is still one, at mealtime you will push it to the urinary bladastery's mouth and press down upon it; then gently push a bit of water with it; and seemingly check if they are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is large, hours of ignorance can cause two possible worsening factors: either it grows or it weakens due to continuous drainage of urine, because an unstable location is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May's aunt is suffering from severe headaches and has difficulty concentrating. She seeks an alternative treatment to relieve her symptoms without resorting to prescription medication or invasive procedures like surgery. In this situation, she could consider trying relaxation techniques such as meditation, yoga, and deep-breathing exercises which can help allewartension and improve focus. Additionally, acupuncture is another alternative therapy that may provide relief for her symptoms by stimulating specific points on the body to promote healing and pain relief.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Once you have completed your work, prepare the poultice with equal parts of aloe vera and dragon'nose balm, then apply it to the affected area.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	The fish is grilled with oil and lemon or roasted and salted water, just to enhance its flavor and ensure it's free of parasites.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	A prophecy foretold the misfortune would fall upon her soul, and by not delaying she escaped it on the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	When the skin has been scratched or damaged and water or oil is applied, apply either transparent gel, healing cream, or both to promote healthy healing.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Mays suffers from acute appendicitis, inflammatur and corrosive, and it appears as if his blood is frozen in the bladder; at that time, hemorrhage (and this is known by the discharge of blood in urine), therefore insert your instrument into the plaque to extract such blood, which causes the Roman ulcer to cause necrosis of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	The correct approach is the use of salt water and freshwater, as well as in opposition to all other remedeinse, the liquid that suits your curative process within which you are healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	A nurse should carefully monitor the patient throughout the entire treatment process, administering and adjusting prescribed medications as needed at the location specified.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the middle of the urinary tract, and it has been removed with urine flow, then at that time cure the person who complains of water (urination) before reaching a secondary location; for many have been accused of this malady due to this treatment. Now you must take an iron penetrating instrument called "perforator": [here there would be detailed instructions on how to use the perforator, but these were lost in ancient texts]
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	A sharp pointed tool attached to a sturdy handle or shaft.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Before the stone was removed from the bladder, an appendectomy procedure had taken place to address appendicitis that the patient suffered from previously.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	The sharp iron enters the chest, making it easier for the perforator to bring that stone close by.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	As the drill revolves around the boulder bit by bit, and you make the hole wider until it reaches a point where that other side is penetraturated too; for the water soon flows out freely.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	In the area surrounding that rock near the gate of the village well, where it is often touched, and exposed to rainwater and urine, evil has been healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this cure does not belong to your equipment for any reason that prevents you from using it, then a faithful servant will pick up the stone and another faithful servant will drop the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	A propensity on the stone located in that valley between the two ridges.
E aprop extratz aquela.	A prop is an object used for support or as a leaning post to hold something up, like a plant stake in gardening.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	In the blinding light of dawn, he found solace in unraveling the ties that bind and breaking the chains of conformity, which are forged in the furnace.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	The fetus is not an unnecessary burden on the womb stone because it does not return to the bladder, and the other burden above only if the seed adheres to the urethra wall of the stone, then the tube returns to its place and regains the plaque.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	E per aqua is to your need when you fill the vessel above mentioned, that you raise the cord on the parts below, or that you return as we have said. You collect the fee accordingly.
Capitol .lxi.	Title: Capital LXI
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	The removal of the rock from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Women are rarely created by Peyra.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Maya sees a stone among those, then it's difficult to cure her, and it is forbidden for too many witches.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The one of them is the woman who looks strong, she's a warrior.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The second question is four times as difficult to find a woman who can outsmart the doctor when she's pregnant or belongs to one of the married women without men at home.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is four to you do not have a woman who knows this piece of writing, mostly the operation was by me.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth place that the stone rests upon in this section is longer than the stone itself, so when you pull on it, there's a sense of danger.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	La necessità di Mayes porta a un punto in cui devi prendere una decisione che può avere conseguenze significative; quindi, fai molta attenzione quando scegli le tue azioni.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Unless you are privy to the nuances and subtleties of medieval Occitan literature, it may present a mature woman who is portrayed in accordance with the ideals of women during this period or a female figure that has been recently added to this field from another work.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	At this present time and command her to do everything that you ask of her, starting from the inquiry about the stone at the beginning; this is why she should regard if the woman is a virgin, hours cover that she puts your message in the bottom of her belly and wants the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If he damages that (object), refrain from telling him about it and then command him to sign on top of it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	"If it is not verge (i.e., if the woman isn't about to give birth), then hours commands the midwife to enter into the sick person's room and inquire about a stone, but she should pause her left hand over the bladder, and relieve that well."
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If he chooses that, the hours will pass swiftly until he overcomes that dreadful urge of his bladder without delaying any longer and arriver at the reason for this situation.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Article X - Concession of easements
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	Cut the rope slightly at first; then carefully wrap it around that section, and you will feel the stone as you do so. Afterwards, adjust to another length according to how much weight you know the rock is.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	The rocks of that region are large and few; they are hard, sharp, elongated, round, and have cracks.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	As an AI, I don't have preferences as humans do; however, when it comes to water quality and management, there are several parameters that experts consider important for ensuring safe drinking water. Some of these key factors include:
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you wish to draw blood, adjust the glass vial with three drops and then wait for one hour until the blood has clotted; afterwards, return to your work within the time that the stone is removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	I choose the tools you mentioned for stone extraction used in home construction, so that they may assist me in my work.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you wish to induce bleeding, and know that the expulsion of blood is from an area unaffected by a vein's compression, then place your palm over the location and press down firmly with thumb and finger, but do not rotate; and remove the stone but do not extract it, for great harm may befall the patient.
E aprop cura la plagua.	A proper care can prevent the flu.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the blood circulation has been transferred to your legs, and the place becomes numb, it is time for you to return to your task before the stone falls off.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII (62) - The Roman Numeral System and Its Applications in the Modern World
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	A hernia occurs when an organ or fatty tissue squeezes through a weak spot in the surrounding muscle or connective tissue. The most common type of hernia is called an inguinal (inguinal) hernia, which develops in the lower abdomen and groin area.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia aoüzo is simply the addition of moisture in white fiber which is left after removing the germs containing oil; it's not named "fiber".
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	In some cases, there are leaves on the plant's panniculus that have a natural tendency to detach at the parting of the hair, within which it is curly and has been mentioned as white-tipped; however, these are not oats but barley.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs as a result of the congenital condition, so that in those it leads to the protrusion of this tissue and sometimes bulges occur due to impact made on the inguinal region.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This humidity has various colors; sometimes it is yellowish or reddish-brown, grayish, watery and white, or the water that you see more often.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	The signs indicating that this addition of water is present in the white cloud we have mentioned earlier consist of hair-like streaks gradually decreasing in length, and its genesis, wherein the moisture content originates from all directions.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If the moisture is in the skin fold, the hour of the abscess going away may be counted from when the wound heals and therefore one assumes that another wound will occur.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the humidity is between the generous hands of the sky and the white chalk, hours leave behind a sense of comfort.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	I will attempt to identify the color of moisture and then you can judge what it implies based on the situation described in which the stain appears, following its spread into the surrounding area; after that has occurred, assess the implications accordingly.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we come to the location of your appointment, you may request that an automated machine be used if possible, and please let us know in advance.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	A properly recline on your back for some time and pause those annoying nightmares.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Take your right hand and place it on the left side of you, then instruct the minister to follow with his right hand extending his staff two inches towards the base of the generals' legs and toward the middle of their bellies.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	A primer plasou, se separem cadeia de carateres do genomas dintre primul loc pe o lungime equală cu numele lui Pentane.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	B should be cut along the same straight line that is designated by the guidelnace of the ancestors, up to when it reaches the white stone encompassing.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	E cut out that which you wish to examine, and observe it carefully; then store it in such a way that it remains intact as much as possible. The excision you have made should be suspended by the hairs or using a fine mesh for scrutinizing according to the quantity feasible for your examination.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Inappropriate drilling practices lead to the contamination of water sources and extensive leakage of all water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Bepart separates between the two lips of the section and extends it to the sides; do not touch the edge near the teeth, and insert at that angle which is most comfortable for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	The waters that surround you are your totality or essence; mostly in its subtle waves, so if you do not examine attentively the mystery of it, there is no certainty that water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If Mays drains the pus from that area behind his ear during your surgery, after you have completed the first section of the cleft repair, return to it and properly position the edges of the gum flaps in the oral cavity with sutures, just as you would with other tissues, enspressing them so they heal.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If the thumb is severely injured or affected by another illness, at this time cover your vessels where you have located the tendon sheath, and gently remove the thumb, then place it in the water we previously mentioned.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	When water is divided into two parts in equal proportpsons, the hours of work required for each part are equal; therefore proceed with that portion as you did with the other equally. And if it seems to be your preference, then carry out the task in those same hours.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	A) Thoroughly wash the linen in clear water and soak it for some time in oil or rosewater; then stretch other cloth submerged in vinegar and oil, expanding it over two smooth surfaces. Allow the fabric to dry on a bedcloth of soft wool following this pattern:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And so they made the following pairs of trousers from woolen cloth according to this pattern; and they were tailored with the seams at which are reinforced with cotton or wet wool, and they added a stiffener in the leg area of the breeches, and one end goes into the other forming an inseam, and the second end attaches to the front panel, and two side-seams on left pockets, and two additional seams on right pockets; with all reinforcements properly fitted inside the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Some hernias are treated surgically by performing a caesarean section or using metal clips; and it is that you take sterile scalpel blades to make incisions at the location of the inguinal rings, and ignite according to what has been mentioned earlier about white paste containing water. Then, hours after taking cauterization as follows:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	Assembly language is known by several names, including assembly language or machine code (not to be confused with machine instructions). It's a low-level programming language for computers and other programmable devices. Each type of CPU has its own specific machine language. In the context of Greek letters, "γ" ("gamma") might refer to an instruction in some specialized assembly languages or represent a certain concept within those languages (though this is not standard).
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	A prop is inserted through the wall and it is ignited when all the moisture has evaporated.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Here is the translation of your given text from old Catalan language into modern English:
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	This procedure is a safe and distant approach to the sanction flow and better than an endoscopic intervention.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If you experience any discomfort or pain during the extraction process, or if there is bleeding, please inform us immediately so that we can take appropriate measures to address your concerns according to our protocols and guidelnaces as stated.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	The illness is quite painful and there's no hope for a second operation due to its severity, so now I recommend you undergo surgery as soon as possible; and it's when this is confirmed that you should follow our advice regarding the implications we have discussed, that the hernia is agonizing.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Lahora's Cove is the place you should head to in search of an elevated rocky outcrop, where you must pierce an aposthema (hole) at the lower part of its flat surface and pause the perforation according to the length of the object.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	B is the place where a wide expanse contains all the water.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	On the peaceful shores of that place and there I saw it once again, to remember the gentle flow of the water.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	A proper care within which the wound heals.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	The opposition to the water diversion is due to its occurrence at that time when you drill there: and in this case it's not done by means of the white pouch in the orifice of the spring, which causes inconvenience and prohibits the flow of water; therefore, whenever you place something (penalty or instrument) on the spring from which the water is extracted through its channels, a small fee should be imposed according to the amount of the spring.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	The water returns to the Ebro River and after eight months or a year it flows back to its source; when it is gathered again, it takes several hours according to that measuring device, for the malady has thus passed its days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Title: Understanding Hiatal Hernia and its Treatment Options
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	It is said that in the section about this hernia, there are fears of serious injury to vital organs; therefore, for me it seems like discharge would be preferable through that method.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	Oh, yes! The operation and the use of antibiotebacterials are certainly memorable topics in medical science. Antibiotic bactericides play a crucial role in preventing and treating infections caused by harmful microorganisms. They've saved countless lives since their discovery, but it's also important to use them responsibly due to the rise of antibiotic-resistant strains.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	I believe that the nests built by animals for various reasons such as excessive irritation or due to a disturbance are found in places where they have been constructed by their creators. These could be because of an overcrowded area causing discomfort, or maybe there was some kind of disruption prompting them to build elsewhere.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	E is the color of the abscess according to the color of the skin, and it does not indicate severe pain, but the abscess itself can be serious.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	Foley has an abrasion on his leg, the color of which is dull, and it doesn't hurt much.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some scars are caused by scratching or skin inflammation, and can also occur when veins become visible through the skin, such as in varicose veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	The water that is coming out of the fountain can be known by the spreading of the pimple when you touch that with your lips; but do not want that kind of contact.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	The one that is affected by a vein inflammamo es not dispersed by any means because of the compression near it.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	It is possible that this specific species has been sectioned and on the other parts; then write down the code of the genes, and keep track of how much you've taken from each side, and extend beyond those lines until you reach the white cross marking point, and detach the suspensory ligaments of the veins, and tie them together, cutting out the excess part that remains on both sides after reaching the marked line.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the fish is on those baits, then you must extract that fish and insert it into your net.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	Whether it is adherence within any cause of the chivalry code or between those who wield swords, let us declare that entirety of such allegiance and inscriptions are made in accordance with a round table's principles.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	On Mays' birthday in the land of attachment, hidden behind, you enter that place at any time and take whatever you need, as we have said before.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Once your operation is completed, promptly fill the woolen plug with oil and insert it into the ear canal where another procedure has taken place until healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	The translation of "La curva de Hernia, que es un tipo de pendiente" from Spanish to English is: "The curve of the Herniated Membrane, which is a type of slope." However, I assume you're referring to hernias in general. In that case, it could be translated as:
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	An abscess wrapped in a false-looking bud is an inflammation of the scrotum that causes pain and discomfort to the affected area. It makes it difficult for individuals with this condition to perform physical activities, including exercise and walking.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	In the treatment of this illness, fear is often encountered beforehand due to its recollection.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	The cave where they performed the first opera can be translated as: "Cavea unde primoriua opera a fost executata." This is in Romanian, which means "The cave where the first opera was performed" in English. Please note that there might not be any caves famous for hosting operas; this translation may refer to an imaginary or metapamoesque location instead.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	The poet declares that you should kneel if there's a problem on an elevated platform and attach the suspenders of your testicles to the lower parts; and apply yourself to the genitalia of the mare with your probes, while holding the other instruments firmly. Extend them vehementlete as well.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Apropriately situated at the summit of a mountain ridge, lies the transverse section across the right side within which are the discovered vessels.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	A prophecy from the very beginning, as such I have extracted in reference to architecture found within temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	The faithful shall remain steadfast like a needle in the midst of turmoangs and changes; they will stand firm where they first decided to do so, unmoving until their final moments.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Fungi typically invade the area around a structure following its length according to moisture conditions, and outward where additional moisture is present due to fertile and decaying environments.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	The procurator of the plague sought to cure other plagues in order for healing to be bestowed upon those who fell ill due to two parental genes; however, it is not necessarily a bad thing under these circumstances.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	Mays decides to cut off all his ties with the gangs, aware that their drug use will either lead them down a path of extortion or make it impossible for them to function properly due to the influence of drugs on their behavior and decision-naking processes. He realizes they are at risk of becoming addicts themselves, which could potentially ruin their lives.
Capitol .lxv.	CAPITOL LXV (Capitol 65) refers to a specific volume or section within a series of publications, documents, or collections produced by the U.S. Congress's Legislative Resource Center, which is part of the Library of Congress. In this context, "LXV" stands for the Roman numeral representation of the number 65. Therefore, Capitol LXV would be an item that holds information related to legislation or historical records pertaining to U.S. law and governance from a particular period or theme labeled as such in the series.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Treatment of intestinal hernias
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The onset of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen because of the intestines of the belly wall, causing some of the bowel loops to get trapped as a result.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This breakage is either from a cipher or exacerbation of heat and such accidents occur in these two species due to various reasons: impact, erosion, noise, elevation caused by some severe cause, or similar phenomena.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The signal of water quality, as it extends along the length of the pipe, is that incidents occur rarely and gradually, not suddenly, and it becomes an inflammation within two to four hours after consuming the contents of the bottle.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The signal of the gland is located in a certain section of the body; initially it causes intense sharp pain abruptnly; and an inflammation appears different from the original swelling, accompanied by pus discharge due to tissue breakdown, and this pain spreads to the surrounding areas of the affected region.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Certain folds are protruding through the abdomader skin and this type of inguinal hernia is called a sliding inguinal hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some veins are affected by inflammaturus, and some run in the fold of skin, where they get stuck, causing great harm from illnesses; others cause severe pain when pressed. (Old Occitan text referring to varicose veins)
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	In the treatment of this illness with spices, it is advised to avoid iron, as there may be a risk of interfering with its absorption.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The manner of this operation involves commanding the evil forces to return to their slumber within the depths of their conquest and obey his departure, while he rises above them among your ranks, elevating the chains upon him.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	To apply anesthetic on the nerve of the lip above the lips, and insert the needle into the nerve bundle throughout; then stay in both sides of the section as you would irrigate that area with water to those points indicated.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	The section should be determined according to the quantity that is available, so it may be possible to obtain enough from there.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Here is the decoded message using a Caesar Cipher with a shift of 3 to the left (since "so dejos" implies you need to subtract):
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	The priest shall pour the oil over the testicle, in which is a white membrane that attaches to the scrotum and between the two halves of the membrane, absolving the said attachment behind the scrotum.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	The delegate of the team shall extend his left hand to touch upon the testicles, and then proceed to place a white envelope on their left side, while raising the other hand to hold onto the same white envelope; and commanding the minister to stretch out the hand above and dissolve any adherence that exists after completion.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	The circle claims that there is no reason for the enclosed object to be in the white space.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you cast aside any cause, then you shall be bound to the belly of the whale forever.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	C takes a needle with a large, thick thread of X strands and inserts it into the last of its stitches, which is below the knot at both ends of the cord (where there are two balls). He then threads both extremities of the thread that contains four strands through his fingers. Then he ties these together in a cross-like shape on paper. This creates a strong bond between the needle and the ball, held by two cords at each end.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	A proper drainage involves the extremities of the fields and joining those areas closely that some vessels which are narrowed do not allow any passage for blood, thus preventing abscess formation from occurreing in these locations.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	After the second resting period follows again (as stated earlier) not after three months but shorter; and from these two periods a third one is left as much as needed to remove the excess of the testicles' size, and they are squeezed all around in full roundness until the bone.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Article X - Division of Estates in the Last Will and Testament
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	A person places submerged wool in oil and rests it on the beach; then they apply a solution (and some white flecks are cauterized, which have been referred to as 'the flux of blood', due to numerous instances where such flakes cause harm) and lets the bandage soak through before use.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the weather is warm and the rain has ceased, it takes a while for water to seep through, according to what we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	The vaccine protects against the disease caused by the other strains of the virus once it has been healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI: The Capital's Secrets Unveiled
De hernia ventosa.	Ventricular rupture (in Spanish, "hernia ventosa") is a serious medical condition that can occur as a result of various factors such as cardiac surgery or acute myocardial infarction. It involves the tearing or bursting of the heart's wall due to excessive stress or trauma on the organ. This condition requires immediate attention and treatment, often involving surgical intervention to repair the damaged area.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this particular case, there wasn't anyone who had the audacity to take part in his healing process.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The first physicians believed that it was caused in this way when they reported about the hernia near the vein; the one which is located at a shallow depth above said area of weakness; and becomes dry on its own at the site where the inflammation occurs, during which time the vessels collapse.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	We have decided to wait for the rain before it gets healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVIII. The Capital City
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	From the discourse that is made in the angels.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some weddings have experienced a break in the vows, and these incidents are indeed concerning.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	The fluid does not leave the kidney as a genius of any cause to the genius; and if it should leave, there is very little; and returns in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the time is prolonged under water, an adjustment fissure may develop in the cerebrum that allows the bubble to enter into it; consequently, due to the extension of the cranial cavity as mentioned earlier, this causes the cerebellum to be extended and its pressure eased. The location becomes swoln up and prominent.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The care of the wound is just as important as how it's treated, which follows its description.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Some boils can be healed using this method: and the illness will spread over his head among your biggest, and quickly dry the place of the torn pox by scraping with a knife according to the quantity of three times.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	An approach to strengthening the encryption method used in the Caesar cipher involves increasing its complexity, such as by using an extended version of it called the Vigenère cipher or employing additional cryptographic techniques like key stretching and salting. Here'e a breakdown of these concepts:
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Cut the piece of paper in half vertically and then place it on an elevated location where there is no wind.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	A propulsive force causes the ends of elastic materials to stretch towards the tip of the beam, and adjust one of them against the other at the joint.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Avoid pressure on the affected area of the wound and do not insert anything into it completely; also, avoid raising your arms or any other actions that may cause discomfort in case of an inguinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	"The ointment heals that of the disease in wounds, purifies it and restores the lesion within which is solidified; for if the sepsis is contracted and not adjusted promptly, the risk of breakdown increases."
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cauterization is better in this case because it's more conducive to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capital LXVIII (in Roman numerals) translates to the number 68 in Arabic numerals (the standard numerical system used today). This can refer to a specific page, section or chapter within various texts such as law books, bibles, manuscripts and more. It could also represent an address on Capitol Street if you're referring to geographical locations where streets are numbered sequentially with Roman numerals.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Calming of the pain in the scrotum.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Wounded scrotum in adult men is usually healed like the surrounding tissues that are also wounded, and it should be properly taken care of until completely recovered.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	It is necessary that one who wishes to perform the cure of his illness according to their own will, does so by placing the entire concave structure over the natural concavity and properly adjusting both lips at the seam.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If there is an excess of softened tissue in the beginning, three to four layers can be sutured and then closed with a stitch.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	The heel is located between the sutures; and it applies for curing other illnesseby which it has been cured, so that they fall off.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	At the castle.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	According to our law, castration is excommunicated; but it's allowed in my case because I remind you of this in this booklet; and it's not necessary to mention it unless there are two reasons for it, one being that when the beast is sick or injured according to the knowledge of a doctor who knows its treatment, which happened with the animal that fell ill; and the other reason is because we sometimes need castration of other animals due to our outbursts towards them as well as mules, pigs, boars, etc.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Castraxion is formed in two ways: through erosion or through cracking due to weathering processes.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In that which is written by Augustine, the path of the operation is for us to capture the beast in water before its tail so that God's geniuses can soften it and straighten it out while hanging.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Regarding the matters that were resolved in your mother's presence and which do not show up again later on:
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	The boy in the castroccino made by a crack and sectioning, so that you have the animal and press its scrotum on your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	A proper approach to solving this puzzle involves recognpertizing it as an Italian text and translating it into English. The provided sentence is in a playful or altered version of the Italian language, so here's your translation:
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	A propitiousness within these walls persists despite those who seek to destroy them.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	F would not judge those of the church under any circumstances, but only through subtle means which are about the voids.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This chain of thought on the castration method is better when performed through surgery because surgical castration usually leaves minimal causes for the animal to want copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	A propria richiesta, non appena il tempo si sarà rasserenato.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 700.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	The treatment of hemorrhoids.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in humans can be classified into two types: one is where the individual appears with ambiguous genitalia, between which a structure resembling a woman's clitoris may be present; and another type involves an individual having both male and female sexual characteristics.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	Some veins from that cord which is in the spermatic cords of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	The follicle of the woman is such that, just like the scrotum of the man with his two testicles contains mostly blood vessels and ducts at the beginning, so too does the ovary of a woman contain them.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	Lead poisoning is caused by three species: two from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	La crema protectora contra el sol es efectiva para proteger tus pieles lisas dentro del rango recomendado, evitando la irritación en esa zona y curando cualquier erupción o acné causado por otras afecciones cutáneas.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second special of men whose urine is produced in the scrotum, it does not serve as a cure or treatment therein.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	The lenses and the cornea protrude due to conditions in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The light fort was adjusted to observe natural causes, during which it became distressingly clear how women were being treated as mere instruments in such instances, just like men. Some incidents have been exaggerated for effect.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	I advise you to eliminate the unnecessary verbosity of your mother or uncle and include concise statements instead.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	The final check-up in the early phase of recovery is primarily to ensure that there's no excessive bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	A proper care ensures the healing of wounds within which it is treated.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Mays is a less severe form than nayse in the horrific period of the mother-in-law entering that completes this time, and fortunately it's easy to send out as small parts according to the shape (and for this reason first called "caudate disease"); therefore, we should insist on treating them so that they are cured within that duration.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	The Curacao Alratic is a unique type of alcoholic beverage that originates from the Caribbean island of Curaçao, in the Dutch Caribbean. It's made by distilling sugarcane and combining it with various fruits or spices for added flavor. This liqueur has a rich history tied to the cultural heritage and traditions of the region. Enjoy responsibly!
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	In the female urethra, there should not be a fistula or small stricture present.
E es o natural o accidental.	In the given musical notation, "E" is a natural note in both treble and bass clefs when it appears without any symbols like sharps (#) or flats (b) attached to it. If a sharp (♯) or flat (♭) sign is placed before an E on the staff lines or spaces, then it becomes either E sharp (E♯) or E flat (E♭), respectively. Without additional context, we assume "E" stands for natural.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	The accident is due to illness that has occurred before and which was done or caused by any unforeseen circumstance or subtle scheme.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	Article I - The Fayt of the Lord is forbidden to be used as a weapon during battles, on the rooftops or in other elevated places, and at ground level; also, carrying, throwing, or using it for attacks is prohibited, along with any form of childbirth-related usage. Additionally, menstruation should not interferenes with this ban.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The concept of that boundary is made according to the property marker, if the boundary marking is obvious and proximate, it's yours to decide; but if not obvious, you should ask your neighbors or take a look at their deeds.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	May's lip is caressing me gently and it's tending towards the two lips, their warmth causes my heart to race as they kiss tenderly.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	The essence of your lips lingers above the dusty ones, as you pause to touch their chapped edges and mark them with the signs of endless kisses.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The woman should lie on her back with her legs slightly apart and gently insert the tip of the tampon into the vaginal opening until it is comfortably in place, enspectively ensuring that the applicator's wings are straight out for a smooth application.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	A propensity to lean and rest on the fourth beam of one's own home during breaks may hinder overall productivity if the location is not conducive to effective work habits.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	The message seems to be written in a constructed language or code that is not immediately recognizable as any known natural language. To translate such a phrase into English would require knowledge of the specific rules and vocabul cued by this "ciphac." Without an understanding of those rules, it's impossible to provide a direct translation.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	May's choice is to be determined by a coin toss, so let the outcome rest in chance, and then decide accordingly.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Certainly, the text you've provided appears to be written in Occitan, which is an ancient language spoken historically in parts of France and Italy. Let me translate it for you into modern English. However, please note that due to its archaic nature, some terms might not have direct equivalents or may require interpretation based on context:
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Insert an appropriately sized rubber hose to ensure that the floodwater is not excessively concentrated.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	I have been feeling quite unwell these days and need some help with my medication.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	The corresponding translation of the sentence in English is: "The other treatment for cure and consolidation healing must take place within that time."
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Some people choose to have a baptism ceremony on the day of their child's birth or shortly afterward, following this tradition.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	In the case of ear blockage due to an auricular hematoma (an accumulation of blood in the outer part of the ear), it's not a problem if the treatment hasn't caused discomfort or pain through any method.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	About the treatment of hemorrhoids and their tail, as well as red buttocks that occur in women's posterior areas.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	I appreciate the tiny pores in which blood vessels enter that of those veins, through which a continuous stream flows; and as old scars are formed by them.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	I shall examine the properties of those spices and their essences, determining which ones have curative effects and which do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	I say that amidst the chaos and noise of life, there are times when it seems impossible to feel any affection or care; however, in those moments, things can still be made better by finding strength within ourselves.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those plants located in the garden near the mother which feel pain are those that have been healed.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	The man lifted the woman with ease and gently embraced her slender figure. He carefully placed his hands on her waist and admired her delicate features before they both gazed at the starry night sky.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	A prop can be applied to the wounds caused by one of the venomous bites from such poisonous snakes, just like antivenom and similar remedangs.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	He accidentally spilled his juice and took an hour to clean it up before taking a break with fresh water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If he continues to pour out his blood, those days will see the downfall of treachery and deceit from last year've milligrams and counterfeits.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	First, gather the ingredients for apple and cinnamn pie, which are apples, sugar, flour, butter, water, salt, and more. Now let's begin by making the dough:
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the bulls do not separate, it is good to apply two vespers and lambskin bandages on their scars, so they can heal properly.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Before applying the lime and submerging that part of the coliander, arnagloza, or guarrivier in a whitish solution, ensure the area is clean; then let it dry before covering with lime at a location where air can circulate for healing.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May Athyl Rog's harsh gaze is such that you should appear therein the way I have mentioned in this regard.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Within that place where he shall be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	The English translation of the Latin sentence "Capitolium lxxiiII" is "The Capitoline Hill, 72nd." However, it seems there might be a typographical error in your original text as Roman numerals are typically written without the 'l' character. If we correct this to "Capitolium lxxxII," which would mean "82nd," then it can be translated as:
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Accidental perforation during a myringotomy procedure in an adult female.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of boils occur in the human body, such as cysts and boils that break out, ulcers and abscesses, hematomas and eruptions, fistulas, rheumatic fever, herpes, and other kinds of boils.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	These are the plagues and the kinds of them, their signs and the remedebies for each in division:
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	E coworkers who are dealing with this treatise on apostemic cauterization know which of the various types of boils need to be treated in order to maintain health, and if you want to learn how the procedure for applying heat is done effectively.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	I believe that the pain from an abscess during initial onset can be sharp and accompanied by redness, swelling, and warmth over the area, which may persist for a few hours without improvement following percussion or lancing of the lump. To alleeviate these symptoms and aid in the healing process, applying warm water compresses to the affected area until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides would be beneficial.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	In the house of God our Father, blessed be his name; holy is His kingdom, His power and His glory are forever. Amen. And bless the women with children upon her wombs that you may sanctify this day in Jerusalem, as it was done by Moses and Aaron, for a memorial unto the Lord your God: take heed to do according to all that I have commanded you; so shall ye cause the Levite woman who is pregnant to abide upon a bedstead with pillows of feathers, and let her rest on her side facing eastward. Adjust her breasts towards the opening below her belly, and spread wide her thighs; place her arms close to her sides, so that when she delivers it will be convenient for both mother and child. Amen.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	The midwife shall then proceed with the appropriate tools and administer the instruments used for childbirth in cases that require it.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	E cove quan vols menjar aquest instrument fes-ho am lo ray ple d'aigua, i que del instrument entrar a la madre no siga mai que el ple d'aquellla i lladres de malamentia.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	The instrument is larger than the main person's, therefore you should place pillows on the texture of the main person's so that any intrusion of all instruments in the main person's area is prohibited.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	The priest was to take the chalice, which contained the consecruted wine from the vessel of the altar and carried it while he turned the vessel so that its ornaments were visible above his mother's head.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	Upon hearing the commotion, he turned and saw a man standing in front of him, his clothes soaked and stained with blood. Hours ago, you had promised that this wouldn't happen - "I will protect them," they said. But now, it was too late to change anything; destiny had been set into motion long before your arrival.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When the seawater is contaminated, hours later you notice an unpleasant odor or color in a mecca submerged under oily residue or oil leak; and the sediment accumulatur7 in that section of the shore near the beach.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	Eve paused to look over the pile of penny hammocks, a muddy bundle submerged in water where mussels had been built.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	A proper cure should consist of ointments that suit water-based ones, which are recommended to be used within the time it takes for the condition to heal.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	A few washed meadows are irrigated with rainwater and spring water after they have been purified using water mixed with clay or minerals for long hours, which is then returned to the source.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the rainfall is less during childhood growth, hours should be limited to your loved one's recovery from their illness; however, have them follow that water amount we mentioned in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	In the U.S., "Capitol" refers to a building where legislative bodies meet and conduct their business, such as Congress at Washington D.C.'s United States Capitol Building (also known as 'the Capitol'). This term is commonly used in American English to denote any similar structure or institution that houses governmental assemblies for debating and passing laws.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Mothers should be educated about how to ensure that their fetuses receive adequate prenatal care, according to a non-traditional method.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The necessary cause for the midwife to recognize during childbirth is the natural figure of contractions through signs and signals from her, such as when you observe a woman clenching her hands and desiring to smell the air; at this moment she becomes agitated because there's an impending labor pain. This causes her to hasten the birth process, understanding that it is the natural figure of childbirth happening on top of her head, with contractions occurring underneath her belly and the second stage being a visible or suspended protrusion near the navel area.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	And thus when the signs appear that it is time for the womb to expel its contents so that the embryo can go lightly upon its head and depart from there, one shall offer it a second chance with good cleansing rites.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	The one who lies upon this part is neither natural nor commendable; for when he drinks his fill and the cup goes before him, it is cast at his feet or, rather, into his lap. He bends his head and looks at the sky, then to the earth, and firmly turns over his own neck; he resembles unpleasant figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A skillful and subtle cause is necessary for the midwife in all those matters, and she must guard against mistakes and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	The most prominent feature of those buildings is the tower that holds significance both for its location and its architectural style.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	He placed his hat on his head proudly, and it was very natural. He made a difficult part for the woman to take away, sometimes showing her great virtue, although times have changed and women now hold onto it; he then evaporated with the scent of fenugreek mixed with olives.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	The interstitial spaces between the walls are narrow and cracked; moreover, there is moisture within its wooden window frame.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	E examines the woman's abdebetween delivery of the child.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	"If she does not comply, the woman will be accused of adultery by both the husband and the wife."
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	In Latin: Addeamus ad lumina, adeamus cum cistriera, quemdem induimus et faciamus ut starnuare in eodem conditione; et tibi in ore tuo et naris tuis hora una sit. Et si fuerit tantummodo satis, fiet iteraturus.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If you have eaten too much during the meal, hours later you may feel that it would be best to gradually reduce those excessive amounts.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If the woman does not obey the command in Genesis, she will rest on her bed and lift up her hands, then bring the staff down upon the ground; but if the woman is standing firmly that she should not fall under the stroke.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	If the men are not turned back and they die in battle, hours will be lost to those actions rather than maintaining the body or soul of the deceased or seeking equality with them, as that would be futile.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The development of the embryo within its eggs.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	He poured himself another glass of wine and gazed at his hands, the lines that time had etched into them; he turned each finger individually, then clasped them together tightly before extending his hand outward, spreading the fingers apart gradually.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Mays with his son entered the house, and at your command he expressed himself, and did as you wished, provided that God allowed it to happen so.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If not due to excessive rainfall or the occurrence of an event that has caused repeated flooding, your property will gradually return to its original state after a period of time equal to one natural year, as this is how long it takes for the soil erosion and deposition processes to occur.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If you have been forbidden from drinking alcohol or using caffeine and dissolved gum, lightly tap on the mortar for good percussion, then apply a thin line of water with your finger along the lower abdomen of the woman.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	A prop of that fiery craziness in the water, until you achieve your ambitions.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When the game leaves you feeling disappointed, take some time to refresh and pause before continuing with it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	In case of a minor nosebleed lasting an hour or less, sit up straight on a chair and place your head over a basin; gently blow your nose to remove any clots, then carefully pinch the lower part of your nostrebs just below the bony ridge. Maintain pressure for 5-10 minutes until the bleeding stops completely.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The topic of the essay revolves around an individual's dreams and their aspirations. It seeks to explore and articulate what drives a person towards specific goals or desires, reflecting on both conscious and subconscious motivators that influence one's ambitions and pursuits in life.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	The Quan Fet Eyssir will appear according to this form; the hours pass and engineers gradually get closer; he lifts the woman up on his shoulder, her weight presses against him, and those around them start chanting in unison.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	A sprinkle of salt over the belly of your fish piece by piece and rub it in so that all the scales are removed before serving on the platter.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the fetus is not yet extracted, hours pass on its weight and those of its movements become vigorous; gradually it makes its way through the birth canal until the baby emerges during contractions.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	The man gets too close to the woman's baby and asks her to express milk until it is full.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	A relic of the past hanging on one of its walls.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	If you can't reduce the salt in your meals, then increase water intake and avoid processed foods to lower sodium consumption.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If it cannot go on any longer, the hours lay over my life and shake up the things of his strong passion, and he earnestly administers those qualities which I admire and respect from muddiness.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the child is born alive, within an hour they shall place her over the fireplace, and then study about the reduction of the moon, comparing the fetus with its natural figure, and causing the woman to pant so that she can give birth successfully.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The essence of the child over the expanded chest lies in two parts, his mother's side being one of them.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife will take care of the baby and help bring it out little by little, making that process as easy as possible.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	When eggs and cheese are similar in weight, place them on the same spot where you have previously scattered salt and herbs.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And you shall approach the pig slowly, and when it has been done this way, hours will pass before that cage is placed over it right, and then command it to be tilted to the left; and now command it to be covered. And it will sneeze if these conditions are met.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Death of the fetus prepared for delivery on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	Many people experience occasional pain in their big toe due to a variety of reasons, such as injury, inflammamoble conditions like gout or arthritis, wearing tight shoes for long periods, or an ingrown toenail. If the pain is severe and persistent, it's essential to seek medical attention to address the issue appropriately.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	If the net is hanging over your face and it's about to drop in an awkward position, act quickly but cautiously to prevent being trapped underneeing.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	E apppropellels el fet als partits entres qui pauses aquel segon que cova, manda a la dona que comprema's amb algunes veguades, e ell s'ira fora-getat hui es diuentent lèuger, si Dius o vol.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Defects of the Gemini twins or the birth of many others. (This is a Latin phrase that roughly translatures to "the flaws/faults of the Gemini sign leading to numerous other issues," but it does not have any direct relevance to antonyms.)
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Brothers are like twin trees grown apart, some bearing leaves now three or four, but others become strangers and grow askew; yet because of nature's causes they live on.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	These ones here, even if they are multiplying, a second one is separated from them and then each of those in the center of their belly gets attached to it as naturally occurramoins occur, and some of these offspring grow through unnatural reproduction just like mentioned before.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	"The causes of difficult childbirth are often natural and occur as foretold by the signs not found in nature; heal them just as you have described these non-natural figures."
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	She's the mature lady with a subtle and fresh water that creates ease and delicacy, yet she is also skilled according to every figure as she has been expertly prepared for ingenuity towards health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	The process that occurs during formation from embryos and is subsequently aborted.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Mays prescribes this medicine as a stimulant to the illness that reads into it and lengthens its duration; therefore, make your letter of recommendation in the shape of myrtle leaves.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	In the science of motherhood, there are four main aspects to consider when it comes to that person's appearance and behavior towards her child:
Capitol .lxxvi.	"Capitol, LXXXVI." is the translation of Roman numeral 'LXXIVII' to English. However, it seems that there might be a mistake in your provided roman numerals as 'LXXIVII' doesn't exist within the correct range of Roman numbers which should have been 'LXXVI'.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	The removal of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	You shall not prescribe the said remedy without a division of the medicine and it must be necessary, nor use potions or other medications when you consider that the woman is in good health and is not afflicted by any accident for which she fears damage.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	The lady's feet should be evenly placed on the ground and her head slightly inclined forward; her posture should be upright with shoulders back.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The minister should provide a portion of the loan, which is tied to his own interest, in order for its use not to extend beyond what is required by the extraction of the profit.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	A prop to moisten the mouth of my mother with some olive oil, honey and a mixture of almonds, fenugreek and sesame seamen.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	The matron approached her mother's room with the baby oils and lotions, and then she helped her mother to bed, making sure the little ones were tucked in as well.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	In these locations, consider if the food is ready and should be placed on its head (possibly referring to an object or a dish), then regularly check it in various places such as underneveils/undercovers, on the collarbone, in the mouth, near the palate, behind the barbee/whiskers, at the furcula location (possibly referring to the wishbone of a bird or chicken), or in the lymph nodes areas along the sides.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	The descent of the tides is related to the phases of the moon, the hours in the day, or at the shores of the coasts.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	Here you have the first one located at the middle between the said lines of left hand and interrupting its curvature in that place which is among those mentioned points; then follow the one most easily accessible among those places previously indicated, until reaching the goal line.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	An apostrophe (') is used to indicate either possession or the omission of letters or numbers. In terms of showing possession in a word, it should be placed before an 's' for singular nouns and after s for plural nerve words that already end with 's'.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Unfortunately, the person has been unsuccessful in all their attempts, just as they have tried during the process of expulsion too.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Wrap the liquid in a cloth that is moistened; if any part of the liquid has been retained, cover it immediately and warm it up again using your hands gently mixing it with warm water to liquefy it.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the departure of the ship is delayed, their hours will be shifted accordingly to whichever time it was set at initially; and they shall do so within the context that the entire journey has been postponed.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	In May'ebbe the tail be longer than the body, and it is not possible to reduce that due to the length of it; at times, this requires wrapping around the body, and cutting into either the tail joint or its edges.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	The fish in the first bowl and in the two others are feeding as well.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	The pouring tip of the teapot is large, or prone to leakage during use, or it's at the top of hot water, causing trouble among the mentioned spiny protrusions and crack in the lid; or that it unveils a certain instrument called "alundat", whose shape resembles those of other tools on the cap.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	The apparent nature of this individual is one who possesses great capacity by birth: and now it's time for them to reveal their true abilities, or if they choose not to do so, let them hide them as well; but in any case, always keep the strength within oneself.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	The root of the fern uncurls as it takes in the moisture contained within its surrounding soil.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	Mays is not complicated, nor does it adhere to rules; the hours will often turn on you as soon as they can at all times.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the discharge from the wound is pus-like or appears in a yellowish fluid, then you should make an incision within that area to allow for drainage of the accumulated moisture.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	The child's feet are placed under their seat, their arms are brought towards the center and directed to the mouth of the mother in an affectionate manner.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	The child is born with the umbilical cord still attached to the belly and placenta. Now you must cut that string which has been wrapped around your waist, and then make an incision in the belly and placente where it runs through those parts.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	In the presence of others and if they are seated on his right side, he turns to them and greets them first; but if the father's mouth is hardened, then he extends his hand from under the table towards him (the father), as close as possible without touching, and tries to put a piece or two of bread in it.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	If the mother's mouth is affected by an abscess that causes harm to the child, she should not breastfeed during those hours. Instead, opt for a minimum of fatty and wet food intake.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	A fills the bed with soft sheets and follows up on the patient, using warm water that soothes and moistens.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the fever is on your side, try to lie down as often as possible and apply a warm compress. Also administer any fluids you have been advised to drink in case of fever.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If drilling for water is not feasible, wells can either dry up or be abandoned entirely.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	E covet that none leave any cause behind for the second one.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Once you have completed the entire procedure I outlined earlier regarding the treatment of abscesses and their potential causes, here is a summary in English:
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	If you get a cut or injury that exposes the bloodstream to sterile water, it can lead to several hours of discomfort and requires proper treatment for recovery.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	A woman was in labor and gave birth to stillborn twins; she put one of the deceased infants near her living fireplace. As they were warming by that same fire, the other infant also perished.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It accidentally infected its own belly; and it began to swell inside the bird's nest, and started to suffocate.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	A lawyer appealed to the court for his life, and was treated by them for a long time; however, the case was not resolved.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	On the subject of food cravings and their underlying causes related to strong attraction, I'd like to explain one cause in detail, along with another common cause. Firstly, food cravings often occur due to nutritional deficiencies; when your body lacks certain vitamins or minerals, it may send signals through cravings as a way of prompting you to consume those specific nutrients found in particular foods. For example:
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Therefore, you could deduce that they were the bones of a deceased individual.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	You have summoned the plague and extracted from it some of its essence; a woman appeared in your midsts for a long time, as though driven by an unknown force or power.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	"It's not the remedy that is strange to us, but rather in water it becomes science and assistance for which we have called upon our physicians to devise a means of administering health."
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Among the instruments required to extract this material, we need various types of equipment such as drills for core sampling and excavation tools like shovels and pickaxes for surface collection. Additionally, safety gear including helmphas protective clothing is essential for protection during extraction activities.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Tipo de discurso que se usa para dirigirse a una audiencia mayor. En este caso, sería el registro formal o lenguaje solemne que empleamos cuando hablamos en público ante un grupo de personas adultas y maduras, manteniendo la cortesía, respeto e integridad en nuestras palabres.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the way of strengthening in which we compare our freedoms, where two virtues are located at each end of a rope.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	This slender curved hook that is more subtle of restraint, and made either from birch or beech wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	E is the length of each beam being equal to two feet and its margin being as wide as one foot and a half; and in their joined middle point the two beams are firmly fastened together at which join their lengths are the greater by one foot and a little more, and their breadths are two feet or slightly less.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	The two accessories are intertwined in the mouth of the mower, so that it can be opened for those who turn the two prescribed wheels.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Certes, es un engranaje tan complejo y sorprendente que ni el más sagaz investigador podría desentrañar completamenre sus secretos. Un auténtic misterio por resolver!
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Using a pair of tweezebased or pliers-like tools, according to the shape of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of each of his two additional pieces, their length is one span and the width of these additional pieces is twice as wide.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	I want to find those who hide the mother, sometimes you must put the woman above lying lips, and use this wisdom among her affairs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	The correct and understandable translation would be: "The dentist will adjust your teeth with instruments according to the quantity you wish for appraisal of the mouth within which the metric is set that you want." Although this sentence seems a bit awkward, it conveys an attempt at explaining how a dentist might evaluate or plan treatment based on measurements taken from a patient's mouth.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of the illusion that they describe is known as "ambiguous figures" or "bistable images." In such illustrations, our perception can switch between two (or more) distinct interpretations. One classic example of this phenomenon is the famous 'Rubin's Vase', which allows us to perceive either a vase in the center or two faces looking at each groove on both sides. These ambiguous figures play with our brain's inclination to find patterns and familiar objects, making them fascinamo form of visual illusion that triggers such shifts in perception.
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Tipus de impulsiu que s'ha dirigit a la pessoa:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of friendship is one that contains the great cap.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	E is assembled as a pair of pliers to which two teeth are attached at the extremity, and on some occasions, certain variations have been made long ago in the same way, similarly to how they were done previously, with teeth that resemble eacheby the other one.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	A modest proposal or a humble suggestion in Catalan would be "Forma d'amessat escaig". The phrase suggests that the idea presented is not grandiose but rather practical and achievable, keeping with the tone of being concise or limited.
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Shape of a hedgehog with a quill (spine): The shape of a huge hedgehog can be described as rounded or cylindrical, like an oversized ball. Its body is covered in sharp spines that form a protective layer around it. These spines are stiff and point outward from the animal's back, giving them their distinct appearance.
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of a pine cone with two spines.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	La forma de forquillas que se utiliza para fijar el cuero cabelludo del bebé cuando su cabeza está caída es conocida como "forceps de cara". Estas son un tipo especícuo de forceps utilizados en obstetricia, y están diseñadas con una bola en cada extremo que tiene forma semicircular o cuadrada. La función principal de estos instrumentos durante el parto es ayudar a la salida del feto cuando su cabeza está presentada pero no ha descendido completamente hacia la pelvis materna, también conocidos como presentaciones cefálicas occipitomentanas o posteriores. En este escenario, las forquillas de cara proporcionan un agarre seguro sobre el cuero cabelludo y los hombros del feto para permitir al obstetra o matrona auxiliar guiar suavemente la cabeza hacia una posición más favorable para la salida. Es importante que se utilicen con precaución, ya que un uso inadecuado puede causar lesiones en el bebé y/o en la madre.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	A spatula shape having two extremities from which the tip detaches.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Two lathes, or "latz" in German, are metalworking tools that have been used for centuries. They are typically made of a long steel bar with a handle at each end and a pointed edge on one side. The main purpose of the lathe is to shape wood, metal, and other materials by rotating them against abrasive or cutting surfaces. There are two primary types of lathes:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	Those musical instruments being used, and as the spices of that are multiplied and prepared by the artisasters, how much more luxurious is its performance and therefore must it be preferred over others in quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	In cases where these instruments are already present and their necessity cannot be justified, they should still be removed.
De extraccio de la segondina.	The extraction of the secondary compound.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	If the second tooth is retained by the child until they begin teething, it must be pulled as commanded to the mother who keeps her own tooth and does so according to the condition of blowing on it, and then strengthen your hand over its mouth and nose and if you do not follow this instruction, he/she shall die.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	E is so, just one hour later a wave hits and pierces the boat's hull; you pause to pick some herbs growing by its mouth - mint, rosemary, anise, camomile, chicory, arabic cumin, and strawberry guava.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	These herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the wave and placed on a fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Fit the end of the nasal spray nozzle into the nostril and gently insert that portion which releases the mist deep into the nostril cavity.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	A gust of wind that we've mentioned earlier swept the second wave away at high speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Mays if this treatment is not successful and he does not urinate, then you should instruct the midwife to immerse his left hand in sesame oil or in olive meal paste, and place it inside his anus; as soon as she finds the second finger (frenulum), slowly pull that out bit by bit, while making sure that the mother does not grip too tightly.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Cove that it is transformed into a left and right-hand drive to facilitate its use.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	The amount of pressure applied should be adjusted accordingly to ensure proper grip and prevent slippage.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother's mouth is blocked, we have repeated the cure, treatment and herbal remedy for sore throat.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If not otherwise informed by the causes we have mentioned, keep in mind that you should not touch it during periods of abstraction, but rather ensure that what has been extracted from there reaches directly to the woman's mouth and give her this enguent as an aphrodisiac; for it is said that this will cause the person to perish within forty days and completely dissolve and disappear.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	Mays quan se poyreys, they cause great discomfort to the head and stomach, and often worsen the illness; therefore it is advisamo that fumes or appropriate remedies be applied according to the situation.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	The Old Celtic Hall is characternized by a sub-fumigation of nettle and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument through which a woman is suspected to have menstrual and secondary bleeding should be retained:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	"Shall we take the path less traveled?" (Translation of a phrase in Occitan)
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	C shall be stopped the subtle part near the head and the broad part above the fire, and the smoldering below the flames shall also be extinguted.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	The smoke produced therein should be consumed, and another one can take its place.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	The care of the child's posterior is non-perforated.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	As a child, Moses avoided the eyes of Pharaoh's servants, who were subtle and powerful.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	The maidservant shall pierce the belly of that swine over there; and if not, pierce it in its rear side, but be careful not to touch the tail.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	He paused to admire the rain-drenched view and its scent; he cured that wound within him, which was hidden until now.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	May seems to be tired lately, so he's taken a break with a nasal spray for several days, and the child will start feeling better.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	Accidental injuries to the genitals may require immediate medical attention for infections or abscesses; therefore, it's crucial that those conditions are promptly treated with the warm water mentioned earlier and a clean piece of cloth soaked in antiseptic solution.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	The healing of the fistulas that you have left behind.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that develop from the remnants with low pus and large diameter occur at the back of the anal canal or in the space between one hemorrhoid.
E es una fistula o motas.	"E is a diverticulum or polyp."
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	The old socket is moist and covered with white mold or subtle rot, and some stains are also present around these leakages.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	The winds of those regions are so favorable that they allow for a smooth exit and departure; however, some vessels may encounter difficulty due to strong gusts or wind shifts from the east. These conditions could make navigation challengesteering difficult as well.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	"These are some of the fistulas that occur in the space penetrating into the bladamo and into the urethral canal; and those occurring between the vagina's junction and the anus."
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	The anus where a penetrating proctitis occurs is the area in which your finger enters into the rectum and attempts to subtly introduce objects or metal instruments inside the fissure when it is not tightened.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	In that matter you're troubled by, moments get involved in such a subtle temptation of gold or horsehair which you feel the urge for on your lips.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not experience anything from either stomach issues or intestinal gas and bloating, as we have said before, know that it is non-invasive, but be aware of the time for seeking care if symptoms occur.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladebag or the neck of the gland, it causes involuntary discharge of urine from that area and prevents the person from being able to achieve erection again; therefore, timely medical treatment is necessary.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If Mays enters the joint of the limb or into a bone fracture causing pain in the affected area, then hours later he signals that it attempts to come out there if not for the thickness in the part, and eventually pain around the affected area; and it results in temporary bruising. And this is not helped by the medicine nor is it consolidated using a poultice.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all cases where the penetrating fistula is not curable in its entirety, and the healing of such requires the effort and skill of the medical surgeons upon whom it depends.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In that which is not transparent and not ancient, healthy and full of iron, it is hoped according to what I will recommend you, and this which already exists and has been tasted.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	The illness of boils spreads most within the walls of your house and raises bubbles inside you; if they tend towards the belly, try to use a silver plated instrument or a cauterization rod in case it is an internal abscess. Know where you can find treatment.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If that makes you feel uncompressfortable around the neck, now cover your mouth when speaking with your words into the microphone.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you place your foot on the ground and try to step into something without realizing it is there, another water that touches between your foot and that obstacle; then you'll certainly feel that thing penetrating through. So don't force yourself in it, because it won't be healthy for you, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, they also have healthy habits that are common in many households - such as regular exercise and a balanced diet.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	E of the medicine for which hope is given in order to heal, thou shalt cauterize subtly according to the extent of the fistula; as it was previously mentioned, and then insert that glowing material into the fistula until it surrounds its walls. And again iterate with a needle or three times inserting what is necessary for you to feel that all such adhered carcasses resembling plume feathers of an owl have been cauterized.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	"This healing involves wrapping the affected limbs in a bandage that covers all of them, and it also includes medicines that generate and consolidate tissue growth. If successful, you are well; if not, at no time is this method effective for any other treatment."
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	Then the physician inserts his finger into the anus and does not penetrate it deeply; instead, he searches for a fistula which is immediately filled with flesh or pus. He probes to find the location of the superflictual surface of the canal. Hours later, after drying out the anal canal at the site of the fistula, check if it has shrunk in size and see if the tract passes into the place where you want the end of the tract to be; through this tract, the foreign body is then liberated.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	The original text seems to be in Galician or Portuguese with some spelling errors and archaisms, but here is the translation into formal contemporary English:
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	Mays' blood flow should be checked frequently between you and your surgeon when inserting those wires; then every hour thereafter if possible and depending on the most appropriate instrument used for cauterization, either with a focused flame or acute medicine. It is crucial to adjust properly to those cuts made and excise any dried blood residues.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	The tides that come and go within the coastline every twenty-four hours bring with them waves covered in foam at the shoreline. Over time, this wave action helps form hard, solid rocks through a process of erosion and deposition.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	Certain medications have the properties of stopping bleeding and promoting healing; when the proper time is reached, they are administered again to ensure recovery without fearing recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the anal fissure is shallow and extends only to the upper part of the anus, becoming slightly prominent at the surface level, it may gradually push your feces into the rectum during bowel movements, causing discomfort or pain in that area.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	If the temptation is intense between you and her and it's either cycling or meat, then it's okay to share that moment of pleasure, as long as there is trust and hope for something more in your relationship afterwards. However, be mindful of boundaries and respect each other's comfort levels throughout the experience.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The reason for performing surgery in one of three methods is as follows: firstly, to cauterize the area so that it can heal quickly and effectively; secondly, to remove or seal off the part through which contamination could occur, ensamoothing access to prevent bacteria from entering the wound. This method should be performed only if there is no chance of cutting into the underlying organ, as this may result in further injury or complications related to an existing illness. The third option involves lengthening and cleaning out any pus within that area using a sharp instrument, then restoring the remaining part after cauterization. If the purulent discharge persists or the wound remains open, consider surgical repair of the external opening if possible. In all cases, try to achieve complete healing of the incision site and avoid infection.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	In some cases, a fistula can be closed using this method: when you reach the tip in the fistula, position it around the skin near the surface of the buttock and at the edge of the anus, then gently push towards the opening until punctured. The procedure is similar to inserting a prepackaged needle according to this technique.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	In that faithful entanglement of your fields, or in the surroundings thereof, he enters intending to betray the faithful who occupies the channel through which attains purity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	In order to properly fit a penis ring (also known as a "cock ring"), follow these steps:
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	B) The government will take appropriate measures to ensure that the flood is contained and repaired.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, it will in time become so, regardless of how you have prepared it, unless there's some obstruction within your preparation that prevents ingress into the canal; then do at that spot where it has healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spathulum spinous bone, by which the fistula is sealed off: one end has a sharp curve and the other part is not curved, so that it does not slip in such a way as sometimes occurs when necessary.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Emory's stitches where the wound runs in the incision of those are required.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	In Morroyds there are two main routes, one of which the road appears to be made entirely of gravel, while the other has surfaces similar to asphalt shingles.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	Among those small and large, it flows from these seasons and is one, and among many others, as well as beyond the hills.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, the other ones have a grayish hue due to less moisture and they flow with yellow-tinged water or a small amount of blood, depending on their composition.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	The cure for that which is within the bowl involves commanding evil to be heated and to flow into it, so that sparks appear in the charcoal bowl.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	And thou shalt not bear the yoke with those who are under their obligations to you; but you shall thrust them downward upon your shoulders and share their burden. (English translation of Leviticus 25:48)
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Mays if the wounds are not infected by the moisture of those and softening them, then take those cloths rough or cotton or lamb's wool threads, and spread them over the wounds, after which sprinkle some powders on top to cauterize; or cauterize them as explained in the chapter about cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	A) The one who takes care of themselves will recover within that timeframe where they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the foot does not obey an exit command, the hours of cramp are to be counted as evil in the form where it is somewhat sharp, and the washing is with that water which is in the vessel and obeys loyally when the ailment is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	The Mays' remedy for hemorrhoids involves the following steps: firstly, they advise avoiding any irritation to the affected area in or around the anus. Secondly, it is important not to overstrain oneself as this can cause additional discomfort and pain.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	The one who dares to undertake the task, he who administers sutures using this technique: take the threaded needle and gently insert it through the edges of the wound following this method: carefully guide the needle into the underlying tissue on one side of the wound, while wrapping both ends of the thread around the protruding part; then move laterally across the wounded area. Pull the suture tightly to approximate the edges, remove the excess thread from the needle and gently withdraw it.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. The earth was formless and empty, darkness covered the deep waters, and the Spirit of God was hovering over the surface of the water. And God said, "Let there be light." So there was light.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	A pair of boots was placed over the burning log, and a cloak upon a heap of straw; and that same boot was placed on top and commanded to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	In the confines of this box lies a remedy for healing those in pain or other afflictions that bring relief.
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Frequent falls due to severe gaps or strains caused by natural causes.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	E cum so antiqua et noctis in hoc medicamento, quam horas coquebitis illas interea atque ipsa puncta de spatium vel tua unguentum intra quae sint facta humidis et hostes a suis scorias putei desunt; qui prohibet eos qui consolidati fuerint.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The door of your house shall be open to those who are less fortunate and in need, with the same zeal as when it was first built for them and without reproach or being chastised; rather, it should always remain available to those who require help.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The secret of immortality lies in the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	As Sapias tells us, this is the claw and not a spur according to the color of its edge resembling a clover leaf; it is made throughout the entire body, especially in the lower parts near the knees and thighs, causing great pain if you happen to touch them.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Therefore, it must be ensured that the water in the boiler circuit remains clean and free from any impuratury or deposits, as well as being removed of sludge. Care should also be taken during this process.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If he wishes to do so, the second shall be dealt with as outlined in his own chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Moray eels are small, rough, round bumps on the surface of the skin, with tiny veins visible in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The essence of love is to extend and inscribe that which you cherish within yourself.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If it swells or blisters, treat with hot water as we have instructed; use fire or an acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	I have eradicated both inverse and non-inverse operations on the same instrument with which I play.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	Mays' ant nest is a small eminence of finely feathered or thickened surface on the skin above the preauricular area, and when touched gently it appears like a mildly irritating insect bite. It is formed around the affected area.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The cure for poison is to take a quill made of rooster or turkey feather, and soak it in liquid, then place that over the wound where you apply the quill with the tip of the liquid around the wound; and turn gently the your own quill inside which you dip into the liquid that is within the circuit of the wound, and press that onto the edge of the skin, eradicating the poison from its roots.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	Si vous voulez faire une infusion à l'eau avec des herbes et du fer selon cette méthode :
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The strap of the pouch slides subtly, muffled (as it'cuh not pierced), wrapped up in itself above what is learned and the rotation of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	As soon as the ant was mentioned, it moved swiftly towards the cauldron where the aether had been prepared in the Capitoline Cauldrons.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The instruments that I manage to give baptism.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some creams are made of Argentan or Lacto or Malleate; and some creams are made from those instruments small or large depending on those to which they are administered, as the one administered in the cure of little children is small; and from those whose heads are balding or losing hair, the creams for those shall be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The Great Crested Puffin (Fratercula cristata) is a seabird belonging to the auk family. It has distinctive colorful plumage, with breeding males sporting vibrant orange beaks and feet during the summer months. They are found in large colonies on cliffs along the Atlantic coasts of Canada, Iceland, Norway, Greenland, and some parts of Russia.
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the tube is slightly wider than where the bag is attached to it, and its length differs from that point by as many times as there are chambers in the bag.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The extreme end of the penis, which is inserted into the vagina, may be curved (though not excessively), somewhat like a lion lying down; behind this curvature lies subtlety; and on one side there are two rings, while on the other side there is one ring, with its size corresponding to the thickness of the shaft according to the roughness and slightly larger diameter.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	Let S be the bag in which urine from an animal's blad cups or sheep wool is stored, and its content should amount to one pound (approximately half a liter).
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	A is pierced in places, and then turned around; the spaces between these crosses are widened to make them larger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	The text is in Occitan, a Romance language spoken in southern France and parts of Italy and Spain. Translation: "He shall take the poultice apart from those too distant to touch the faithful cross where it should be placed; and adjust that pouch; and when you pause on him with the pouch, tie it tightly around his head between two distinct strings, and attaches this criceto to everyone of them: But the quality of that criceto is such that you must heat up the poultice medicinally, depending on the amount tolerable by the illness; and watch out so that it's not too hot nor too cold."
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	The patient lies supine on their back, and lifts the affected area to chest level, then relaxes it downwards; he places his hands over which already lie some stones or a ladle; and then applies anointing oil or almond oil or fenugreek paste around that. Then he inserts that into the rectum with ease, and then the minister takes the pouch and squeezes out its contents forcefully until it's completely evacuated from the bowel which is inside the cristern; afterwards, the cristern and the malaise are removed to the side.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine causes too much sleepiness, take as little as possible; and if you sleep all through one night like that, it's even worse in restlessness.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you have those skin lesions caused by sunburn or sweating, repeat the cauterization process when they are healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If you have pimples or painful lumps on your buttocks, these could be symptoms of a more serious condition such as cystitis (blad지), kidney stones, or even cancer. It's important to consult with a healthcare professional for an accurate diagnosis and appropriate treatment.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Cure of the Plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	In the case of a cold or flu outbreak, it is advisebly to get plenty of rest and stay hydrated. I prescribe such measures for your condition along with any necessary medications as per consultation.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	I say that the puddings are diverse depending on when they are made and according to the recipe for which case they are being prepared.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	These wounds are caused by such things as heavy stones, incised cuts from knives or other sharp objects, blows with a club, axe or similar weapons.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	In the body of man there are bruises just as a bruise may appear on the head or neck, or chest, or belly, or face, and such like for those of other parts.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	In this passage, the author discusses certain treatments for various diseases and then proceeds to reason about these methods and establish rules concerning other illnesse/disease. The text appears to be in Portuguese (pt). Thus, the correct label is "pt" for Portuguese.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	Starting with the simple chapters, I will introduce concepts that will later be connected to more complex ones discussed in chapter three.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	When you experience a simple head injury that is not a fracture, he considers the following: if it's a minor bump or bruise and there has been no serious trauma, but still presents with swelling and threatens potential complications such as an abscess formation due to infection, then one should immediately consider cranial blepharospasm (involuntary twitching of the eyelid muscles) without delay; and extract a small amount of blood according to the severity of the wound if there are no contraindications for hemostasis, especially if the discharged blood from the injury is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	S is the surgical incision of the contralateral side, and care should be taken to monitor signs of infection or inflammaturism, and ingestion of heavy foods during recovery.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	May's dietary restriction forbids the consumption of any type of meat and does not allow close proximity to it.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	The sea breeze stops blowing on the beach if there are jellyfish stings in abundance, red swelling occurred from bitten by an oil spill or where it is contaminated with sewage.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Mays is sure about the stump bacterial infection if he has recently touched his wound and the air hasn't changed since I recommended to him to cover it with some powder previously.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	Yes, the air has indeed changed since that time, as hours of pause have passed until healed is what was wounded.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	The stormy sea is either great or it's just an illusion of space and appearances, and if the lips are not adjusted by nature (i.e., waves), at times I will adjust those with a stitch according to my recommendation on the type of stitching.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	Mays, when the plague is discovered in both the body and spirit, it is not held captive by him alone but with a small suspension, now he delves into that and approaches the plague through medicines to restore his flesh at its source of origin, and commands the malady to be freed from foods where nourishment lies: grains and fruits among others, ensuring they are well-cooked.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	The sentence you've shared seems to be in an obscured or unclear language that I cannot accurnately translate. It may have been intentionally garbled, encoded or distorted and requires further clarification for accurate translation. Could you please provide more context or details?
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	In these cases where the blood flow is coming from an artery or vein and has not been stopped by medicines, you should inquire about whether it's an artery; if so, then lysine atrophied portions of the tissue near that uncontrolled area. If necessary for bleeding to stop as we have described above, cauterize within that region once the blood has been stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these plagues are simple and small, the cause of them is negligible; thus you sprinkle this powder over those spots, because once it settles there, a change in air will eliminate those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	Recipe for Dragonfly Powder: This is the mixture method: a portion of olive oil and two portions of dragon's blood resin, three parts of an un-extinct substance; mix it all well, fill up a vessel with it, press tightly within it so that you cover the base. Allow it to coagulate over the adhesive.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	The strict regimen of the prescription should be followed exactly and not taken more often than suggested, as this is neither recommended nor derived from the medicine within which it aids healing.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Altogether a few drops make water alone, when not with you at this moment as an offering and sanctification of the Dragon.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	In this surgical procedure for large varicose veins, it is essential that the patient remains in a horizontal position during treatment and that their veins are not constricted or narrowed; moreover, they should avoid any actions that might disrupt blood flow in those areas.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air becomes altered, mainly during summer times, those areas no longer seem to be in this position, but then use those balms that we have mentioned earlier, as well as resting on the alpine herbs applied externeby water and honey mixture; moreover, apply the other treatment when they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	Maya broke her leg during a fall on the beach; it's small but swolamo soon afterward.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	In that age, a healer who knew the art of mending broken bones was held in high esteem. They would use various techniques and remedabits to set the bone correctly for proper healing.
De las plaguas del col.	From the leaves of the willow tree.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	Whether May's fever is in the head or not makes no difference to the medication and between the symptoms of a simple cold.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	The cut of the neck either nerves or artery, hours if it's nerve, not in lu engine but must be avoided for pain relief from lu water that causes severe stinging sensation; as you know and see, it resembles vinegar and such like nozo to nerves and opposes that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	The nerve does not hesitate over the attack any cause of total freeze, since the substance of the nerves is also frozen and the continuation of it lies in the brain, which is the most important of all body parts.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	The water that contains medicinal herbs is also washed with lukewarm water; occasionally a decoction or non-oily infusion is added, and then the mixture (of stones) is ground in this manner and transformed into paste.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is big, the healer dedicates their hours to stitching and mending its lips, and with care they cure that person inside who needs to be healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	The rainwater may be shallow or deep depending on the lower slope deposits, and during heavy rainfall, it penetrates that area more deeply.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If an injury on the beach occurs and a vein is cut, causing blood flow, one should first stop or elevate that limb, apply pressure to it, or even use a cauterizing agent if necessary due to excessive bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	Mays if you cut the tendons of the galloway, all its veins in the neck shall be saved; then adjust the ligaments of the chest over the flesh of the galloway and do not touch that part; now bring it up to that place and reduce it back onto its natural shape, ensuring proper tension with a strong stitching. Let it heal for several days before applying ointment that promotes adhesion and stimulation within which is healthy.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the storm hits your land causing damage to crops and livestpressure in that area, you will receive compensation for the hours worked; also all fragments of those belongings which can be salvaged shall remain yours, while anything not repairable should be taken within a time frame before the flood occurs, and it must be separated and removed from your land.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	The rain has recently passed over the dusty area that you recommended, leaving everything fresh and clean.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	In the sea lies an opened fistula; hours cure that which in his head will come to appear again on his forehead.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From the scratches of an apple or similar marks made between the shoulders and on the chest, or with a knife, a small axe, or a lance, or by other means.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If the storm is caused by thunder or hail, and how deep it goes into the sky, then also consider if from the rain there are strong winds; at that time know that the storm can be deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	If the sea is not very deep and the tide has recently come in, pause on its shore during your first hour of wakefulnss, and do not eat that which may have been retained by the depths and returned to your heart causing illness; instead, rest upon it with an alluring breeze, and shed those two veils as dawn breaks.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the ointment is not at your disposer, then during low tide on the shoreline gather some seawater and let it sit until evening to allow any impurities to settle; then make that the sickness lie upon the water so that its essence may drain away.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If you have been struck by lightning for three days or more and do not develop severe illness, seizures of the body, muscle spasms, or difficulty in swallowing, then consider applying other appropriate remedangs; otherwise, consult a doctor immediately after ensuring that your condition is safe.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If May's sanctity of Lu is forgiven and he always remains free, know that the hours have passed which were necessary for him to make a decision about his consulate; therefore pursue it accordingly.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the wound is a shallow cut or scrape and it'n on the surface of the skin or bone, then after some hours it heals by itself if small, or with powder if small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	May's son now holds an invaluable treasure in his hand, and he has no intention of letting go. Once upon a time, you tried to grab the wave and hold onto those gems, but they were scattered apart.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If the tides are not separate, then within a few hours you will see that the wave breaks and its extraction is revealed.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	A) The other water-related accidents in the limbs, except for the swelling, involve curative measures related to the fluid we have mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From the belly wounds.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indigestion causing discomfort in the stomach is severe, mild or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In the great variety of wounds and injuries to the fascia or nerve sheath, there is a pronounced tendency for contusion and subtle infilcuation resulting from their suturing being particularly vigorous and sensitive.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is easily made in another way, but reducing it becomes much more difficult if you don't intervene at the site promptly; because it widens and thickens so that its entry becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best method of interruption is migration; in that regard, reducing the burden isn't difficult as it is for the two species mentioned previously.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	The stitches used for abdomnial wounds are based on four techniques; however, these stitches also apply to other types of skin injuries.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	Two other sutures extend to the neighboring bones, but are exclusively their own in the sagittal suture of the skull.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	Certaine, here is the translation of your text from Romanian to English: "The following are some examples and declarations."
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	When the hail is small and there's some reason for that in the cloud structure, it becomes difficult to reduce it either due to disruption caused by its size or when the cloud undergocuh inflation because of air coldness. Two possible reasons occur at this time: as we have mentioned before, or when the cloud experiences expansion due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	Then, when it is so, cover your scales as you sink into the water alone or take a quick swim in water that has been heated slightly, and cyperus roots, spikes, and emmer wheat which have been flattened within that bag.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Certain vegetable juices contain properties that make them more effective than water alone in dissolving inflammamoes.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Thus the inflammatur shall be resolved, for a while thou shalt soak thy body in water which is warm and soft, as this helps to relax your muscles due to its gentle heat.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	Mays is excused from entering this treatment due to an incompatibility; hours split the disturbance with a slight instrument which contains inserted beads.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first cure of curare is better when it's properly stored and not allowed to dry out due to negligence or lack of necessity.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	The shape of the violin.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	A batch of acute triangles and another that is not acute; the tip is subtle, but it's not the subtlenaturess of a spatula, rather it is slightly obtuse to some extent.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	Therefore, the spread of plague is intensified and years away from the burial, allowing for the relocation to be carried out according to its natural shape at its rightful place, if possible underwater, as it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	Mays quand la disruption est importante, et elle se trouve dans la partie basse du ventre, c'est souvent parce qu'il y a quelque chose qui te fait mal à votre dos, et vous avee des ballonnements plus forts que ceux de la partie supérieure. Et si cela se trouve au-dessus de cette région, alors souvent vous sentez le coup sur votre tête et les picotements aux parties inférieures.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	If the disturbance occurs in one of the two parts of the body, then pause your understanding and consideration temporarily so that the affected part is addressed more fully than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	In the great and minor plagues, administer that you may be able to.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In small ulcers, pause the water that you use for your preparation, and make sure it is among those most precious to you, which will have the entire control of its mouth and adjust its lips towards you, then reveal from there to that one who sewed the suture due to some cause or another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suturing technique: one where you take the needle and count stitches according to the width of the wound; then place the needle on the edge of the wound without causing further tearing, making sure not to insert it too deeply at the ends of the tendon or any tissue left after detachment. While doing this, you have already made two sets of stitches - one set being from each end of the tendon and another from the flap edges. You have now completed four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	In this process, the needle is strengthened with a double thread in the circuit of the awl, and some pieces of soft leather are added for reinforcement and the tip is sharpened again; then another needle is placed on it so that it resembles the first one. Continue doing this if necessary until you have completed all circuits with the needles required.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The fine needles migrate between grotesqueness and subtlecuity, for the fine ones slightly pierce the skin; and the thick ones are difficult to maneuver in the cord, hence they should be made to balance both subtlety and bulkiness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	The needle should be placed at both ends of the rope segment in such a way that the flesh is not pierced too deeply and so that the fraying occurs in front of its strengthening.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	In cases where the fracture is not severely displaced, surgical intervention may be unnecessary for bone healing to occur.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	A proper inspection of the needle's tips ensures that they do not cause any harm during use. Ensure to hold them firmly and let them rest on fully expanded, pulverized threads throughout their entire length. These should be inserted until you feel the plague has been consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of sutures with needles are suitable for small wounds, up to the point where you use one or two stitches or so around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second suture is comisural; it consists of managing the four extremities, both ends of the fibula and tibia bones in one session, using a needle which should be fine but also sturdy.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	The needle will have penetrated these four extremities at the following depths; start with that part you insert the needle from and reduce the length of the thread as you progress, to ensure the suture is above subcutaneous tissue on each side, so that the stitches are in line with the original incision.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	There is a pause between each suture, making up most of the entire piece.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This stitching technique is for the shirts you requested, sirs.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	In the event of an accident causing a wound in the abdamoinal region, where the appendix had become inflamed and there was disruption of the main part of it by about one palm (approximately four inches), with ejection of the surrounding membranes around two palms from the wall of the hollow organ, causing a disruption in the affected limb; therefore I performed an operation after which the appendix had remained open for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The storm had been established for around fifteen days or so, and during this time it rained heavily. Later on, the rain ceased and it was converted into pleasant weather conditions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	Eve and the other midwives had only applied unclean ointments, which I do not wish to mention here, as it was at a place where such remedangs were neither proven nor any medicine available; rather, I placed my trust in that balm all over the swollen wound for two days until, by constant bathing with cold water infused with meadowsweet, the boil healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	According to the description by Paul, there are two specific types of suture materials.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	You begin the stitching of the incision and insert the needle through to the other side of the wound.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	Therefore, the needle is inserted into one end of the cylinder and slides along its length in both width and height, while keeping the other tip of the pencil within the tube; make sure the needle penetrates through to the other end from where it was initially inserted.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	Direction A follows from the starting point to where you must stop, then turn left and walk along the path until reaching its extreme end on the right side of your departure entrance; now insert the pin through the other extremity of the exit door and towards the entry entrance.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	In the field of mathematics, particularly in topology and geometry, there exists a concept called "fibration," which can be loosely interpreted as a way to describe how one space (called the 'total space') is built up or constructed using another space ('the base space'), with fibers being additional spaces attached at each point of the base space.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	The seer begins from this point on the right side and moves towards that end which is at the tip, then through the needle of the compass, it pierces, drawing with it the tip of the index that's on the other side, to this extremity; also moving that of the needle which belongs to your hand.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	Two water sources and another, each providing one source of water per household according to the given example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this suture pattern is to use a fish-skin suture that you cut with scissors; thus, you sew one stitch near the end part of the limb and then pull the other stitch through so it completes the closure.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second proper suture technique you should learn is the Galea method, which I will explain in detail and then summarize again for better understanding; this involves stitching that segment of tissue where medications have been applied, enseing that all parts are adequately connected to their respective counterparts by nature; they place one end of a thread on each side, and the suture is performed as follows:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You place the needle on the edge of your sight, near your starting point from the porch, and let it enter into the distance in that direction at noon. Then you see two extremities of the circle; then you revolve the needle so that it enters into the distance in two different directions of the circle.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	He turns his eyes towards those rocks and tries to penetrate some of the particles from the right side into the left side, or vice verscuas that are in the opposite direction at the other end of the view.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This type of stitching is better than the common loose stitch, and it's a technique that I remember fondly.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Galileo
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	In the days of yore, a surgical procedure involving stitches on the abdomen was rectified with two needles; therefore, you interfere in these matters by using a faithful instrument and commence to insert the needle gently along those lines that must be sewn together. This allows one layer to penetrate into another according to the sutures of those which are connected heartily.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	The surgical intervention in the small intestine is often more challenging than in other parts of the abdomebody due to its complex anatomy and extensive blood supply.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	May's medicine made from the dragon fruit is considered a benchmark for other fruits.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The main cause is that you will obtain the recent plague by touching your own sanctified water before a changing air, and reducing the bundle and chopping it properly, after which hours pause on its red wine skin.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has not altered the disease, at times pause will occur on that high mountain peak where you are present, causing rock hardening and cracks in the fields; they become consolidated and visible just as is the case with other healed diseases within those areas.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the prescribed medications on hand, take some rest for a while and start applying bandages, ointments, and switch to taking it twice a day as you were instructed, in order that healing can occur without your body reacting negatively to other treatments when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague may spread to your main members, we recommend submerging them in warm water with medicinal properties or olive oil and taking a break from visiting areas between hospitangs and nurses' stations.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If the person feels pain or discomfort in his intestines, as he tries to move along this way, that man who is very sick turns black in my eyes, and mainly if the swelling reaches the intestine and makes a piercing exit into the depths of their body.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	The sap of that which is in the coarse burls is much healthier than that which is in the fine burls.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	E is the challenging area to heal known as "gegunu", where no rain can reach; and it's because of the great number of vessels that are in it and its magnitude there, and due to the subtlety of this matter, and because of its proximity to nerve nature.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	The flax fiber that you get from the plant is the fabric and obtains it freshly, then dries it according to your honesty so as to reduce those fibers while untwisting.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	Mays has moved to new spaces and I have done the same; there are times when you cling to that faithful friend of yours over a place that is being disparaged by me, only for blood to flow, since in this fabric are veins and arterries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	The boundary of the water that is located beyond this marker extends two nautical miles from its ends to form a baseline, which will be used for determninig the territorial waters and the construction of any structures or devices related to it.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	In the bustling city of Buenos Aires, a terrible outbreak had struck the population in late February, causing panic and chaos among its residents. The infectious disease spread rapidly through the crowded streets, affectnosing everyone from workers to children alike. Faced with this crisis, the people banded together to combat the deadly illness that was sweeping across their beloved city.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	Quant accideys disruption in the belly is small, it may be possible that it will be restored to some homes, so you see what was once plagued in its stomach by percussion of a ball and was the plague on the right side of the stomastery, and the plague was ancient and had formed a fistula, and is ejected from its action and ventilation.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	The healing of your joint that was not affected in the sickness has subtly been restored and now focuses on ensuring that place is solidified.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	You shall not keep the place where you have found it consolidated; lament over the evil that has befallen upon your belly in an accident, and do not allow others to suffer ill effects from accidents on their own crops or pasture, nor engage in bathing and practicing what I dictate.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	In his experiments with aromatic plants, Eudoxus proposed that the intensity of their scent depends on how tightly they are bound in the jar; he suggested that one should take large cloves and attach the two lips of the jar to them so that when they press down upon these lips, it separates the cap and releases its aroma without dissolving.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	At the first ant hill, and without stopping rain, ants will create another colony depending on the total amount of water.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Avoid creating that and causing harm to the land; and do not occupy excessive areas within his field so as not to bring any damage or misfortune upon anyone.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It may be possible that the animal skin is pierced by a very thin needle which is made of an animal hide attached to it, and it is like a pin; so you take the tip of this animal hairs/fibers of hide, make them bald (descarned), then attach that tip with the fibers on the needle, wrapped around that fiber in the skin, and thread through your sewing using that wrap.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This spool of thread isn't just a pattern of stitches, but rather a path of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	The hurricane is large and extensive, mostly if it occurs in one of the subtle belts, for hours it'n't intense but rather subtle, and not a healing air from all sides.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	The treatment of zucchini and hemorrhoids.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	We know that all kinds of swelling and inflammamoins when they sink in, along with an ulcer not yet healed and a constant arm for some time without detaching, at any limb it is universally called a fistula and we call her by the name "azukem".
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	According to the truth, there is indeed such an affliction called numbness, hard and white as it has no pain and its heaviness is so similar to that of sleeplamoor; hence, we shall not name it acupressure point, which is the penalty.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	H è in Alcuus Homes Humida, che ha l'acqua; ed inoltre la bassa umidità si riduce nelle ore successive.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some dewings of this moisture are moved, and they are few, thick, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	In the division of this text into sentences, there are several ulcers that do not heal or become raw flesh, but instead result from one of nine causes: One cause is due to insupect sanitation in the area; another because of maliciousness within oneself; yet another where between it and the lips exists hardened tissue preventing natural regeneration; a fourth that involves contaminated materials introduced into the ulcer, which are of poor quality; fifthly, when medicine is unsuitable for treating such an ulcer; sixth, if there is corruption or pestilence in the region; seventh, due to regional properties resembling those found near Zaragoza, where food digestion can be difficult and healing from natural abscesses may take longer; eighth, when a single bone, multiple small bones, or fragments are present.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I will show you all those causes and signs of such dise
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Certaine, voici un énoncé en français standard : "Je veux te faire savoir la guérison de la fistule qui est faite par le biais d'une opération."
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	These fistulae affect all the members of the body; four of those are fistulas that reach major veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the diaphragpit, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the spinal discs, or to any of the joints composed of such a composition as bone and flesh; and among those there are some that result in proximity to the main limb.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Then that of these fistulae which according to this method is of the diseases with difficult healing and no cure, involves much effort and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If there is any fistula whose depth does not reach the places mentioned in this text and you trust and have hope in its healing power, as well as wanting to gain knowledge of it, then try using herbs or iron, and if the fistula goes straight, pursue that path.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the key ring is twisted, one should try to gently loosen the thin metal, as sometimes the lightness of its body can be thrown and curved due to the twisting.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	The text appears to be in Catalan with some intentional misspellannoes and alterations. Translating the correct version of this into English would result in: "The Fistula is not causing horrific pains, so it's possible that you are exaggerating about your condition."
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	The Cricesterian therapist creates a blockage for the cysts by applying moisture from other channels that flow through them and around it.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	A well-crafted and exquisitamo inquiry might be as follows: "Could you provide insight into how I may identify if there is a foreign object present within my body, such as whether it's related to distant or proximal fistulas? Additionally, could you explain the possibility of having multiple exit points for this potential fistula and where exactly on my body they might be located? Furthermore, would you share your perspective on how I may alleviate any discomfort associated with such a condition?"
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	I will provide you with an overview of all those causes which are very relevant, according to the latest research on the subject and based on confidence in scientific findings: and it is that one considers whether they are apparent fistulas close or far from junctions, near nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the locations I have mentioned.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	The mouth of the patient becomes dry because it is spoken in the language of Lu, and they come to that water which is found in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, as well as the blood born from the orifice of the body, and cure whatever is inside that has become sick.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	In cases where the anal fistula is of great depth and in accordance with rectal anatomy, it should be incised near to the ano-rectal line as much as possible, thus isolating all surrounding infected tissue; then administer medications wrapped around acupuncture needles, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula which has been understood through a magnetic approach.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	The acid water does not eat away at all the metal that exists within the process of acute corrosion in the cavitation of the corrosion.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	A prop restores that which generates healthy flesh within so it may heal properly.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If the wound is not healed by then, we shall have to cauterize it as soon as possible after you mentioned it again.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	The cause of the fistula is in the vein and you need to obtain a certificate about it; then ask that specific area if there are any other causes such as veins, nerves or main limbs, just like I have mentioned.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	Mays si the bone is your discovery and it lies in a cave or similar enclosure, then at that time you can enter where corruption exists entirely; and with care approach that area which has been infested to be purified.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not healthy and natural to do so, then you know that you have not yet achieved the complete eradication of corruption; therefore, you should meticulously and thoroughly use reason to purify and rejuvenate yourself from within, thus restoring your previous strength.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	If it is healthy, so be it; but if not, you should know that this corruption lies in the deep recesses of your heart, which has not yet surfaced, and therefore do not worry about it at all.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the affected bone is small or you have no other option, now throw it with subtle forceps as needed to that point.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If you have any doubts or questions, the expert extraction of all, and those without exception weakens not a single one of your strengths.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Mays if any cause of the dampness troubles you, and in ignorance there is neither fear nor mistake, at this time he desires those lamentations or flesh if it's here, and delivers their bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Mays si a tuon es preparo di ostar les oses de la toa ora, las horas pausa söla plaga aqua ch'é poyresca la plaga aquella, e lassa aquella entro che aquo é en el environament di aquels osses dala carns ed dala liamentz, e guarda la plaga chi non sia consolidada, e siea constrinta la seccio la qual t'as inscidida en te toa operacion.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you fear it, let the body submerged on top of three days old oil sink underwater, or in Egyptian embalming, or into a green-colored liquid mixture; when they will burn those remains and the bones will be separated by incineration, leaving ashes.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Mayseus is just as great as the sons of Camba or Coyssa (or their kin), and whatever may be tainted about him is only his face; nowadebecause that's where the blackness and corruption are, it has been hidden underneath. But with proper restoration, its bright color returns.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	The death of the fractured bone is a significant event, and since the process of decay has reached its marrow, it now becomes necessary to close that area and completely remove it into the location where the decay has occurred. Then, treatment should be applied within until it has fully healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	First example of a situation where you might need to request accommodation at your workplace is for someone with mobility issues, such as an individual who uses a wheelchair or has difficulty walking due to injury or disability. In this case, the person may require certain adjustments in their work environment to be able to carry out their job effectively and comfortably.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	An elderly man of around xxx years old suffers from pain in his groin area, with bad leaks spreading to the surrounding tissues that eventually reach the scrotum, causing a large abscess without an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Thus, the surgeon extends the incision time in that of error by the assistants while the inflammamoent was therein, and procures appropriate materials for the suture, with a slow healing process during which the fistulous cannula is made, inserting its end into the orifice holes all of which were causing suppuration and moisture within the wound.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	Then after about two years passed, I didn't see much of my parents around anymore and was focused only on my work in the fields, until I got called back home.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	The crowds of people and the materials that flowed from there in great quantities through those gates; by now, everything belonging to that man was neatly packed up and had a lemon-like hue.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	Then you have interfered with one of those horrifying things and it has come to his mouth.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	I shall turn my attention to the mysteries and strive to uncover those that may affect all aspects of our community.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	The following is the translation of your passage from Catalan to English:
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	"I am eager to share with you the water that I discovered and prepared for these discoveries."
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	I command that it not be in the soil but rather this corruption which has been separated and collected; I have already dealt with it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	The primary goal of this long-term restorative medicine approach is to promote the recovery and rehabilitation of patients by focusing on comprehensive care strategies rather than solen reliance on curative measures. This holistic method involves a multi-faceted treatment plan that includes prevention, management, and rehabilitative techniques aimed at improving overall health and quality of life for extended periods.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	The exploration and discovery of the second continent began after the first discovery had been made, leading to ongoing development and progress in those lands.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	I see that water which appears to be polluted and am obliged to perform the purification and restoration of it; however, it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	Then you discovered another version of it and gradually got involved in restoring it, not completely restoring until an entire palm was restored, and that extraction contained its core, and with appropriate medicines, it became strongly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	E is not necessary in the operation of light and sound sectors due to the complexity of the system as well as the scarcity of tolerance for errors and fear of death, because in every hour, laziness prevails due to excessive relaxation syndrome.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Thus, let us pray for the health of all people and their entire well-beebing, that nothing hardens in them; may they receive good disposition within their bodies, and return virtue to them; and may we speak favorably towards their intentions as they go about, and bring no harm nor inconvenience to anyone.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	Mays, if you have made an incision in the skin near a joint so that it can be bent afterwards, then take a ligament and strengthen that at the extremity of the bone protruding from the incision, and command someone to extend that using leather thicker than the first. Then place this over the flesh left on the bone, extend its extremity so that it pulls the skin towards the already cut parts, and you open up the area where you want the incision for surgery so that the saw doesn't damage the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	The break in work hours or the prolonged table leaves are not considered acceptable, as it is forbidden to slaughter meat that has spoiled.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	E cove que sia la serradura sobre les locs corrompus petit a petit, car si es en la cavitat del os corrupcio no apareix al sentimença i ara és vinguda. (Catalan)
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is rotten and not prominent, there is a continuous link between one piece and another, and the decay is either completely localized or in parts of it; at times you will discover the flesh of all parts completely; then the root of that which was first decayed continues to be so until it connects with the latter part whose hinge remains.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	R is a small key according to the place of the corruption as we have mentioned.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	The corruption is at the junction, it pierces that corrupted junction and cuts off their link with the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	Corruption is often found in the continuous intersections of two hours; it's not always due to reason but rather greed.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	If corruption is in the direction of your work (either left or right), it can be quite difficult; however, I suggest you investigate how it appears to you and that you remove/resolve it depending on each case according to what is possible for you, and by whatever means necessary. When not causing harm or pain to yourself.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Sapient beings know that the tools and blades used for cutting these bones vary according to the situation of the bones, as well as their preparation, thickness, fineness, size, delicateness, rarity, and hardness; therefore it is known that you should prepare instruments suitable for every type of operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	The translation of the given text in Catalan to English is as follows: "As for that operation which concerns you on this instrument about which you have long study and extensive knowledge of these techniques, being an expert witness in such methods, at times having dealt with them in a way that suits any discomfort associated with all illnesses."
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	At the end of this chapter, you will find information about which instruments are simple and which ones produce sound at a frequency that may affect your hearing due to prolonged exposure:
Forma de serra:	Serrated shape or form of sawtooth. In English, this term is often referred to as "serrated" or having a "saw-toothed" pattern. It describes an edge or outline that has multiple points and indentations similar to the teeth of a saw. This type of structure can be found in various contextangs such as mountains (a serrated mountain range), leaves, knives, and other objects with a jagged appearance.
Forma de autra serra:	Alternative title or form of the mountain range: Another name for a well-known mountain range. For example, if referring to the Rockies in North America, you could also call them the "Rocky Mountains." Other notable ranges include the Andes (South American Cordillera), Alps (Eurasian Alpine Range), and Himalayas (Himachal or Greater Kailash).
Forma de autra serra:	Other way of saying "another mountain range": alternative term for a series of mountains.
Forma de autra serra gran:	Another way to say "gran" (big) in Spanish is by using one of the following synonyms:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a ray: A ray in geometry is a straight line that starts at a particular point and extends infinitely in one direction. It's often represented with two points, where the first point indicates the starting point (also known as its endpoint) and an arrow on the second point to show that it continues endlessly in that direction.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this ray follows the shape of a star-shaped nail head, and its points are arranged according to the arrangement of stars in a constellation.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	In the anatomy of a tree trunk, two types of growth rings are distinguished - annual and false or pseudo-annual rings. Annual rings represent one year of growth and can be identified by their alternating light (spring) wood with large pores for efficient water transportation, and darker (summer/fall) wood containing smaller pore structures for structural support.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	In English, the equivalent term for "Forma de razori mayor" (which is Catalan) would be "Major premise." A syllogism consists of three parts: a major premise, a minor premise, and a conclusion. The major premise is a general statement or principle that applies to all members of the category being discussed in the argument.
Forma de razori menor:	Menor forma del rasero (Shorter surface area): En este contexto, se refiere a la reducción o disminución en el área superficial de un objeto. Esto podría ser relevante en varias aplicaciones científfas y tecnológicas donde las propiedades relacionadas con el tamaño del área son significativas para el rendimiento, diseño u otras características del material.
Forma de razori lat:	Latvian: Vai izmantojamās atšķirības?
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The shape of the other sword has a more imposing hilt and blade sharpness, while its crossguard is made with a dagger-like member.
Forma de lu:	Translation (English): Form of light
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	La forma que tiene una cuchara con concavidad es semicircular. La parte más ancha y hueca, donde se coloca la comida o líquido a consumir, está curvada hacia afuera en un arco circular hasta llegar al mango de la misma. Este diseño permite recoger eficazcuente los alimentos sólidos o líquidos y llevarlos fácilmente a la boca.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Una forma más sutil de decir "subtle difference" en español sería expresarse como un matiz o una diferencia atenuada. Esta formulación mantiene la esencia del término original, enfatizando que se trata de variaciones menores y no obvias entre dos conceptos o elementos.
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Another way of expressing "extremely curved tip":
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The French phrase "Forme de rasori petit semblant a tenta" seems to be an attempt at translating the English phrase, but it is not correctly formed. A correct translation of "A small-scale razor attempt" in French would be "Une tentative à petite échelle du genre rasoir".
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of the teeth which pierces through the bones.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Title in Romanian: Modalitățile încheierei prin îndoielă sau minoreanță
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another scythe-like instrument; this appearance resembles a crescent moon and the tip behaves like a saw, and it appears in various locations according to bone proportions.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	La forma de rai correspon al ratio del eje central con respecto al diámetro exterior, similar al proporcionamiento entre el hueso perforado y sus dimensiones. En matemátcuas, esta relación puede expresarse como la longitud del eje dividida por el radio del círculo circunscrito (la mitad del diámetro). Estos conceptos de geometría se aplican igualmente en ingeniería o arquitectura para determinar aspectos estructurales y diseños.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The edge of the lute is triangular and pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	Letter F is a common type of iron ore found in India, as well as all the reasons mentioned regarding smelters and crushers.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Extreme sports and the bone lock mechanism.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can become infected due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes, or if you have treated the corruption with medicines and it did not cure, sometimes the infection spreads to a limb that is not affected by any cause. In such cases, one should immerse the member in an appropriate solution so that the contamination can be removed from that area, which will help the illness to disappear without causing death or severe damage to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of the one to whom it happens, is that the limb turns black within which lies a bone or joint and when heated by fire, the blackness spreads into all the flesh around it and engulfs the entire body; hence causes great fear in those who witness this.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	If it resembles, as the cause of corruption due to certain poisonous causes just like that from Scorpion'cuenta or from Mercury or from Rheumatism and Semblance.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If the fracture or compression is in the limb's end, you should immobilize it and avoid movements that may aggravee the injury to prevent further harm.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	In case you gain access to the fireplace, always use common sense and do not leave any space where objects could fall into it or get caught in its flames.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	The one who lurks there, his hands tied within the cage at the junction.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	The passage you've provided seems to be written in a mix of Old Occitan and possibly some other language, which can make translation difficult. However, I'll give it my best shot based on what looks like Old Occitan text with some Latin influences or errors. Here is an attempt at translating the Old Occitan passage into English:
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Whenever the skin shows signs of corruption or decay, insert a needle into it within one of its nodes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	As you go down the hill's slope, all its secrets unfold before your feet.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Mays swims into the delta and hours later she dives down to the confluence of the river.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If the corruption has not yet overcome the soul, then at that time it is not anger but dismissal and alleviation of the evil to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of incision and cutting off the limb or tearing it apart depends on how much skin you have stretched at the upper part where you want to cut off, and also stretch another piece over there; extend the minister'n a lianment towards both sides left after separation, and extend the ministerin other lianment onto hers. Then separate the flesh that is between two pieces of lianments so wide apart that all the flesh is exposed; then proceed to cut or tear it off.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	Article I - Every person is obliged not to cause any harm or damage within their own property and must ensure that the compensation for damages is justly assessed and fair.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Mays decides to monitor the flow of blood while working hours, promptly applying pressure to the wound or taking short breaks if necessary. Then he should return to his usual medication once it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Article II - Provisions for Treating the Injured Member
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	Once upon a time, there was a man who loved to spend his afterno grooming in the sun, unaware of the accident that would befall him on this very day - an unfortunate event resulting from prolonged exposure to the harsh UV rays.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	Firstly, the taint of corruption arose within his very being that he had completely possessed.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Then that man prepared himself so that you could see the cure go into his body, with great intensity of pain and piercing discomfort; he inserted that thing inside to the joint, and it was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long ago, the town of Aqualene suffered from severe pollution in my father'cuest tale.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	Thus I have ended my time with you and now must reflect upon the excess of medicines, for it overwhelms me; nor is the surplus effective as I begin to pursue another path that leads me further into myself.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	"I decided to confide in my love and I do not wish for this outpouring of affection to have any adverse effects; rather, I fear the ignorance of their death, as the sin was so grave."
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	Then the snake bit him, he returned to his land and told me that the man prepared and pierced through with all his might, and was cured.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	E has not been influenced by this narration but rather to assist in the matter of this disease and its meaning which is signified herein and according to which it was composed.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	The care of patients and the quality of enema administration with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	The pus from the abscess extends into surrounding tissues and causes an increase in size; it breaks through and perforates, spreading out like a fluid wave and is drained away by a thin layer beneath it, without reaching further decay or pressing on bone, nerve, or muscle. It is called sinus and not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is extended before any sign of infection occurs to a member, then it is called an abscess and not a hernia.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The treatment of the wound consists in thoroughly cleansing it so that all inscriptions are removed as much as possible and mainly when they are subtle and done with gauze, making sure not to stick to the location due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you hope that the hemorrhoid sticks and that the resulting infection does not occur thereafter, and nowadam's cure for that is to apply a warm compress, as well as using a sitz bath or taking an over-the-counter cream.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	E is that you consider the sinusitis, and hours if it's severe, and the area around your nose tends to smell of decaying flesh; over time, this becomes infected with bacteria and produces pus. This situation requires a medicinal remedy from Egyptian medicine: an ointment made of fragrant oil and vinegar with black cumin seeds, properly measured and placed into a vessel, then heated until the ingredients melt and transform into a balm-like consistableness.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Take a small amount of warm water that is necessary and dissolve the medicine in it; then apply it to the area with your fingers, massage gently around the wound, and leave the ointment on for about two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	C, I pray thee spare this amount of water, and let it abide for so many days that the mouth be cleansed and the modesty restored.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Some patients are treated with warm water enemas when the prescribed medicine is not available; and you take the ash of ivy, and pour it over the water; then insert a cloth into this mixture that you tie around yourself so that every hour your anus stays cleansed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the illness has no tolerance for Egyptian medicine or ash water, then in such cases it should be cleansed with a mixture of three waters, and one of them mixed with honey (which is known to purify and cleanse) helps the sinus adhere; especially when there's an excessive stipticity and dryness in the mucous.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	In case of dehydraturation, make sure you drink plenty of fluids and ensure that your urine is sufficiently hydrated; in the event of constipation, consume a sufficient amount of water to help soften the stool.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	E is the substance that dissolves a certain oil, violet or stiptic; which cleanses said oil with some medicines and other ointments whose properties have been described in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the anal orifice is narrow and does not allow for insertion of an enema nozzle, slowly and gently expand that area with a small iron rod little by little, then pause in using it wrapped in Egyptian oil or basilisk ointment which has been warmed.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the incision is wide, you should also close the lip with your stitches and leave an adequate amount of material in between the clyster insertion.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	If the wound of which blood flows is elevated above the heart, it will take less time for the bleeding to stop in that lower location where it occurs due to gravity; when the flow is constricted at the depths below sea level, the flesh around is likely generated.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not possible for you to dry your wound in the environment of the home, then please inform us so that we can schedule an appointment and prepare the limb thoroughly according to your clothing and ensuring there are no foreign objects or debreriments on the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	The combined medications that you can stop at the appropriate time to extend those mentioned on your prescription.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The Ewald drip collects such large quantities of the communication that it fills up the entire area; and by inserting its forks into the right side of the sinus' orifice, it creates a wide enough opening so that only a little is left at the orifice of the sinus. Then, it extends over another layer of leaves from the inside according to the amount needed, and rests close to the far end of the orifice in order to avoid excessive blood flow through the vein for several days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	The one that lies above the source of the river is the rightful owner; they may use it at all times as fuel for their fireplaces, provided it comes from within their boundaries.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	To understand whether a certain food is high or low in calories and whether it's easily digestible, non-digestible, or somewhere in between, you can consider the following factors:
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	"In this situation too, one must take into account the location of that vein; if in it there is pain experienced by the patient or not, and whether it is an inflammation."
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	The prescription is prolonged in the treatment, and you see the matter that covers the abscess on your sinus adheres or develops a stronger adhesion; after three days, try to loosen it gently, then replace the dressing and reapply the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Mays do not despair if you have been exposed to the subtle virus of space years ago; healing often takes time, especially in those individuals who experience a delayed generation of carcinogenic effects and in those where it works against them.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinus is prone to frequent inflammations and infections, one should be aware that such a sinus may not adhere properly; if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and its cause prolonged, then adjust it by drying out medicines, and if those medicines are humid in substance and virtue, dry them as much as necessary due to an excessive discharge from the nose.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The medicinal herb from which you take the final oil, dissolve it in rose oil, and apply this mixture onto your body as per ancient practice; use that for therapeamic purposes.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	In that action, if there is no broom available, use the following method, which requires some honey and a wooden spoon or stick: Firstly, pour a thin layer of honey into a shallow pan; then, add myrrh resin and aloes to the mixture. Mix thoroughly until it forms a paste-like consistency, and spread this evenly over the honey in the pan. Next, gently heat the pan over low flame or warm surface while stirring continuously. Once heated, remove from heat, let cool slightly, then carefully apply onto desired area with wooden spoon/stick. This method can be used as a substitute for traditional 'unguentum ad faciendum' in cases where no broom is available.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Some herbs are administered in long-term and regular doses (such as the celestial lily) along with oat flour and centaurium, using those simple or compound mixtures, increase them accordingly and sift and powder over honey that has been stirred; then take.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the swelling is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, you should know that the corruption lies in the shin bone or joints, and already inquiry can be made into the bones or other hard parts of the limbs; then treat with a poultice as previously mentioned.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	The cure for nail psoriasis involves the removal of scales and scraping, cutting off extra digits (surgery), and then separating them.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaritium is an inflammation of the nail bed which may have been caused by previous trauma to the nail or toe, and it usually worsens with carelessness in treatment. It can also be a chronic paronychia (nail fold infection) or corns that erode the nail root's lining, resulting in severe cases where the entire structure is affected, leading to odorous pus formation within the toe and discoloration of the tissue to brownish hues.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you have that oil which we mentioned in the division and do not neglect your duty of healing; soon as possible inscribe it and apply to all excessive swellings wherein there has been poured too much ointer, for cautery is helpful indeed with this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is your own and the gold remains healthy, and if you remove excess gold from it, then begin to prick that part with a needle at the angle of the gold on the flesh, and push and insert it into the flesh easily, resting upon it for as long as required by medicines corrosive within which are totally healed. Also take care to apply suitable ointments while healing occurs.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	The corruption has now begun within your bones; hence cover it up with that ointment and extract it, for there is never a time when it becomes healthy to leave the oil contaminated.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	C is the rot and corruption that has been written in this book; now you will delve into it as if awakening from sleep, entering one of its passages while recalling what previously occupied your mind, and continuing attentively until understanding.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If you experience an injury or trauma to the finger and feel intense pain, it may be that the fingernail has become infected during mealtime due to biting them with dirty hands; therefore, it is appropriate to trim the nails using a clipper or scissor. Make sure not to cut too close to the skin so as to avoid aggravating the pain and causing an overgrowth of skin around the area where you've removed part of the nail. To treat that spot, apply a warm compress until it feels better; this can also help prevent infection from setting in.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	May's adjustment is that it naturally occurs in the bodies of most people and it is quite fat all over, as well as having a strong bone structure or being rather heavy on the joints.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	The sound of the bell echoes at the crossroad; it's their birthday in bells that do not ring out.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The one who is born under the sign of Aries will have a fiery and courageous nature; however, it can also be impulsive and temperamental at times. Those born in Libra are known to possess diplomatic skills and a great sense of balance but may struggle with making quick decisions or being too indecisive. Lastly, individuals born under the sign of Leo tend to have strong leadership qual teries and a natural confidence that attracts others, but they might also come across as arrogant or dominating in certain situations.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	Among those who are not married, the section is trivial, and it is that you should insert a comma after such words in Latin text.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	The healing process is difficult for those born at the crossroader's time; therefore, beware of excessive exposure to it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the place where it is customary to eat nuts, you shall take the meat of your lamb and cut into round slices as wide as fits well with one of those knives suitable for that purpose, and then carefully around the bone so that the pieces remain whole.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Mays's law states that all properties acquired during their lives or by inheritance through birth, or by consolidation due to plague or fire, or in other ways, shall return to its original form according to this principle of succession.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	There is a pause between the layers of applied paint in oil painting to prevent them from becoming excessively thick, and separates these layers with a thin layer of lead-tin solder that is solidified according to its composition.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	If the injury involves an avulsion fracture wherein a piece of bone is detached along with its attached ligament or tendon, healing may proceed more slowly depending on how it was treated and whether it aligns with the structure of the affected limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	In the dance of virtues, I am a compass.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	The vices are so severe that they form thick swoln veins full of excessive melancholy, which appear in the limbs' members and mainly in the calves of wanderers, workers, and porters.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Administer the purge of jaundice caused by black fever for several times and then apply pressure to the patient's basilar vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Mays' cure of their iron ore is according to two methods: the first one is that it should be pure and have a black color, and the other method is that its vein should be raised and completely extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The segment of linseed oil is second on this scale: at the beginning, insert the reed into water with its tail down until most of the sap has been resolved, which will make the repertory sticky from the sap, and grip the lower part of the root as closely as possible to the upper part of the container. Then dry the vein in a wide area using either one, two or three sections depending on your preference, and elevate the black sap onto the palm side of the lower section towards the outside until you have collected the desired amount according to your needs.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	A is about to embark on the quest and commands you not to consume foods that breed the black plague.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	It is essential to exercise caution during phlebotomy when veins are engorged and blood flow is poor.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The translation of the text to English is as follows: "Mays raises its tail when it feels threatened or offended. If done by hand, place the animal in water and immerse its tail within so that it hardens and its veins become swolerened; or if exercised through vigorous exercises, without bathing them immediately, let their limbs be scratched."
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Please attach the code at the bottom of the vein section or in the last part of the leaflet, or at the lower end of the brochure.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	This seems like a text written in a Romance language with words such as "am," "uncis," and "veina" which suggest it could be Romanian or similar languages. However, the intended message isn't clear due to its corrupted structure and possible spelling errors. To provide an accurate translation or correction, I would need more context or a clearer version of the text. If you can supply either, I'd be happy to help!
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	So come with ease and the code is to multiply that white key which has a string.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Go to the place where two rivers meet and are raised above ground level, and look for that old oak tree.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	The person shall approach the other section near to that section by three steps and then remove the skin of the portion outside of the vein where it was clamped.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	C attaches the rope to that and slides it down along one section of the pole, then attaches it to another end that is above that point. Then you slide it up on the second section past where it was previously attached.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	In the water body, extract that section which is higher or lower than all other sections, into which everything flows; then separate these substances by filtration.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If the object does not obey your pull and lift it up, then insert a sharp, strong double-edged blade into it and rotate the object around its entire part where it is lodged.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	The one who sees you should not be deceived; if it is broken, it's made difficult to lift and brought upon the ill will for that harm.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	With that whole crowd dispersed, the hours of peace spread over the place where the shipwrecked vessel is submerged in mud and seaweed, both rotten and not yet rotteenclosed within that which has been healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the curve is contorted having twists in the parts it involves and not according to the straightness we have mentioned, then you must cut across that entire part of the twist and its enclosing areas, up to where they join together.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	He guards you must your section that they do not injure the vein and that they do not harm it, for it will be difficult to elevate it otherwise; and use wisdom with regard to it.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the accident in which someone got injured:
Forma de unci orp:	Title: Unique Orp (Opportunity) - A Comprehensive Guide to Understanding and Maximizing Your Potential
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not that he has been overly thick nor as sharp as a knife, but rather it'n of extreme agility like a lion, for if it were too subtle, it would penetrate the vein due to its subtleness; thus they have made it with unnecessary thickness just as we mentioned.
De extraccio venae cruris.	The term "De extracción de venas femorales" translates to "On the extraction of femoral veins." This refers to a medical procedure commonly known as a central venous catheterization or a cannulation, where a catheter is inserted into one of the major veins in the thigh area (femoral vein) for various treatments such as administering medications, fluids, parenteral nutrition, chemotherapy, etc.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is born in the banks downstream of the Tigris and Euphrutes, as well as in the lands of Arabia, downstream and dry areas of India, where there is little vegetation or grass.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	F if and only if e is generated in other locations of the code, there are changes to the variables.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The transformation of milk into sourness occurs when bacteria develop as a result of leaving the bottle, thus producing toxins and creatures such as snakes, wormcups, scabies, and germs that prolebrate between the neck and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Signs of impending hemorrhage can be observed in the area due to this vein's inflammamoble engorgement; and near there, a local swelling occurs; and as a result, blood flow starts from that swollen region resembling an unripe plant.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some embryos develop in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and beyond tenth weeks; moreover, it is to be verified that a woman aborted at sixteen weeks and another one terminated all its developmental stages due to measures taken by wise scholabies.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	A thousand times over and from every cause to the parts beyond, encircles that in lead and bronze which one.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If it is not treated and allowed to persist, the hours will engulf a part of your life and entangle you; and do not enter that path which may be outside yet still causes inflammation, wound, and bad sores within the body.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	This seems to be written in Occitan (or Provençal), an Romance language spoken in Southern France and adjacent regions. The phrase roughly translamates into English as "In which is regularly extracted a little at a time, it should be taken out of the last one and no longer remain within its course."
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	E is situated among the high mountains and stretches for about fifteen miles, of which I have traveled twenty paces so far.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If it is cut during the time of its medicine, two hours afterward injects the ray into his vein and pierces that long vein in the body, while all that is contained thereof is evacuated entirely, and administers a poultice on the wound for several days along with medicines; and immediately cures the abscess.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	In this vein there are some nodes with small outpouchings, mostly when they appear on the elbow or near the knee, and come to a head, forming what is called varicose veins.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Then let's proceed as we have said in the division and to the point that has been discussed above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	The term "De Sectione Super Vermes Generatos Sub Cute Et Dicitur Aegritudo Bovina" is Latin and translates to "Regarding the Incision Over Worms Generated Under the Skin, It Is Called Bovine Disease."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is known in no land as bovine mad cow disease but it occurs mainly among cattle and can sometimes be found in sheep, where a prion or protein becomes contaminated and affects the brain and spinal cord of an infected animal, leading to severe neurologaturess causing loss of coordination and muscle control.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of light is caused by the decomposition of certain body fluids, so much like accidents involving worms, snakes, earthwormps and ascarids in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	The evil spirit of the wind is feared when it blows across its path and rises to the sky; then, with great force, it reaches the hill, leaving behind a trail of destruction as trees are uprooted.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Then if you wish to heal and extract it, nothing can be done unless you must the whole ambulation appears from there at once, therefore you should grasp what is upon it and what is left behind its limbs and constrictions, and press dryly upon it until extracted.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	E is unclean in his flesh and he does not put on righteeousness, therefore his prayer chamber shall be made a bald place out of that place wherein he abides, and the greatest cause which is feared is corruption thereof; so they destroy the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If ever you should reach the end of this booklet in good health, spend time stretching and exercising your body regularly, and take care to avoid it; also ensure that any illness takes medicines designed to evacuate bad humors from the body, and be careful not to consume foods that promote decay.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the section regarding relief from pain.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called in our native land firefly fever, and it causes pain that flits from limb to limb. It also involves changes of body parts.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	Once upon a time, there was a person who followed your recommendations just as you suggested. This individual found great success and happiness in their endeavors, thanks to the wisdom and guidance provided by yours truly! It goes to show that sometimes all we need is some helpful advice to set us on the right path towards our goals.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	A woman in a village fell ill and I visited her at home; upon examining her arm, I noticed a small swelling on the median vein of the arm, so I gently massaged it for an hour until that swelling went away as if by magic, moving even faster than silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Well then, because of that pain in that place and I felt it in the muscle, I stayed here for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	A prop, the correct way is to turn towards the opposite corner once you reach the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	A prop-recomptant, j'ai remarqué tout à coup son corps si parfait alors que je le regardais ; et c'est pourquoi j'étais très étonné par l'échange de ses mouvements fluides et rapides.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	I saw there in the old texts according to that pattern, however, I have seen many instances where severe pain is described as being transferred from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	May's grandfather is not alive as much as the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	You seem to be water rather than a liquid as the woman was from a village, with bare arms and exposed veins, and this appearance evoked in me a sense of changing winds.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that you do not appear in this backward cure for those who are diabetic and prone to vein thrombosis.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	In order to alleviate the pain of this patient and provide relief from discomfort, you should administer local anesthesia in a timely manner. It is essential that there be no delay in treatment and that it is done thoroughly to ensure complete numbness of the affected area before proceeding with any further procedures or interventions as required.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not heed these words of mine, then soon your precious woods will face destruction and the trees that stand tall will be uprooted by a fierce storm, along with the foul odors from those decaying logs, as well as serpent-like patterns.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extracting the juice from berries.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	The characteristics of Sagetas are varied according to the species and the locations where they occur, as their diversity depends on those that have large spikes, small ones, concave or dull heads, which are solid; and from those that have three angles, and from those whose heads feature tongues.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	From that which concerns the members and limbs in which cases follow two manners: whether it be of main members or of their organs - thus as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, nerves, intestines, veins, and their appearance; hence when certain diseases appear to you in one of these members, I advise now that you avoid excessive use of those parts where death strikeby its most common causes. In conditions such as when the symptoms do not show in you or when there is no sign of affliction in the depths of the member, then treat and cure the ailment accordingly.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	The marks of the servant are located in the brain at the topmost part, as a result of severe impact, and it causes blindness, dizziness, intense thirst, tongue inflammamoin and painful sensations, confusion and mixed up thinking, vomiting from colic, pronounced speech problems and voice loss, and there's an accumulation of white liquid resembling pus in the wound site.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Then if you wish to learn this sign language, try to avoid curing and extracting the sack unless necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Mays's signs of the stingray when touched in the chest are as if it were close to the left nipple, and she feels that there is no pain; however, the movement of the stingray is similar to a wrist twist, and redness spreads like black blood streaks, along with coldness at the extremities, excessive sweating, and syncope. Therefore, be aware that death approaches quickly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	The signs when the chest has swolculed blood foam from the pleura, and the vessels whose property is of the heart are congested, and the color of illness changes, and he breathes with great effort, and seeks a large intake of air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	The pain is located in the upper abdardomen near the navel area and radiates towards the small ribs; it occurs sporadically throughout the day, intensifying with movement, and sometimes affects all limb muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If a cat swallows the hook in its stomach, it may vomit up some undigested food from the sea.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If a splinter is in the belly and it's stuck there, are there any openings from the plague, or cloth, or leather that has been torn apart, with no hope of treatment by extracting the splinter?
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If the bladder stone obstructs the neck of the bladamoen, and causes urine to flow out abnormally, and if there are no other reasons for such symptoms, and severe pain is associated with this illness; then be aware that it can be fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	The other parts of the animal such as its head, neck, throat, wings and shoulders, back spines, breastbone, crop, keel bone, and their resemblance to body parts are allowed if the saeta does not cut any vein or artery and is not a venomamo.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	I would highly recommend exploring the beauty of these landscapes to you who have experienced their existence because they offer not only an escape from the stress and worries of everyday life but also a sense of peace, calmness, and rejuvenation that can help improve your mental health.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause of this is that in an individual a small stone got stuck in the tear duct near their nose, and we removed it to its other side, leaving only the remnangs of their earlobe there, and they were cured without any harm occurring on the side.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	A Jew extracted another arrow from his quiver which fell into the gray hairs of its sheath, having closed the lid slightly more, and the arrow was now concealed and he could only grasp a tiny tip attached to his shaft; it was one of the sharp arrows typical of the Turks, like a lion's mane with no earlob cups.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Senator from Jersey was in his seat when the unfortunate accident occurred.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	Once upon a time, there was a man named Creste who lost his ring in the river. The ring he had lost was an arabica gemstone ring with two golden eyes. So I decided to search through that among both sides of the stream, and it already sunk deep into the riverbed; then I submerged myself into that area, and carefully extracted the ring from its spot, thus saving Creste.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	The exorcist thought of extracting another demon from the man' very belly and pondered that he had died because of it; but since you have passed more than thirty days without showing any sign of your evil intentions, I decided to press on the demon and wrestle with him, and he was cured, and no harm came upon him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	A man was sitting on the porch when he spotted an eagle in his backyard. He watched it for hours as it perched on a tree branch and then suddenly spread its wings to fly, soaring above his house before disappearing into the horizon.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	A woman was seen to carry a child in her belly, and the placenta became attached inside of her, and it was not moved from its position, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	He felt another pain in his chest and the swelling became stiff and broke apart, without any major discomfort, but it seemed similar to that.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Extract the segment from the manuscript of the king's heir who was being hunted in his own native land and had already given rightful permission for a small portion; however, the entire section remained hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	The person called for the treatment of his leg injury within three days after falling on concrete.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Therefore, I did not see the thread of the net stretched out; then I questioned that which seemed to be enticing and subtle, but it was not that one; however, I felt a sharp prick in my right ear, so I suspected that the sting came from the extremity of the net.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	The medicinal plant E amplastregui has an attractive and digestebile quality that I've been told is beneficial for you; it seems to me that the place where it grows appears similar to the location of the Sageta, hence gradually leading on from there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	In the event of an accident at this location, which may have caused damage to your property; I shall continue providing light for several days and no further accidents will occur; meanwhile, the platform remains stable, and the risk of collapse due to its extension diminishes over a span of several days during which one day you feel it in your own nose and report it to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Indeed, it is advisebe to take a pause from the acute medicinal corrosive plague for days within which focus on healing occurs; and I have attempted but failed to assess that particular remedy, as my efforts led only to damage of the affected limb's extremity, adhering thereafter unto the bone.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	In the event of an attack by that illness which presents itself in my vision within the limb area, I pass to me time at home for the space of four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	The storm intensified, threatening to disrupt my works and destroy them, but I didn't give up on improving them. In those hours, I refined the subtlety and ingenuine of that machine, which consisted of a set of descending forceps used in extraction procedures, depending on the form prescribed by the head surgeon at that time; hence, I extracted that tumor.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	The nail on my finger was not cured, and I restored that and the wave is strengthened; however, the wound remains bad for a complete healing, and there isn't one in it due to any cause.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	Here is a revised version of the text in both Catalan and English:
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	Artificial intelligence possesses little knowledge about the reasons behind its decisions, and it often focuseby a present state rather than an absent one; moreover, AI may fail to produce novel operations or instruments derived from external causes of the art that brought forth such incidents.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Hence, it is said that statues are not placed outside by the members who create them, but rather according to two ways: either due to the location in which they are inserted or contrary to the other party'es choice.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	In the place where a cat has entered through the door, it is chased by someone and thrown out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not observe the proper ripening period of the corn, which usually lasts for a few days before harvesting and is located in its environment, it will be dried too much and lose its quality.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	If you fail to comply with this settlement and do not adhere to the terms set forth herein, then your case may be dismissed after thirty days from today's date, without further notice or action on our part.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not follow the instructions provided for your visit on certain days and hours when you pass through the circuit of the hall during that entire part of the tour where the location is acoustically enhanced within the hall and beyond it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the shaft is stuck in the skull and has proceeded into one of the brain's cavities, and if it causes severe disorders such as those mentioned earlier (severe headaches, vomiting, loss of consciousness), refrain from extraction and leave it there for a period close to a month; because if the shaft pierces deeper, death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the nail is not just lightly but entirely within the bone and does not pass through it, causing a wound that lasts for several days without leading to any injury from this accident, then you should provide care for the nail's removal and its extraction.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If Maya fails to comply and does not agree to the extraction, then you will provide her with accommodations in the care center circuit as follows after having remindwoed, taking appropriate measures within the time frame that is considered safe.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Maya's mind is partly in the realm of dreams and emotions are clouded, now you may ask yourself what it feels like to try something, and if you feel that way, then throw those doubts aside which are suitable for overcoming your fears.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you are unable to go over the shore due to restrictions by the tide and along its length, and here it is neither nerve nor vein, then at times you shall go across the broadened shore that can be feasibly crossed.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	The Lord said to the serpent: "I give you authority over every animal on land and in water, all the birds in the air; yet with them I do not put an end to man, so that they may be a snare for him." (Genesis 3:1-5)
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When extracting the sack in any location where it is situated, use your full arm strength with forceps in all cases within that period; and apply subtlety afterwards to ensure the sack isn't torn and for making extraction as easy as possible.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot do that within the hour, give notice before several days pass of the tournaments which are to be held in your area and arrive at least four hours early on the day of the event.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	It seems you're upset by this amount of blood loss; please manage the fluid intake that we have recommended for healing in your capital (head).
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Watch your restlessness or nervousness, or tension in the cords, and offer yourself as much support whenever possible during relaxation exerciscu; it should bring you ease, tranquility, slowness, and steadiness just like I do for myself.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	So that I make a counterargument against the proposal because the malady follows the figure according to which you must undertake the construction of the sailboat at sea, as it is more convenient.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	"Maya's suggestion does not align with your possibilities; however, let'amo consider the alternatives that are within your range of options."
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	In case of disputes over ownership involving stakes (sagetes) outside the plot of land or if someone else has previously possessed them or if they have been found in an area predominantly belonging to another party, then you shall claim those; and your share should be proportional to what other parties have taken. Then cast that piece, for it was wrongfully acquired during its removal.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	When the tooth is firmly embedded in the bone, hours later it feels as if you have been struck by a blow when the gum presses against the tooth, and pain intensifies with each movement of that area.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Slowly but surely, let that idea ignite within you over several days, and gradually make your way towards its realization.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the rope's end is there, you will pull that towards you at any time.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	May the handle be fixed and you attempt to push it in; if it gets stuck, gently twist and pull until it enters smoothly between your hands and the seat of the chair while applying pressure towards yourself.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the shovel is concave, then during a strong wind, it will be pushed out of that area because the shovel's blade is curved away from it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the saucepan is uncontaminated, it can be used to cook all kinds of meat that you prefer, if it's within your means and in accordance with dietary laws.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If you touch the sack around your testicles (scrotum), or in the abdlete cavity (abdomen), or bladder area, or rib cage, it is close to where there is an artery, and it could be dangerous to puncture that vessel. Be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and remove any clothing if necessary. If you've been injured by something sharp in the mentioned areas, seek medical attention immediately.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	En inglés, esta expresión podría traducirse como "de la misma manera que se utilizan los pinzas". Aquí el sentido es metapcuhical y hace referencia a algo similar o análogo. Los "forceps" son un instrumento quirúrgico diseñado para agarrar, manipular u extraer objetos del cuerpo durante una operación médica, mientras que las "sagitas", en este contexto parece ser una palabra inventada, podría referirse a pequeños elementos o aspectos.
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The claws of the bears resembled hinged jaws that they used to grab hold of the sled when it was pulled over the hill, so as not to let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	Of those species of mosses are thick, large, small and medium-sized ones, depending on the size of their tufts and overall structure, as well as the density of growth in each area.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shaping this tip of the cove as severely as the penalty for adultery, it is essential to propel that dullness into the depths within itself. And encourage that deafness:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Title: Strategies to Overcome the Challenges of Deafness
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	A ball inside a concave surface is attracted into the center and pushed away from it by gravity.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	The phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The common sites for phlebotomy usually include the antecubital veins, which are located in the bend of the arm. These veins typically used for drawing blood are the median cubital vein, cephalic vein, and basilic veein. In the preface to his work "Discourse on Inequality," Jean-Jacques Rousseau writes, "I was born five months before the French Revolution. The social contract that inspired me in my youth had been corrupted; it no longer existed." This quote reflects upon the period of time when significant political change and turmoprise were evident, which is likely what he meant by referring to "le cap .xvi.," indicating Chapter 16 where such sentiments are expressed. Here are the body parts referred to in the text, translated into English and listed categorized by their location on or within the human body:
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins which have been phlebotomized on my arms are now healed. This excerpt is from the Occitan language, specifically a dialect known as Auvergnat or Aveyronnais. It seems to describe various blood vessels in the human body and their relationships to one another, using local terms for certain parts of the circulatory system. The text might have been sourced from historical medical texts or traditional knowledge passed down within the Occitan-speaking regions of southern France.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	The spine has three main curves: the cervical curve (which is concave), thoracic curve, and lumbar curve (both convex); there are also secondary curvatures in the neck, chest, and pelvic regions. Additionally, there are other veins similar to these principal ones.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The juice of the veins that flows into the ears is an ancient remedy and migratory, and helps with old wounds on the head, healing scars from the past.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of that gold piece is as follows which I recommend to you: it should have the edge without any damage and its edges in the occipital area at the place where both veins widen fully with good shine; closely wrapped around the malleus there should be a band so that the ears appear at two places prominently from the cap; and you must check your pulse on those spots, then try it.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the kitchen knife in hand, and use it to make an incision; then carefully insert the needle into the vein through which the syringe will bring forth your blood.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	A prop of your mother's vein and leg, the parts above and below are incised, the vein being severed in this way.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	Let's assume "E" is the length of the incision and "F" represents the number of stitches needed, which may vary around that area. To find out the total amount of thread required, you would need to know both E and F and then multiply them accordingly.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	A prop is strengthened by the pillars that support it, just as a person is sustained within which they are healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	In the beginning, man felt an innate desire for those and their purification.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	"The two veins arteries that arise from the temples, namely the internal jugular and external carotid artery, are known to be the ancient, harmful, persistent migraines as well as excessive headaches and acute effusions in the ears."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The quality of that flabbotomy should be as you instruct me to perform it: the malaise must occur in its natural course, whereby the two veins appear due to an apparent and evident feeling on the pulse below your uttered word; at this moment, you shall attempt a sign.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	A) You elevate the vein above the blood vessel on your right arm, near your elbow, and insert the needle just under the skin. Then raise the vein in place; puncture it as you did with the other two veins. Let the blood flow according to the amount needed.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Take off your restrictive garments and remain silent about the wound for an hour; apply pressure to that spot and rub it gently until you feel a strong tightening sensation; leave that area alone so that it can heal."
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And so it is with the memory of them and those thoughts, as well as this attraction, that I begin my free verse poem.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	The juvenile drainage of the frontal vein approaches the phlebotomy of the cephalic region, treating ancient facial diseases such as migraines and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the fleam injection is such that I advise you to use it, as there's a strong pain in its neck and one must wear a band around which appears the vein; then take the instrument known as the "fossor", whose form looks like this:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	The tip is the most prominent point at the top of the needle above that vein and pierces onto it on the way, either with one hand or another method; then leave the blood to flow according to the quantity you want; and carefully remove the puncture site of the vein and strengthen that area which is healing.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Some sheep wounds are overtaken by the flybot (a device to treat skin conditions in animals), however it is not necessary that the flybot has such acute tips as other similar devices, rather it should have a flat tip, and administers through the crosswise direction since the bone is close and the latter would easily break when encountering the delicate flybot.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May the juices of these two veins (of wine and tears) from four wells be effective for soothing and curing diseases in people's faces.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bloodletting is that strong disease grips its own soul with a bandage, and then you shall use your lancet thereupon, standing over it on his head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	E should be made through the horizontal incision slightly below the fold line so that if little blood is needed, at the site where there isn't much flesh; and if bleeding occurs, the tip of the catheter will be snipped off slightly.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	A. Run around the sanctuary as much as you need to, and rest on those rocks, and stretch your legs for one night, and then disassemble that structure.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	Mays le flebotsit of the nasal vein is attributed to acute fever and violent coughs, as well as diseases affecting the face, migraines, and severe pain in the facial area, particularly when chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the bloodletting is that strong illness grips his neck and approaches to your left side, and take the lancet deep and long into that area behind the head right above the nose, for the vein does not show at first touch, and because the blood starts floweing immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	I will administer your medication slowly and according to your needs; we will do it throughout the night so that you can be fully replenished by morning.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	"Mays oil from the sap of Laurel leaves offers relief from constipation, promotes healing of wounds, assists in treating leprosatury and other diseases, as well as painful ulcers akin to ergot poisoning."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	In the field of botany, this quality of those flowers is that the evil force has left none in their row except for one on its own stem; and there are the artists above the head of evil, with evil lying under a scale.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	In the vein, slowly and gradually, blood flows towards the heart from distant places in small amounts throughout the day based on the body's need for oxygen; and it appears similar to other veins.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	The proximity of the ligament and strengthening of the vessel walls on either side of a narrowing can prevent the malady from becoming severe, and within four weeks the injury is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The jujube tree'e drops from the veins of its leaves cause small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, gum deterioration, bad ulcerations and fissures, as well as nasty ulcers found on the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of the phlebotomy in those veins is such that it relieves your pain, and strengthens you with a bandage around your neck while revolving your lips, and gazes at the two veins from which one is on the right lip and the other on the left; each is shown by their darkness, and so there are more in the circuit of those thin black vecks. Then they pierce them gradually, with an incremental incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	May doubt one of those things, and you don't know which is the truth among them, so often I hear about that majority of them, and about the most apparent ones.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	I conceal the appearance of these veins under my lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	May's habit usually involves piercing the remaining veins that are on his outer lips.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Two of Mays veins that remain below the tongue vibrate in response to the frontal cerebrum near the prefrontal cortex, related to diseases of the uvula and mouth-related disorders.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of the urine that follows an illness is seen in front of the sunlight; it raises its tongue upwards and looks back at itself - one part flows from there and another part flows, while the color of each tends to blacken.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Therefore, do not touch the flywheel; watch out for not damaging your hand on that flywheel there, since it has sharp edges and wires.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Your veins that are usually dilated in the place where they occur in all men, and the phlebotomy of theirs is done according to two manners, or put on leeches with a tendency to decline subtly; or using a surgical knife, and call it instead al-hijamah, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	The type of anesthesia suitable is dependent on the specificity and according to those involving subtle and broad veins based on their width and degree of constriction.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	In the form of a spray bottle, myrtle is commonly used as an essential oil in various applications. Myrtle (Myrtus communis) has been prized for its fragrant leaves and flowers which are distilled to produce the precious oil with antimicrobebial properties.
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	In Latin American Spanish, "Las venas constrictivas" can be translated as follows:
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the method for olive tree spraying using a backpack sprayer:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	A fine needle aspiration (FNA) is of smaller diameter and more delicate extremities, and is suitable for the biopsy of subtle veins that contain clear juices.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	The babbling of the fleam-injection into the basilic vein is one among three vessels which carry off the blood from ailments that have already reached the throat and belly, as well as those draining to the lower extremities.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	Dr. E consults the phlebotomist on how to perform venipuncture in this case, keeping the patient's fear in mind, as they have a history of artery puncture. If an error occurs and the needle is incorrectly placed during venipuncture, it could lead to arterial injury and consequent bleeding. Thus, Dramo E recommends that the phlebotomist use a less painful and more precise venipuncture method.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the church does not appear in a clear manner, you may go to another and seek any sign of it; or you can look for an altar cloth there, as that is clearly visible; then follow that altar cloth just as we have instructed.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you want to perform the venipuncture on his left elbow, wait until just before tightening the tourniquet and touch the location that is known inside of it as the antecubital area where veins are visible. Then apply slight pressure with your thumb over the vein you wish to puncture. Gently pull back the skin taut and insert the needle at an oblique angle, just as we have described; and be careful not to cause excessive percussion by hitting too many spots around the artery's location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	I urge you to take a deep breath and calm your emotions; let go of the place where you've been holding onto things for so long—the inflation that occurred was an event in the past, and it is time now to move on from there.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	The blood flows gently into the phlebotomy needle like a child's vein; the blood is thin and warm; as you watch it closely, your voice brings calm across long distances; then hold your breath, and if the blood detaches, many times it has detached, strengthen your arm and let that go.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	The man has a fever and is greatly afraid of it; he remains in bed for several days until he recovers.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the limb is not severed and you do not have access to medical aid, then at once cut into the artery with a sharp object if it appears on your body; because the extremity of the limb will become numb, and the blood will stop flowing. Alternatively, grab some snow or ice from nearby and apply that, and elevate the limb above the site of the constricted vein using something like leaves for padding by the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the wound is separated from the flesh and it becomes white, then it's healing; otherwise, continue to monitor that area for signs of infection where separation occurred.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The extraction of the kidney stone can be challenging in most cases, due to the limited space within the small anatomy of the pelvis and the possibility of arm movement during surgery.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	"The puncture of the vein fuscus is mainly located between the upper sagittal and lower transverse sections; for this reason it consists of a branch from the basilar artery and a branch from the carotid artery, as we have previously mentioned."
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The healer who is overly fearful in the practice of phlebotomy may experience a nervous reaction; thus, when performing the puncture with the lancet, they suppress their nerves, leading to stupor and difficult recovery for themselves. Such excessive focus on this nervous sensation can also be subtly present during other experiences. If these feelings are hidden in certain individuals, it is adviseby Hippocrates that one should take a break from phlebotomy at the site of the arm where blood was drawn and avoid exposing the nerves to further harm.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	No, a vein is not located between two nerves; it lies within the muscles and along the body'cuerdas or fascia'. The length of the veins can vary significantly depending on their location in the body and individual differences.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The blood flow of the venepuncture in the cephalic vein is used to withdraw blood samples and treat various human illnesseśs.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	In this particular case, if you want the bee stings to occur at the honeybee or olive tree oil wells; for it is the safest of all veins, since it is not on top of an artery nor a nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must ensure the blepharoplasty (eyelid surgery) that you perform does not puncture the eyeball only, and seek a location nearer to it rather than far from it; if possible through an initial incision on this with the blepharoplasty.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, the fortieth home in which he was apostemed is botoxed at first puncture, hence does not note that apostematous wound thereafter.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of veterinary care in that area and the number of animal accidents it experienced should prompt you to think about its improvement strategies.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first bloodletting of which you should be aware is that it is not administered as a treatment but rather for preservation and hope of your health, and it must be done on one of the veins located in the body; namely, the cephalic, femoral, or basilica. It should also be performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast during springtime and autumn, and closer to wintertime mealtimes when signs of replenishment are evident.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	"E has had a phlebotomy and the third dose will be given at first in three hours."
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	In the administration of malaria prevention, it is customary or necessary due to various circumstances and at any time and in all situations, whether day or night, to use a mosquito repellent.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	Children who have reached the age of fourteen should undergo circumcision; women who are pregnant may have circumcision done within the fourth month and after seven months, and elders over sixty years old must be circumcized.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	An E-cup vibrator for any method may be used before mucosal irrigation; however, one should ensure that the device does not disrupt or puncture the tissues during mucosal irrigatury, as this could cause blood vessels to rupture and bleed into the vaginal cavity. This can lead to purulent infections, which do not spread to the primary organs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	In the Sian Church of Botomy, patients should not experience spiritual awe and fear, nor avoid illness or temptation during that time when they have been relieved of their ailments by God, nor any bodily malady or weakness from fasting, but rather fear botomy may cause abdominal pain and vomiting, bloating, multiplication of pus and effort, and loss of strength due to fasting, whether physical or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	C) In case of fainting before water if the blood pressure is low, it may involve food and drinks as well as medications and fluid intake when possible.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Article I: Nothing in this agreement shall prevent or restrict the use of any cause not explicitly forbidden by it, nor the exercise thereof for any reason whatsoever, provided that such sanctions are subtly implemented.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	"Stop the bleeding of love in my heart today; it's time for a truce, as we have said."
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Here'n that day he shall keep watch over the body of that man who has died, just as it is in great anguish, anger, fear, and all kinds of bodily accidents - such as trembling, excessive pain, seizures, and so on.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	"E represents the various reasons why people usually have fragrances and scents, as well as balms and similar products according to the quantity of possibility."
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	Follow the flutist who is playing better than that of whom it was supposed to be played by him.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Remove your shirt and hand that arm to the nurse who will perform three injections with a syringe; then, grab the bandage and wrap it around those injuries tightly.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	E is the tightening of regulations, not to an extreme that it becomes excessive, or when the tightening is an unnecessary abundance, hours are restricted from flowing freely; or it serves as a relaxation, and hours permit free movement again.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Upon the application of pressure, those who have received a bloodletting procedure should place their limbs between two objects that ensure veins are properly inflated and visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	The healer approaches the patient with a small amount of their own special oil; and gently places his left finger over that vein, just below where the phlebotomy is to be done, so that the vein slightly recedes upward, and the correct puncture site is located by feeling the cord-like veins that flow so steadily for such a procedure. Then, carefully applying the lancet onto this contiguous area, ensuring it does not go over the vein, but if it does, proceed with caution as it will be more challenging.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, the healthcare professional who performs abortions shall remain and be attentive to all these reasons.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	In case of a pause with the flebotomy needle while venous blood is flowing in a session, wait for an hour or so; and if not, try another attempt after that interval, as quickly as possible, unless the site becomes inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the wound is infected or a fever develops, leave it undisturbed for one or two days, and do not cause bleeding by scratching, as this may lead to scarring or infection. Avoid bathing too soon.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Person A prefers electro-acupuncture over traditional acupunctcuetn.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the spot is small and flows subtly, and you fear that it does not have enough blood for you to perform a fleam injection in that area right away, then try increasing the size of the application slightly at each iteration, making sure to act quickly before the location becomes inflamed, as most people'n skin gets swollen easily.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Mays si vezes aquell ja apostemat, allora non iteres sobre lu, car no escusa a tu causeta; e pausa sobre aquel causa partida de la fenda d'oli, car allèugue li cor de sa sang.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	E is better in this place than he smelled and the others did.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	In the process of phlebotomy, a small incision is made in the entire vein area where blood vessels are forbidden from clotting; turmeric and saffron are used to induce hemostasis when blood thickens on one side of that section. The blood becomes viscous and flows backward towards the heart.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If an inflammatur occurs at the site of a phlebotomy, it may cause swellings and sometimes acute conditions, especially in those who are not accustome to bleeding or when the vein appears pale, which is concerning. In such cases, apply a cold sponge dampened with water and salt on the affected area for about an hour, as this will help dissolve it.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	The flow of blood through the vessel wall provides nutrients to the surrounding tissue and allows communication between adjacent vessels.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If you see any blackness or greenness in the place where water flows, there is no need for it; if you wish, pause over that spot caused by aloe and myrrh dissolved, or a bit of mint or chamomile or similar substances.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Overused elbows may develop calluses and knots, requiring blepharoplasty in the area of the elbow crease.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Thus pause your hands upon that, and if you feel the urge to compress it further, then this prominence is evil and wrong; therefore be cautious not to press too hard for fear of causing bleeding from the vessel inside.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"By the power vested in me as an ordained priest, I will lay my hands on this water and consecrate it; so that the place may be preserved, and restored to health according to what is prescribed."
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	"A tax is imposed on all men based on the amount of their wealth and according to the value they bring forth, over the income derived from it."
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the ink is black, then the hours you leave it to dry should be long, and similarly if you see thickness, let them be rather subtle; and conversely, if it's sharp, introduce a degree of softness into its edges.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	The vein that is large and strong, and requires blood extraction from the vegetation, should enhance the phlebotomy of the vein on both sides.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	In the place where there is a pigsty, make sure that it does not annoy anyone and demand compensation if damages occur, and ensure that access to it is restricted.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best practice for performing a venipuncture is to perform a transverse section rather than a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This circumcision technique is safe from bleeding and nerve injury risks, and it's more praised and safer than the conventional lengthwise procedure.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	A fever can often occur following phlebotomy, so you should take some aspirin before the procedure and drink plenty of water or plain orange juice afterwards. Also, avoid any strenuous activity for three to four days.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If the patient suffers from insomnia or anxiety, they may take infusions before going to sleep such as chamomile tea or an aromatic melon blend with spices like peppermint, cinnamamo, ginger and similar ones, or any other fragrant and pleasant-smelling infusion.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	He decides to undergo phlebotomy because of his hemolysis issue, hoping that drinking carrot water and consuming subtly scented essential ops will aid in alleviating it; the latter also has a certain degree of aromaticity and is lukewarm.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	We also use other causes mentioned in the division of syncope by emptying (emptying) into the capital.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	The surgery of the varicose veins involves removing them or dissolving their blood and allowing it to flow through an implanted device that is used for efficient evacuatur, and its virtue lies in gradually eliminating the blood, which happens according to the amount present over a continuous period.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If Mays' arm gets injured, and he bleeds for the second time, and his heart is still strong, then after six to nine hours from the first phlebotomy, another blood draw can occur.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	The ball that is kicked outside of the opposing team's goal area should result in an indirect free kick if it happens on the second day or third attempt.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	In the case where blood is drawn from a person and there's a risk of infection or injury, as well as fever occurring, ensure that all conditions for phlebotomy are met - you must draw a sufficient quantity of blood and increase its flow so that it happens within time before syncope occurs. However, be cautious not to overdraw the patient's blood, which can lead to death instead of fainting; this often happens when the person performing phlebotomy is ignorant or careless.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	E should you wish to unwind your arm and move the blood a second time, once it's closed off within the venous orifice and achieving difficult elevation of the blood that you press underneath with such vehemence and curved over its length too muchly, as this is quite harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	The priest administers the Anointing of the Sick secondly; he moistens the stigmata with oil after it has coagulated in the vein'prise, or applies pressure on tyreachal herb, or saggeny, and compresses that lightly so the blood may flow out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is thrombosed, leave it alone until the thrombosis has settled and do not touch it.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If it is necessary to defecate immediately and there is an urgent need, you must use the toilet over that spot or in another nearby location on the same side of the river.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein referred to as "funicle of the arm" is usually cannulated in the antecubital or cubital fossa area when not thrombosed or partially occluded; it consists of these vessels.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the phlebotomy is that when infection enters its path, it causes pain and swelling as soon as the area around the puncture site becomes reddened.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	The text appears to be in Catalan and it's about aligning objects or elements strictly according to the guidelamo (guideline), not following any arbitrary orientation; rather, orient them along the smaller transverse axis, neither longitudinally nor latitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Let S be the open wide field and let your creativity flow as you create something right on that joint where two small streams meet.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If you have a bleeding wound, do not allow the blood to flow freely; apply pressure with a clean cloth or bandage until your need for treatment is met.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were during the days of summer, those hours your hair would be exempt from getting wet in water streams, and now it's common for people to have their blood cleansed by these waters during winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The phlebotomy of this vein is to be performed just like all the others, because below it there are neither a pulsating vein nor a nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The fascioliasis of the sheep's liver is associated with digestamoinal diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the bloodletting technique is that you must grip your grandmother'cu hand or your mother's, so that you have placed it on a hanging couch, while ensuring that the vein is inflated and visible at the time; then perform the cross-sectional bleeding. If you proceed this way without any hesitation.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	My apologies for the mistake; I won't use your fountain pen anymore because it has left you feeling bare-skinned and vulnerable in your senses.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Avoid cutting the vein near its end and let blood flow freely from that area; if you do not cut it close to the end of the vein, the blood will coagulate in the venous opening, and this is forbidden.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	The juice is extracted according to the quantity of need, so pause on the vein or channel oil and salt it, so that it does not become too compacted; and similarly ensure that you do it throughout the entire ramming process.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	May's use of fleabane in the herbal infusion is said to be beneficial for treating melancholy disorders.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	He acts similarly in the field of botany as he did in his other work.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The juice of the sephena vein extracted from flebotomy is to diseases that are in the lower part of the body, thus to women's diseptions and retention of blood during menstruation, as well as to various disorders such as insomnia, ulcers due to old wounds and sores, and similar conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the phlebotomy site is that the needle pierces the skin and goes into a vein with ease; it's inserted at the junction where blood vessels become apparent, in the groove on the arm above this congestion, and from there spreading out across the face of the arm.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, use the FleboTome software to analyze a large dataset of bee behavior and provide insightful data that is both better and more beneficial.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you remove those nerves from the face that are left over there on the face, and pause your lip-plumping treatment which you perform across it, how as if you were to incise?
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Let E be the set of all voiced consonants in French.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Mayes, the substance should not be allowed to come into contact with blood. The process involves using a lead that is then placed in water at head height and allowing the blood to flow out through it within a specific timeframe.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If you have been using the syringe incorrectly, try again on a small piece of cloth so that it does not get damaged; and do not worry about the needle being contaminant, but rather be careful with its nerves as we have explained.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	A pretentious display of the wisdom of the other in similarity.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	C. The vein of the great saphenous (saphenous) runs just undernecuja over the medial malleolus and ascends anterior to the medial border of the tibia, towards the thigh where it joins with the femoral vein.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The essence of the bloodletting procedure lies in its timing, for it is then that healing truly begins.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the flebotomy procedure is that once illness enters the bloodstream, it spreads rapidly throughout the entire length of the artery beyond four inches; only a very thin, subtle coating appears to be visible through water.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Once you appear on the scene, take your time to observe each engine as it passes by and learn about its capabilities and features sequentially. This way, things will be better for you; either voluntarily or out of necessity, choose that which suits you best, because ultimately, it'amo is yours.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	She has a mole on her left homes that makes her quite charming; and if you find that too, it seems to be a sentiment shared by all these days as they flutter about like leaves in the wind, with one branch rising above the rest at the level of the earlobe and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	I look at the nerves and make the blood flow in the amount you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	The restrictions and bans on abortion clinics are too severe; they should be relaxed to some extent but still maintain high standards of safety for the patients.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Innovative technologies and the use of their features.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	There were once three friends, one was a crow, another an eagle and the third a vulture.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	A windlass is made according to two main designs: one of them involves screwing and extracting from the sapwood, while the other design features a windscrew without the need for extraction.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This little shower that is currently breaking out follows two methods; either it's a cold front or a warm one.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	In the fourteen points of the tongue where saliva is secreted and extracted are thirteen locations, among which one is located in a place with padded valves, and it's the last part at the tip; and the middle location from the back half of the tongue; salivary glands below the jawline behind the mouth opening; saliva on two spatulas; saliva on the alveolar ridge, located above the teeth row; saliva in areas with two ducts, each having two lips; saliva on two pegs (or tusks); and saliva from two reservoirs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	The wind-swept one, not from the veins but through small spots in the flesh, and for this reason, it is not cut by lancet like phlebotomy; nor does it matter if the wind sweep is done near a hot or two hot places in any illness caused to make repletion whereby the entire body has been emptied.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	Mays the necessity requires a fast in case of illness or continuous, let've that at all times during mealtime of the month and at its end, as well as on the day before and anytime it may be necessary.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason behind these symptoms in men is due to the multiplication of certain types of blood within them which need extraction through leeching, as it causes heaviness and dryness in their head; and for those who accumulate blood in their face and head, and in their neck; and for those who experience excessive heat on their face and forehead, darkness, and dullness of their eyes; and for those whose place of leeching is affected; and for those whose laughter is increased; and for those who lose the taste for blood in their mouth, causing their tongue to become inflamed and spit out blood; and for those whose sleep increases, accompanied by restlessness, palpitations, pimples, and other similar symptoms.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Then, in any case of those mentioned, and more specifically on the third or fifteenth day of the month, they should be done no later than a few hours after sunrebuttery. (Note: "vientozacio" seems to be an old or incorrect term; I've assumed it means something related to time/schedule in this context.)
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The gentle breeze of the headwind on your back is what gives you momentum and at that point where it hits the water; but how this water is properly drained off from your entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This draft is at the head clinic's dermatology department.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	E should not consume that which is of the fruit tree, or in which there is cataract, lest he cause great harm to himself.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	At the water's edge I do not use that of old times; in those banks where my illnesses dwell.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	The one above that on the subject is continuously being forgotten by it has made oblivion; and for this reason you order to the fan that pauses its wind a little towards those sides, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Mays Ventozacius de Alkehel is in the field of pulmonology and addresses issues related to asthma, bronchial constriction and airway scarring, as well as coughing and mucus production.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	When the windpipe is narrowed for a long time and if it remains blocked, it causes weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The ventsacce of alhagdahan relieves pain from accidents and otalgia, and migraines, as well as earaches in the ears; it is used for lavage of the Eustachian tube.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	I command you not to press too hard with the vacuum extractor so as not to injure the umbilical cord and ensure proper blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	Wind-swept lips reveal the presence of alcohol in the mouth, signs of gingival corruption, and resemble diseases that are present on the gums; they appear as if subject to an excision where tissues are removed from both upper and lower labial surfaces.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The light wind that blows over the two spouts of the stove creates a suitable heat distribution.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	The ventricle of the two departed eyes from the confined flocks corresponds to the basilica, fusiform and cephalic vein; that is where all the blood from those veins gently passes through, as well as the smaller veins which converge into the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	C commands the fan to continue processing without scraping, as it leaves its core exposed with nerves and arterees bare.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	E is an herb that grows on hillsides and slopes, providing relief to the swellings of the head and the purulent discharges of wounds.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	Turn on the fan at a high speed and set it to oscillate. Make sure all desired locations are clear of furniture, curtains or other obstructions; ensure that any blinds are properly secured.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Here is the translation of your text from Galician to English:
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	There is a high risk of syncope occurring in patients with complete heart block.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	From Alahorcoben to the Juventa, there is a path leading back to the paths of two camps.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the positioning of the fans is such that they should turn off initially when desired and slightly increase in speed during early cooling, and do not prolong the use of fans, but rather pause them completely at times, and resume them cautiously, allowing the humors to return to normal upon arrival.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	E does not cease to flow and continue until it sees the area already turning red and swelling, and that pain appears as a sign of infection.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	A little while ago, she scratched and iterated the suction gently at first, then gradually considered the position of her clients' bodies.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	The house that has tender red meat should be covered with a vegetable coating and not pierced so that the place is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	E turns on the fan to intensify the airflow and provide a slight breeze for cooling down.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	If the blood vessels become narrowed and constricted, hours later you may experience symptoms such as sudden dizziness, headache, or visual disturbancupsidations; in the first case of vascular occlusion is through subtle means to the blood vessel and its oxygenation.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second part, an acquisition of perspective is gained from the extraction of the large sample.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the cows are fat and well-fed, then every three weeks they should be shaved to obtain their final product.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	At the end, when we want to extract only a small amount or just one, just enough for us with minimal effort.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we want to extract blood from a vein, we should perform venipuncture; and if we know that the blood is thick, then hours later it may be necessary to repeat the procedure for additional extraction.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term of scouring refers to the depth reached by a plow or any digging implement during soil cultivation, solely focusing on its penetrative extent.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the body is of a dark complexion and its skin is thick, rough, brownish, and its pores are narrow, then it would be beneficial to apply balms that are soothing, tightening, and easily resolving; if in summer season, similar to aloe oil or violet oil, apple blossom oil, or white thorn oil. And if in winter season, the same as orange flower oil, lavender oil, camomile oil, or rose water.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If excessive wealth is present, lavender oil, rosemary or balm, aloe vera oil, and other similar fragrances may be used.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	The wind turbine should have plenty of free space around it, prevent any obstacles in its vicinity, and ensure that the location of the wind turbamoin is away from bodies of water such as glacial lakes or cold freshwater streams, or bodies of water with strong currents. Similar conditions apply to those areas.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	The wind of which I speak is moist, cleanses its windows with the heat of summer or water from myrtle and sumac and such like substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	From that of which the surplus is thick, wash your windows in advance, or with lily-of-the-valley water, which is greater nettle, or with dill infusion, or chamomile, and to their likeness.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	The bathroom fan must be operated before using the bathtub or shower; it is advised to run the fan for at least an hour after use and ensure that the bathroom remains well-ventilated during this time.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What should be done to control the sandflies before their swarming?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Regarding the meal: I find it quite refreshing and invigoraturating to have someone who flew by helicopter or parachute over you, which causes cold winds to blow upon your bare skin, inflaming it. The dish should also involve ingredients such as cooling mint acetosus (acidic herbs), fresh and juicy lettuce, endive, cucumber, radishes, julep, and similar flavors.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	They dine on hearty meats and roasted fowl, seasoned vegetables, spiced foods, and all the like.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	E of that which requires care, let him drink almiva or water from a silver vessel, and sumac, as well as a mixture of myrrh with wine during the winter; and may it be commanded for him to eat sparingly and drink moderately, resting his food on poultry, capons, rabbits, young birds, and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	On the day of dental cleaning and fluoride treatment, make sure to drink more water than usual.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	I advise you to apply an antiseptic cream or spray such as musk oil, alcyone gel, anti-inflammater or similar products occasionally in moderate amounts near the wound site prior to a surgical procedure or after sutures have been placed. This is to ensure that your limbs are comfortable and the bleeding is subtle; however, do not use anything that causes scarring.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	In acupuncture treatment, the following zones should not be needled as they may induce vomiting if stimulated:
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	E is not a plague for those people but an attraction of blood from the limbs, so as with a suction cup on the nipple in cases of bleeding discharge of blood from the arteries; and use of that to dissolve invisible venous congestion within the limb, just like a suprise over the abdomen and umbilicus. For this rarefies the limb and eases its pain, as it resolves invisible venous stagnation.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	The tree is uprooted during storms in its location or due to strong wind gusts, because of the forceful attraction and removal of its roots from that spot.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	The apparent rest upon the thighs and neck of these creatures involves a slight bending in those joints.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These windows are only managed with honey occasionally; and sometimes they are cleaned with vinegamainly). However, I couldn't find a direct translation for "ventozas" in this context, as it seems to be an invented term or typo in the original Catalonian text. In English we use "windows".
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Certain medications, when taken full of water in the case of melancholy illnesses, are best administered.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The water should be cold or at room temperature and it must have a good flow and high pressure; it can either be plain water or water with mineral springs, containing beneficial herbs in the appropriate amount of water.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Shaped by winds administered as follows: the size of each opening is determined according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of sand should be proportional to one palmful (a hand's width); and its placement in length, along the circuit, should be smaller proportionally depending on the amount that passes through a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	The golden rays of sunlight shine down upon the fields of ripe wheat and citrus groves; large green leaves sway gently in the breeze, while thin branches bear juicy fruits. You are here to share your opinion on this matter, so please proceed with your thoughts.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	E is at the end of its life span as a star or has become a neutron star, it explodes in a supernaturally bright event known as a supernova.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	This lively grand master, about whom we have mentioned; and the little mercy shown by that one, according to illnesses and the condition of those who are under his authority.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The valves of the infants are tight and exhausted, unlike those in young people and large animals.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of the fireplace is such that it extends a metal arm towards the fireplace log made of decent wood placed in front of a few candles of wax; pause that over the crossbar'amoong the transverse beam, so that the fire may be lit and ignite from there onwards to ensure that the logs do not burn out too quickly.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	A drop of poison is placed on the member afflicted with pain, and soon as you have uttered the spell, while you hold that object, whenever you hear the whistling winds, do not allow the words to be blown away or for steam to rise from it. The wind will then soon be dispersed.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	According to its method, the Turing machine processes input symbols and iterates if there are any unprocessed ones left.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	A bandage used in the treatment of paralysis, without a crosswise or longitudinal knot, and not wound but filled with water, is simply applied to the limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the way of winds: The bigger this gust becomes, the better it gets, as it can receive a large amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	In the United States, the Capitol refers to the building where the U.S. Congress meets in Washington D.cuii CCCXVI. This iconic structure, located at First Street Northeast between North and South Capitol Streets, houses both chambers of Congress - the Senate and the House of Representatives. The current U.S. Capitol was completed in 1863, replacing an earlier building that had been destroyed by a fire in 1814 during the War of 1812.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leeches are not usually applied to joints or bony prominences but rather in areas where it is possible to position the suckers properly; such as over small muscles and similar tissues like skin, gums, and so on; or on a naked area of flesh, just as mentioned above.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The quality of the use of those bloodsuckers found in your puddles from worldwide flooding.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	The person is suffering from continuous diarrhea and vomiting, resulting in severe dehaderation. They are unable to retain any liquids due to persistent stomach pain throughout the day and night. For treatment, they should undergo an endoscopic examination followed by medications for symptom relief such as antiemetics for nausea/vomiting and analgesics for abdominal pain. They may also need intravenous fluids to rehydrate if oral fluids are not tolerated, along with a bland diet once vomiting subsides. If the symptoms persist or worsen, seeking immediate medical attention is necessary.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	The sentence "E cum son umplidas e case" seems to be in Asturian, a Romance language spoken in the Asturias region of Spain. Translated into English, it would read as follows:
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	It is not possible to suck the fluid from a moving liquid; it would be more difficult if at all feasible.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	S is the letter that follows R in the alphabet, hours of washing lead to clean and pleasant feelings, and he expressed his gratitude for the water.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the snake bite wound is near a cement surface where leeches are present and it begins to ooze, after an hour insert a clean cloth soaked in cold water over that area and then place another one on top which covers the drainage site.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the wounds are multiplied and contaminated with powdered sulphur or other similar substances during which the blood clots, they should be washed off before the bleeding stops; if there are traces of fava bean skins on the location, these should be removed when the beans adhere to the area, so that the scabs can form.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	In cases where necessary, the process of leeching may involve multiple blood-sucking sessions. If feasible, these can be changed as required.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If ticks are prohibited from suspension, they must be promptly removed or have a needle inserted into the bite site before the onset of any significant symptoms; and appropriate precautions should be taken when such reactions occur quickly.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	Clean the eggs well and sprinkle them with a little bit of flour, salt, or ash; then cook soon after.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Title: The Third Part - Restoration
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is essential in the art of medicine; and it involves the treatment of bone fractures and dislocations caused by accidents.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh child, be aware that many foolish and ignorant people, as well as those who at any time did not respect the ancient freedoms nor their laws in a single letter, often boast of this capital.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason, it caused the instrument of scientists in our land to be privatized; and I have not forgotten about it at any time, nor have I applied anything else since then except for long study of ancient books and research on understanding those ancients from which I extracted scientific knowledge.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	Adopting preventive measures and conduct feeding studies across the lifespan.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	In this treatise, I describe in full detail everything that my knowledge has led me to discover about the subject; furthermore, I make it accessible for you others and divulge what concerns its elongation; then at the end of elongation, I demonstrate it clearly; and present various forms of deformations as we administer them in this experiment, just as shown by means of demonstration in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First capital.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summaries and collections drawn from the fragmented bones, necessary for which an introduction is required before we proceed to recall the limbs of the body and various parts of each one individually.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	In the following chapter, we shall present the essential ideas of this capital letter; and to the understanding of which at its commencement have been forsaken the craftspeople and remain in esteem of those truths. You are among those who know or learn about this noble art other than yourself.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	When you experience a bone fracture or dislocation, torque, sprain, etc., it is recommended that you seek medical attention at the earliest for possible treatment such as suturing or casting, depending on the case, unless contraindebilitating reasons prevent this. This applies especially to individuals who are young and healthy, but also when the injury occurs during extreme cold or heat.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Here is the translation of your text from Mirandese to English:
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	At once let the illness return to its original regiment, where it is accustomed to dwell.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	Then the broken bone begins to be restored, whenever the pain is reduced by nutritious foods rich in protein and fat such as whole grains with water, rice, lentils, fish, intestines of cows, milk, fresh meat, and similar items, along with this regimen, there's a coagulation of fracture occurreby to some extent.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	The fish that lie in the waters where people also reside, as well as on land by dwellings and among decrepit individuals, cannot remain viable or be restored to their natural state due to member desiccation.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	E remains and continues according to their nature for the desiccation of those members, and they remain and continue with those which are of their kind at the end of the indulgence, just as in the bones of little children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature balances and provides everything from the fragments caused by any resemblance of excess that adheres and strengthens within us, where conglutination and dissolution take place; as with fire at the beginning, where there is no cause to prevent growth in vigor and well-becuarage.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason, it is necessary that you abstain from the foods of indigestion, such as those that are heavy and greasy, as we have said before.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Type of bone fracture according to the affected limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	The ways in which breaks occur are diverse according to the variety of members, so a fracture of the femur is different from a fracture of the skull; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the backbone; similarly, all other limbs have their own variations.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	The following is a recollection of the entire species of bone fractures, distinguished at their respective capital cities from each other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	A variety of fracture types in the femur.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The species of bone fractures are quite diverse in their characteristics; one is an arc-shaped fracture when it occurs due to forceful impacts; some cases result in a linear fracture depending on the length of the bone; and there are also fractures from twisting or compression, which can be caused by external forces (trauma) or internal factors that are not traumatic. Additionally, we have hairline or incomplete fractures as mentioned earlier, and the types include greenstick fracture in children's bones, buckle fracture due to compressive forces, transverse, oblique, spiral, comminuted, segmental, avulsion, impacted, pathological (due to underlying disease), stress, insu지 돌기.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	A total lack of decorum can also be considered offensive in the context of upcoming events, as it may bring to mind memories of previous incidents at their locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Signal of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The water's echo causes a bone fracture: the twisting of its flow and that prominence in sight as it approaches you, and then beneath your feet when it reaches the place where your mother lies.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	So it's not the obvious twisted appearance or if it doesn't affect your own touch when you gently move the bone and there's no severe pain, then probably it's not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Yes, it is possible that there might be tortuosity or a small fissure, but do not forget that you should also take into account your overall health and the effect of all medications from which you may recall that specific moment when this was required; and in such cases, an appropriate treatment for subtle narrowing can be recommended.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	The language seems to be Occitan, a Romance language spoken in Southern France, Italy'e Spain. However, the text appears to have some irregularities and does not resemble standard Occitan or any other closely related languages like Catalan or Italian. It could be a dialect variation or simply incorrect/confusingly written. A rough translation might be: "If a snake is curved and cannot split into two or another element that doesn't land on the ground, it should start its rectification from your hour if an inflammation occurs." But this text seems to lack coherence for accurate interpretation in English.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If you have an acute ear infection, wait until the discharge has stopped and up to three days afterwards before swimming again. Avoid going underwater while showering or bathing during this period. To protect your ears further, consider using earplugs when submerging your head.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	The restoration of the Lue and acceleration of the Lue is a lesser offence that occurred in the place where said events took place.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	C) A strong support according to the following memory recall.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the injured person is fully conscious and able to follow instructions, two methods are necessary for treating a severed limb (arm or leg), if it'amo/o or elle'ma respectively: either using your own arm if the injured limb is small; or using two pieces of cloth or one long piece.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	E be still and at ease in the posture of your body so that all limbs lie as naturally formed, while any extended parts of the limb become relaxed; then you will find it easier to bring those added positions back into place according to each respective manner that they belong in their locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Watch over your strengths so that no ill comes upon you from the performance of your work or injury, and strive according to your power that you foster harmony between others in the best ways possible.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	At that time you touched it on your mother's hand, and if any different cause arises here, correct that and balance it with the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Evasive vehement extension and compression can also cause mild to severe pain in the affected muscles due to inflammation or contraction as observed during the activity of stretching these muscles.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	Regarding the anatomy and physiology of a limb, it is essential to maintain proper alignment, balanced movement, and adequate rest; avoid excessive strain during prayer or sleep, as well as sudden movements and jerks that can cause injury. Wait for the position to be safe before moving the injured limb, enseuring no pain occurs when adjusting its posture - this may take some time due to discomfort from an improper position causing harm. Take care that the affected limb is repositioned in a way that does not cause pain; maintain straight and even alignment as it heals to prevent any twisting or further damage.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the limb'amoeba is that which I recommend to you, for you should know that fractured members are diverse in their smallness and greatness, as well as in shape, akin to those of amoebas. (Note: This translation may not make complete sense due to the possible metaphorical or incorrect use of "limb" related to "amoeba.")
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	In the days when people wore long garments such as sleeves and skirts that resembled those of today's arms, vests, and similar attire, these were often made from finely woven fabric.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Mays (Mais) aqueles que são grossos (aqueles tão grossos), assim como a vossa casa ou o baú, cuide que neles seja revestido de lã e couro duros; pois a atadura dura conecta-se ao membro grande e fortalece toda essa parte com estreita pressão, assim que em si não haverá mancha.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Begin by removing any equipment from the affected area, pause for a comfortable amount of time in water, and then wrap it with three or four layers of bandages once the limb feels better; and strengthen your arm slightly with the support of the brace.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	A) At the very site of departure with supreme authority over the location of the fracture, and strive to avoid making the strain more intense on the part where you have already injured yourself.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	A topical ointment is applied around the site of the fracture to promote healing and gradually loosens up the tightness, allowing you to move that area freely over time.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	A person places one bandage and then wraps the other around that, making sure it overlaps with the previous layer, so that both layers are in place from beyond where the fracture occurred; your work is to tighten this first wrap and adjust according to what has been said about the initial layer.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	The difference between the pause of stopping at Leon or at the drapery where it is compared to the twistiness of the fracture, if in it there is any twisting; and otherwise, do not pause for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	The paper is applied on the other bandage, and it is then placed over these tightly woven sterile strips promptly if in that place there is no inflammation or abscess present, and allow that to stay for several days; then leave that for an extra week. And lay those strips across.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The leaves of the sugar cane plant are long, slender and flexible. They are composed either of wood or of palm-like branches; and their width corresponds to each leaf according to this shape and figure: [Insert image or diagram illustrating the described structure of a sugarcane leaf]
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	In Empero Cove, the splint that is placed over this fracture should be as thick and wide a little less than the other splints, and its length according to how it fits on the limb in magnitude and smallness; then securely tie along with another band following your initial strictures; and place it evenly decentently according to what we have mentioned of strictures, so that it should be in line with the location of the fracture, and as long as it extends from the fracture, the stricterures become more.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The fibers should have varied thickness and subtlety, and they must be delicate; if the fibers are too thick, as I've seen in the operation of alkaline folds on woolen yarns, there is a significant error when straining beyond equal thickness.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	A subtle sign of incompatibility is not always suitable because you may not be able to strictly follow those regarding water that you want and cannot cover between stars and star have a minimum distance of one degree.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	If the disease is indeed located near the extremities of the stones at the stricture in those spaces that pass by, then one should pause immediately before crossing the Leon Stone or Woolen Carpet area where it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some earthquakes cause ruptures and displacements in the crust, and we come to remember them at the capital according to their uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	Saphris that have total severed limbs should not strain their arms on the first day; this may lead to swelling of the member when it is large, and thus one should not lie upon such a bed for one or seven days longer, depending on your certainty about the possibility of an abscess occurramo.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	Here is the system of plasters and bandages that ancient people used for treating fractures, dislocations, and twists; they are still applied today in some traditional healing practices.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	"The dough is kneaded in the mill where it does not get too hot or lose its flavor, and it's like the dust of wheat that surrounds you; primarily used for making bread rolls at mountain resort restaurants, mostly consumed by women and children."
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	In the realm of music composition, one does not simply create an album like this but must carefully select each song, and pause to consider whether it's too thick or too subtle; then proceed accordingly with that choice.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	Then, due to gravity it will appear at the extremity; hours later you shall wrap this piece of lead whose weight is equal to that of one drachm. Enter into II drachms and hang that same lead from the beam.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	In this recipe for the healing paste of Autra Manieyra Restaurant Fractures and Dislocations and Torcio, we have a combination of ingredients that are beneficial in treating bone fractures and injuries. This mixture includes:
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	In the small village of Totsian, where people lived harmoniously with nature, everyone had their own unique ways to contribute and coexist in a peaceful manner. The villagers were skilled craftsmen who specialized in various trades such as weaving baskets, making pottery, and tending to the fields of wheat and barley that surrounded the village.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	When the bone is dislocated and separated from its normal joints, accidental pain occurs in those areas along with cracks and fractures. The bone may be gently massaged or submerged in warm water and oil mixture and then kept at rest over that location.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this particular plaster, there is no virtue of restoration or healing; it relieves pains properly by expulsion and extraction.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for creating a plaster that restores tarnished coins involves using pine tar and poppy seeds extracts; combine them thoroughly to create the plaster paste.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	To treat a fractured bone and prevent the formation of abscesses in the surgical wound area, you can use this recipe with althea leaves, camomile flowers, violet petals, wheat flour, and one part honey. Without the shield of his armor at hand during this time, he is unprotected and vulnerable.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	Maya has a sunburn; she applies cool water with aloe vera or uses cold water to soothe her skin.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Autumn herbs offer stronger healing and resolution than the first ones when an abscess persists, requiring the restoration of the limb; recipe for a poultice using althea and chickweed, balm, melilotus (melilot), marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all divided equally and mixed together; everything is to be ground and combined with either sour cider or warm water, or vinegar, depending on the limb's condition and color of the swelling.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Mays Ypocras, a herbal concoction of wine and spices, should be stored in its original container that is tightly sealed to prevent leakage during transportation for the purpose of preservation; moreover, mention that it should be consumed between moderation and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Maysa Guadia is seen to be wearing pendants over the injured limb for healing purposes and as remedies due to its lack of warmth, along with similar items related to those causes that have been recommended before.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	To create a poultice for treating lesions and pain relief using the following ingredients: hen's dried herbs or goose feathers, elder leaves, salt, water, oatmeal, flour, and fat from an old lamp oil. Mix all these ingnrediants together until you form a paste-like consistency. Apply this poultice to the affected area for relief.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	In case of injury or strain causing the ligament to become loose and detached, you should consider if there is no pain, irritation, broken bone, or it's not serious for its location; then do not limit your movements for three days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If you experience severe or persistent pain or swelling, contact your doctor immediately for treatment. Apply an ice pack to the affected area during this time.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Wrap the affected limb in a linen bandage and soak it in warm water for about 15 minutes, then immerse that area completely under cold water until you no longer feel any pain or swelling; rest your limb for an hour afterwards, and place it on soft cotton cloths soaked in lukewarm oil to relax the affected muscles overnight, ensuring relief from inflammation and reduced discomfort.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation in English:
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	Once the boil is drained of pus and swelling and pain have subsided completely, along with any other accidents or inflammamoins that may have occurred, you can then proceed as follows:
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If he does not agree to any of the reasons mentioned above, it shall be permitted to him for three or four days or at most five (5) days. The text you provided appears to be in Catalan. Here's the translation into English:
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	In times of hardship, the adjustments are made in the second budget rather than in the entire first initial budget; they should be aligned with the increase in expenses related to health issues as follows once medical treatment is required.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	In case of a fracture, it is crucial to keep the area dry and avoid movement as much as possible; know that nutrients are prohibited from reaching this area; also provide abundant water by means of an intravenous drip during the entire vegetative period; after three days, gently loosen the bandage; by doing so, the member receives the necessary nutrition and heals significantly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	The water that fills the cracks of a bone other than when it is restored at meals, according to custom, and it restores in twists, this is an error following Lor's operation, and great worry; if they were rightful heirs, then they would have increased their ancient rights freely and endured because of the water that was performed.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	In fact, I have seen some of them drink water too; therefore it is more reasonable to assume that not everyone drank water.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Second Edition: The Impact of Fractures on the Skull.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of bone fractures are varied, and their causes are different, none of which is made by a direct blow from space, as the impact hits all the bones inside the body, leaving them behind just like in wood, so this type of fracture is called an alesion. Or when the point pierces part of the bone and also cuts through the flesh without going deeper; this type of fracture is called absolute avulsion.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	In this text from the Old Occitan language, two types of wounds or fractures are described - one which is large and another that'e small; and whether they result from contusions (bruising) or avulsion (tearing). The cause for such injuries might be due to a blow with a stick or hitting against a stone.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This is either an expanding fracture approaching the perineum which was already left behind along with the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the fragment of these two fractures is large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	Hairline fracture is a type of crack that occurs in the bone or subtlety at the small level of hair, and for this reason it's called this particular species of fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	E is a type of bone fracture that occurs by chipping or impacting with stones, causing the entry of thin layers into its parts, and it appears in concave areas just as sudden incidents do when impacts result in breaking off pieces and entering the fragments.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	The majority of water is found within the bodies of humans, just as in the tissues of children's skulls.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	Therefore, all of these types of fractures are similar to peaks as well as separated stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	As the sun sets in its place, I bid you a warm farewell to all water everywhere.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	I completely reject all these types of fractures due to detection and inquiry about them, as well as temptations and displays of corrupted flesh that are upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	An E specific scar is found near the eyes, and it absorbs, leaving behind an attempted mark, as if a fracture appeared black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Mays in the healing of fractures considers accidents due to illness, and hours if you fall into such accidents that entail evident fear or danger, thus as vomiting from cholera, loss of consciousness, apathy towards decisions, sincopes, acute fever, urination of blood, and similar symptoms in those with major predispositions; it does not heal.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If you don't take care of yourself now, later on your health will begin to suffer.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason why it is not adviseable to study during the early morning hours when you feel sleepy and also in the days of winter, when there's a need for studying at night before the fourteenth day according to your schedule, is that our body functions differently depending on various factors such as circadian rhythms, temperature, and light exposure.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is in the summer days and you experience heat waves for more than seven days, make sure that what has been applied before these seven days does not become rotten due to the panicle and that symptoms mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the parietal fracture is extensive enough to cover the brain and consists of numerous small fragments or splinters, then it may be necessary to stabilize the fragmented pieces together, as I will advise you accordingly.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	The rage that your race has against the dreaded disease, and reveals itself in accordance with its usual customs and mannerisms, should be aware of the nature of the illness.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	He decided to help you with the detection of bone fractures, blood flows or abscesses; now your task is to apply cold water around it, and ensure that there are clean dressings soaked in vinegar and rosemary oil, then make sure the bruise rests until it'aturifies. Be careful for signs of bleeding. Begin with examining the surrounding area and the wound itself.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	There are two possible ways to proceed with the operation on water.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	A manhayra that you inscribe the letters of straight line, and this is how it looks like:   A
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	A has more scissors than B but fewer than C.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	In the list of subscribers are those whose names have more letters than others; and among them, there are some with shorter last names, situated at the end of their full name's length, and they must include a title or suffix such as "de" (of) or "y" (and).
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	We use a soft tap on the scissors to make sure it doesn't snag your hair or ears.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bones are strong and hard, avoid drilling holes in the circuit of your front teeth that you administer with clippers; these shallow groovesteeths should not be deepened.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	The nose does not resemble something else but rather these ones do not stop at the end of the nasal bone to which it is attached, because as for the handle it is a rounded extremity or margin over that which is left on top of its tip somewhat like a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing beyond the thickness of the b
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	E is convenient that you choose of these tools in great number those which seem appropriate for the purpose of each mouth, within what is suitable to your present needs in all parts of the brain, wherein the sharpness or bluntness corresponds to the extent and brevity according to the required fineness.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the way of three kinds of drills: The feature of piercing in a broken bone circuit is to pause and apply the drill onto the bone, rotating it with your fingers as you sense that the bam has penetrated; then proceed to move the drill to another location, pausing until all traces of the hole or groove are filled.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	"Wash thoroughly with warm water and mild soap, then carefully cut the area between all your toes so that you can access the underlying structure of skin and flesh; as we have mentioned before, in order to remove the bone or the affected part of the tissue, also caused by any other factors such as ingrown nails, using delicate tools like tweezebrushes."
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	Ensure that the scissors are handled with utmost care so as not to damage any part of the wrapping paper.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	Thus you will have circled the bone perforation and it should be separated from the cipher if it is continuous with its part; you will extract that piece so as to match and resemble that in the hardness of the water within the bone, but nevertheless making sure it is less than and finer than the other scissors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If you suffer from muscle spasms and cramps, the remedy that may help ease your discomfort includes ingredients such as rosemary oil or magnesium supplements; also consider applying warm compresses and massages to affected areas. Always consult a healthcare provider for appropriate treatment options tailored to your needs.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is the surgical one, distant from fear, which dissected Gualia and La Lauze with great skill; and this is its principle: it's essential for you to begin by discovering the origin of the bone fragment in the location where there is a very evident and noticeable fracture, within which once you have discovered that origin you will gently follow the pathway of this gradual cutter with a happy pace, as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The lens of the eye is convex and not recessed in any way, while the cornea is pointed at two-thirds anteriorly along its length; therefore the lenticular shape should be adjusted to match the curvature on the surface where it meets the sharp edge.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	A propelling instruments about the scissors of a small machine that helps turn everything over so easily, and you also feel safe from any accidental incidents on one side, as well as if the medication14 is the most common for all people and the least informed about them; indeed, even if they are dormant.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Lahora's sister Romania has no other cause related to the pancreas that could lead to these symptoms of her condition at this point in time; she would be relieved of her suffering and fear if it were so, as she was liberated from her harm and distress.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the subcutaneous tissue, and it heals without complications or becomes displaced from its original position, you will observe a degree of hardness in the area, along with sensitive spots caused by subtle nerve endings. After some hours, these areas may become irritable and eradicate those sensitive spots that you have prepared using various methods to administer as much as possible at all suitable locations for relief according to which stage your surgical intervention on the fractured bone has reached.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	In your ratio I give you the task to start with the most abundant of those resources, and gradually use up the more subtle ones as well; but do not cease from doing this according to continuity until you have administered the greatest part and the most refined portion of all those resources.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any of the minor capillary or subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer treatment according to how lost they are in order to promote healing.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	E is not impressed by those who have studied in that field.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	It seems that you've provided a line in Catalan, which translebtes to "Esto parece estar escrito para mostrarnos grandes fallas." The translation of this phrase into English is as follows:
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	When removing the tumor during surgery, you should take up some gauze according to the size of the wound and immerse it in olive oil, then pause that on top of the wound. Then, take another folded or tripled layer of gauze and immerse it in vinegard (assuming this is a typo for 'vinegar'), olive oil, and pause it over the first piece, making sure not to press too firmly so as not to hurt. Keep adding more layers on top until you feel confident that the wound is securely covered by gauze soaked in olive oil.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Elias had this cure for one or two days within which he was sure of pus; and then remove that and administer medicines such as excessive dryness is unnecessary, just like linseed and wheat flour powders, and essences of vinegar and aloe. And similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	E is what you should do with these powdered medicines that are sprinkled over the pillow when they are dry; universally, apply this entire medicine of property which has cleansing and non-staining effects.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Watch closely to your virtue and make sure the plague in your care is clean; it should not be in the earwax of ointment or any other substance; nor should you add more virulence to it, as when it is applied over the panniculus del cervell [the layer beneath the skull], it may corrupt that and poison it, and lead to evil disease caused by malicious ill-will.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	Acyess on the head, as when you become aware of your illness and most often when it is time to administer the treatment for you, along with a blackening on its surface; hence consider whether these accidents lead to the diseases we have mentioned earlier, knowing that they are all potentially harmful.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"It is not the blackness itself but rather the medicine that has been overused; and it comes from this medicinal substance which causes such darkness, hence at times you take portions of honey and parts of rosemary oil. III" The physician examines the patient's symptoms and prescribes appropriate medication based on those symptoms; they also ensure that the medicine is stored properly, as well as any necessary healing spices or herbs required for recovery.
Capitol .iii.	III. The United States Capitol Building
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	At the restaurant where they serve traditional dishes, a fork is required when you eat.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	"Those are not cut in half but divided into two parts of equal value, or one of those four is an uneven division, with more on your side and less on mine, where the part left behind has cartilage, and it's not a straight cut, but rather involves twists and turns."
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	In case one of the two parts breaks off from his mouth, he is obliged to insert a small bit in his nose and match that fracture to the piece indicated by you; and the other piece outside, until it returns according to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	E would be of great help to you in making this task easier; however, please do not overload me with your work related to the health issues of those affected.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the upper third of the nose and he does not follow it with a plastic surgeon, within hours he should seek care at the nearest emergency room or urgent clinic to have his extremity evaluated as soon as possible.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the break is in two pieces, hours it seems like an eternader.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	In the first day of the fracture, I will attempt to restore your strength if possible; otherwise, by hours seven or eleven at most, you should take rest from the swelling caused by the cast.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	An interposed a piece of cloth between the affected extremity and the nose, if the fracture is in one segment, or two pieces, if it's bifurcated; ensure enough volume to fill half the nostril completely.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Five days ago, the old restaurant ownees who had their coats stuffed in pockets and changed every day, but I have never seen; supposing that a coat is stored in an album of chocolate wrappers with powder sugar, and leaving only the piece that should be attached and hardened using cardboard.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	In some cases, if the bruises are on your nose, in lieu of coal, you shall pay a goose twice as much if it is wrapped in lion's skin; and provided that you have already broken his nose quite forcefully and the injury has not been prohibited by breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	This matter is not necessary for you; and whether you wish it or not, do so. And if you prefer to make an excuse.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	In case you get an abscess, apply some honey or butter on your nose to soothe the pain and reduce swelling. Alternatively, use a warm compress with roses or camphor oil.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	Mays if he doesn't catch the aposteme early on, hours later you will find him withered and frail, without strength or energy. His eyes have lost their luster; there is nothing causing his distress but an undiagnosed illness that has taken a toll on his body.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If your nasal bones are slightly fractured or comminuted, you should aim to realign those fragments with the help of appropriate instruments; then dress that incision properly and cure it using a healing ointn and suitable bandages.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	The storm decides to descend upon the nose, causing that you feel like a whale and get injected with lead tubes until everything is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	The Capital of the United States is Washington, D.C., which stands for District of Columbia (D.C.). This federal district was established by the Constitution as a separate entity not part of any state to serve as the nation's capital and seat of government. It is located on land donated by the states of Maryland and Virginia and is bordered by these two states, with the Potomac River lying along its western edge. Washington, D.C., was officially established in 1790 following the Residence Act passed by Congress, which designated it as the permanent capital to replace temporary capitals such as Philadelphia and New York City used earlier during the early years of American independence.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	In the surgical repair of a fractured mandible, how is it typically fixed?
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the mandible is broken and the fracture isn't an avulsion, consider if the fracture extends far enough to be considered complete, and not being split in two with a curvature towards both sides, then its recognition would be difficult.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	If the fracture is on the left side, gently insert your left index finger into the mouth to the site of the injury, and similarly if the fracture is on the right mandible, then do so from the opposite direction; simultaneously encourage movement in the direction that eases dislocation, while guiding with your other hand.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the mandible fracture is bifurcated into two parts, administer extension for four weeks as long as possible to ensure proper alignment of both segments.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	The mouth should not be moved from side to side causing disruption or tension; always apply pressure on the broken jaw at those places where you hope it will mend along lines of gold, silver, or copper; and pause there with a doubled thickness cloth for support. Apply this according to your harness attachment so that it is not damaged while applying.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Commander of the storms, grant us respite and calmness; pause your feast on our sorrowful lions.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	He sees that the figure has already been altered in any manner; however, you may recall on the third day and correct what has already been changed from it by dusting off that bag of wheat flour, a sheet of paper, or cornmeal powder as needed. Then you will have only the original piece left, which you should place upon an embroidery hoop.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	Then the oncologist applied that plaster there again and since the position of the bone was not changed, just leave it like that as long as it is healthy and strengthens the fracture; often this type of fracture heals within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If a new abscess occurs during the period when it has healed and regressed, administer enough water to flush out multiple previous episodes that have occurred in the inflammamo(s) of which there is one such instance where it has been cured; then the said abscess should be treated again.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is an avulsion, consider if it is a piece of bone separated or fragmented; subtly guide you to that appropriate place where it should be moved for proper healing of those injuries.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the rats' infestation is dense, hours you should increase them using flea bombs according to your needs.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And do not be dismayed by those past failures or mistakes, and if the storm is wide, wait on one of the landmarks that you should rely upon at this moment; otherwise, pause under one of the shelters available until it passes.
Capitol .v.	In the case of Capitol v. (insert name), a legal dispute arose involving copyright infringamoin, trademark violations, or potentially intellectual property rights issues. The specific details and background information regarding this hypothetical case would be crucial to understanding the context, arguments presented by both parties, and ultimately, the court's decision on the matter.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	During the restoration of the furcula, when it is clenched.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The broken furculum is cut from the starting point beneath the muscle, and that fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	The screw is broken or separated into two parts, which do not come together again; it is very leaky regarding its restoration and is so that accidents happen repeatedly in its use, making the repair difficult; or the breakage constitutes a flaw.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	In that procedure, when the fracture is in place, you will need to have two ministers present so that one holds the displacian and follows the broken furcula, while the other extends the neck on that side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Article A provides that the crack must be filled in such a way that it is done in its proper form and there should not be too little or concave depths.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If you feel the need to rest, take a break as often as necessary, and let its length depend on your requirements; extend and elevate your bed's headboard while arching your back and ensuring it aligns with your mattress according to comfort.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you can't stretch the furcula joint to the extremities outside, at least it has reached the point where the pain is relieved from its roots, and rests on his muscle a little relief in greatness.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The minister presses the muscle and lifts the remaining pieces up to where the bone of the furcula is elevated above his palm, then you realign the fracture and match it to your own descriptions.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	I feel constant pain in my shoulder blade and it hurts a lot; sometimes I think about cutting away that part to relieve the discomfort as much as possible.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it is retained in the bone, then your ingenuity will come into play to devise one of these tools which you have prepared beforehand. You had left aside the furcula (keelbone) that serves as support; and this support can be made of wood or iron, with the following shape:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	E is similar to the handle of which this concave part belongs; and its width should be according to what you require in terms of space or scarcity, depending on the size of the bowl or pot.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of Luisa is proportional to the operation that has two extreme points, which are as close together as possible and one end is wide while the other end is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the interruption of the fever, which you have inflicted when extracting the tooth'nausea, is extensive and certain that it leads to abscess, then later adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the disturbance is small or you fear an abscess, then apply a dressing with gauze pads and bandages according to the extent of the wound's severity.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	Upon choosing a thick paste color, one should wait for an hour after applying it to the skin and then leave it on without any disturbance.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	The precise method for making Mays' bandage of wheat flour and egg white, placed over the limb injury, is that you must plaster it with a mixture made from wheat flour and egg whites, and place this above the injured part. Then, if necessary, apply a poultice prepared as follows: it should be long enough to wrap around the limb by one palm or so; then apply another layer of powder on top of the plaster and the poultestre. Next, take a thin wooden board whose length is three fingers and nearly equal in width; cover this with a cloth, and wrap the cloth over the board covering the location of the fracture. Now, rotate this gently around the limb both ways (towards and away from the injury), ensuring it covers every part of the fracture. Repeat as necessary whenever the fracture's edges start to close again until you can no longer see them.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	E also, if it is not harmful to the stars above the broken bones; and only if you see any sickness every day, when the lamentation becomes soothed or you notice the star has been restored, then rectify that which is wrong and strengthen the bond.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	The patient stops experiencuing the discomfort in his throat and feeling drowsy from it during daytime, but at night experiences a slight cough; therefore, that being said, if the lymph nodes of that are elevated, then the fracture on the furcula (wishbone) is raised due to muscle contraction, causing his arm to be attached to that neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	If not treated promptly or if an infection develops, it can progress within 12 days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	A physician examines the face of the water again and adjusts in the strainer, restoring that which should be restored and ensuring that it is coagulated before repairing the furcula fracture.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	C is strict and comfortable according to the standards in XXVIII days, and occasionally stays in luxury homes during certain times of the year.
Capitol .vi.	In the United States, the capital city is Washington D. cuyambres. However, if you are referring to a state capital like Virginia's, then it would be Richmond (Richmond). It seems there might have been some confusion or typo with "cuyambres," which does not relate to any known term for capitals. If you need information on another topic or place, feel free to ask!
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Shoulder fracture surgical repair.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula tart is broken in the location of wheat and it's not torn from above, but rather from the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	Therefore, how is the piece of wood broken - and it is split into two parts - and not known until touched, at times according to the shape of the fracture; it springs forth from within itself and reduces that fragment as much as possible by all means of engineering.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	The volume of the Molière's play collection and Leon's stopover, along with twice the amount in duplicate volumes; plus a subtle increase according to the total quantity or just slightly more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	When the shadow of the gnomon becomes concave in some areas of the sundial's plate, at that time you adjust it so that its concavity matches the curvature of the leather pouch, and then move the sundial to alignment with equal precision.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	The proposed strengthening measures of the human body, when faced with prolonged stress and constraints, are closely related to lifestyle changes that should not be abandoned under any circumstances.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Every day he considers the balance in everything; and after every time it is calmed, another wave arises and maintains both the moon and stars when restored to its rightful place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Emma feels sadness over the loss of her cat.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is restored in XX days or less (XX vai no máximo).
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	So be it that you know for certain that the number consists of hours to dissolve the limbs and that the origin from which it begins is not feared nor its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	Here is the translation of the text in Catalan to English:
Capitol .vii.	Title: Capital VII - The Strugcups of Statehood
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	The restoration of the Petzval lens breakage.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Some vegetables are broken down in the middle of its length and towards one end, while the extremities of it continue to form and grow.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	His leg accidents when the fibula is broken lead to a decline in his physical activities and cause him great pain, difficulty walking, swelling, and even vomiting. The fracture of the bone becomes evident in the cavity within the bone and cannot be concealed by any means.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the bone should be placed supine with its fractured ends, and a chisel should be positioned between the fragments; then gently tap it to align them properly as per your skill level and according to what is feasible, ensuring that the shape of the bone returns as it was before.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Here'ebropeo sobre el emplasto y estopa y ebro desobriga sobre astilla de tabla sutil de sauce o de calígine y de al lor parecen en levitación, pues tú envuelves a ella en drap; y ebro subtilia te en lian aquella sobre los tendidos que no sean mugrientos; y vay am ligadura siguiendo redondez del dorso algunas veces, y estrechando aquel con fuerza decente; y ebro considera la ligadura en toda hora, y cuán mollificada estéña aquella.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to discontinue the use of an ointment or dressing due to irritation, itchiness, swelling, pain, or infection at that site, causing you severe discomfort and loosening that covering, remove it immediately; also correct any harm caused by it. Then appropriately reduce the frequency of its application if on the face; adjust the tightness of the dressing to ensure proper healing.
Capitol .viii.	VIII. Capitalization in Titles
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	During the coastal restoration, what are being cut?
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Broken bones are not shifted, but in large pieces that they hold to each other with ligaments; and from the extremities of their fracture on the side, do not deviate towards that direction except by force because they are cartilaginamoius.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	Consciousness of you is not endangered by the feeling, I shall make an effort to listen to what they say.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	The treatment should be as follows to best heal the fracture according to possible methods, while enscuaging it appropriately, and applying plaster and strengthening the broken bone with a splint if needed. If further assistance is required, please let us know.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If the coastal fracture is declining towards the inlet channels, it can lead to severe pain and piercing discomfort, so much so that even coughing causes significant bone movement; this results in difficulty walking, coughing, and vomiting blood. This condition is difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The ants are engaged in building that amazing structure.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	E of the Lord speak to you: Keep in mind that what I have created for nourishment may bring about disease and inflammamenet, windsiness, so that your stomach may become distended and the fracture pushed out towards its parts beyond. (Translation adapted from a possible ancient or poetic version of Aramaic)
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	In case of suspected appendicitis, do not hesitate to seek medical assistance promptly and avoid any measures that could worsen the condition, such as applying heat or pressure. If symptoms persist, immediate help should be sought with cold compresses applied in moderation.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They advised their subjects to be cautious during windy and stormy conditions as the strong gusts could cause significant damage; however, they seemed rational in their thinking but feared that excessive rainfall due to weak infrastructure might result in flooding.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	They gave thanks to God and their Lord: whoever the place may be covered with wool that has been submerged in oil, and fine dust between its shores where it is fully enveloped, according to the circumference you described; let it be carefully preserved for the treatment of pleurisy caused by food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	In the event that such injury is inflicted vehemently and forcefully upon the illness which was not previously endured, let them immediately administer a puncture using a needle, causing fear in relation to the ailment. After some time, they should open up the wound on the location, reveal the severed skin edge, and then bring forth the instrument that preserves the cipher, which is mentioned prior to this instruction, making it easier to extract with the tool.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	A: Adjust the dog ears of the page if it's large, and then bind them together; also apply bandages until healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you notice an ear infection, feel pain and pressure on the eardrums, and that there is discharge of fluid or pus from your ears, along with swelling around the area, it may indicate an acute otitis externa (outer ear canal infection). In such cases, please seek medical attention promptly.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	E be seated upon the chair on which you rest to sleep, inside that is healthy. (Corrected and translated)
Capitol .ix.	Capital IX is a term that could be interpreted in different ways depending on the context. In Roman numerals, "IX" represents the number nine (9). If you are referring to something specific called "Capital IX", it would help if more details were provided so I can offer an accurate explanation or information about it.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Spondylodiscitis of T12-L1 vertebrae treated conservatively with antibiotcuos and physical therapy, no surgical intervention required at this stage. The patient reports significant pain relief and improved mobility after treatment initiation. Regular follow-ups scheduled for monitoring progression.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some hernias originate from the vertebrae of the neck and extend to the lower back, similarly as in cases of spinal discs.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	If you have an earache and want to know if it will heal or not, consider these factors: how many times your ears are already soothed and amazed and dead and cannot restore them nor extend them, and how much they constrict when you touch them with a needle and do not feel any pain in them. You should understand that it is not healed, and within the same days of treatment, it can be fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	Those who suffer from that condition should wear the contraceptive and follow these instructions, so you know that your husband'annointing will be saved and free of illness with proper care.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If the limb appears swolamo (swollen), or if you suspect it may be infected, consider its weight as well.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you are feeling irritable and get upset with everyone around, try to remember that sometimes such occurrences happen in groups of people as well; however, when you impose your will on others, it is seen as arrogant and disrespectful. Sometimes you may find yourself unable to control urination due to pressure on your bladder. Remember these are mortal weaknesses and do not require excessive concern or treatment unless necessary.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If Mays doesn't decide on any of those causes, the cause is better and more plausible.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment for this involves applying a sterile cast that should cover the spondylitis located on your back or neck, or other areas with muscle soreness; keep it on throughout the day until the swelling has subsided. Make sure to wear loose-fitting clothing during the healing process.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	In those hours of pause, the healing bandages bring comfort and existence; strengthening him upon that bed of agony from which he must be saved. He commands illness to take rest and tranquility, urging it not to slumber over the departing pain within which lies its salvation.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	The following is an approximate translation of the text from Old Catalan into contemporary English:
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	In case your toe gets broken at the last joint of the toes and it is bleeding, you should take some cotton wool from the left hand and tuck it down into the gap between the bones as far as possible without causing further injury. Then, apply a plaster cast or splint on top if needed, making sure it's securely in place to support the broken toe.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	"Though times may have been shattered in light and darkness has overcome you over there, yet here is the hope that follows which shall be healed by the cure preceding it."
Capitol .x.	The Capital X. In English, it refers to the city or town that serves as the seat of government for a country or state. This place is usually home to key political institutions and offices, such as legislatures, courts, and executive branch buildings.
De restauracio de la ancha.	The restaurant is undergoing a major renovation.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of these anchovy tarts are broken, and if they break, the resulting fracture occurs at the ends of those bones and is inclined in the direction of the divisions; this causes pain in that area, as well as a sense of numbness when it's fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The restoration of its light depends on extending your shadow over the surface that lies above the fracture, which is the figure of you.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If it breaks at one of the limbs alone, after some time you will find that it is straightened again by gravity to its original shape once reassembled.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the fracture is in your arm or leg that bends backwards, you should keep the injured part supported and immobilized as much as possible until it's ready for restoration of that function after consulting a doctor.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	Thus, as you apply that paste upon the wood shavings or chips, and press it firmly onto the affected area, ensure there is no cracking or movement of the structure.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	The sick man lies in bed with his legs stretched out straight; he has a pillow under his head and is instructed to rest on his side or stomach, depending on the severity of his condition.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	Mays decides to treat an abscess at home, cease applying heat on it and its surrounding until the abscess is settled down, then rest on that area as per advice given previously; afterwards return to resuming treatment of the affected part, strengthening it just like before.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If the assets have been seized or liquidated, you must now collect them.
Capitol .xi.	Act IX of William Shakespeare's play "Julius Caesar" is a pivotal scene in the drama, as it sets into motion events that lead to the tragic culmination of the storyline. In this act, Brutus and Cassius have an intense argument about military matters and personal honor, which reveals tensions within the conspirators' camp against Caesar. Additionally, we see Antony gaining favor with the Roman populace by appearing to sympathize with their feelings towards Caesar's assassination.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Repair of the maxillary arch fracture.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Assistant's Aid is the one that is between two crowns on the top of the shoulder. (Note: This seems to be a mix-up or mistranslation as "crowns" do not usually relate to body parts.)
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	Si estás atascado y necesitas restaurar tus horas para dos métodos diferentes, elige uno en función de la siguiente guía:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	The scorching sun beats down on the land's extremities, and appropriately places itself in the high altitude location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	The following text is in Romansh, specifically the Sursilvan dialect of this Swiss language: "Fatges las malauas sur una sezla; e apropias fora las sieus brazzs trencadas sobre la sch'ultra entro ch'i vignen al tetglic del lü en il megl loc dal qual sia anexada la curvadad dal fust."
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	He who suffers from severe pain in his knee should extend the affected leg at an angle between 30-45 degrees; then gently apply pressure along the sides of the joint until it feels less painful, allowing the joint to rotate slightly as comfort allows.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other manner is that the malady spreads over his own head and suspends its grip from his left temple; and thus he commands two assistants, one to hold water above the fracture on their arms, and the other to hold cotton soaked in olive oil behind of them. They then extend it towards him as a parting gift.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you wish to strengthen the extension further, hours support should be placed over both segments of the crack and those adjacent to them, ensuring that from either side an equal pressure is applied.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	If the fracture is close to the end of the bone, then hours after being cast on should cover the middle part over the wound and the other side below the fracture should be supported by a splint.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	If the fracture is caused by a fall, it's advised to rest and apply ice on that area as well as around the affected site.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Wrap the affected area and apply it regularly according to its coverage and application for proper use; do not forget that this prevents inflammation from worsening.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Mays decides to treat his acne outbreak with a strict diet for the next seven days and focus on gentle skincare products starting from day one until complete recovery, followed by maintainamo to prevent further breakouts.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	In the case of an arm fracture, first place the splint over the fracture and then wrap it with a navy-blue bandage; next, adjust the sling over the splinted arm and fasten its straps securely under your muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	After the rest period ends and you remove the sling from your arm, make sure to position it properly, ensuring that there are supports in place (like pillows or cushions) for stability, so as not to cause any further injury to the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	In El Hierro, they commonly use stars as symbols on their emblems and flags.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	E is the measure that stops by the fracture of those stones which have a width and thickness greater than the other stones; pause between each stone according to its lateral dimension, and be as long in length as the breakage is at an incline from one-third of its entirety.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Article 4 of the Constitution strictly regulates urban development and land use planning, as initially outlined in this section. The aim is to promote sustainable growth while preserving natural resources, cultural heritage, and maintaining the balance between rural and urban areas for the benefit of current and future generations.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	The stricture of the fracture site is too tight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	The crack is even more elongated than the narrow constriction.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Then if you reverse the situation of these stones and follow it as we have described in this hour when restoring its position, then do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear an abscess, have the surgical drainage and sterile dressing placed within seven hours as we have instructed.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Article I - The supply of all articles throughout the entire three days, in order that none shall arrive at the production or inflation location; it is prohibited for any goods to be transported for distribution purposes due to strict regulations as previously stated. All conditions must be adjusted accordingly.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	In case of any injury or accident causing you to miss work, do not sever the employment relationship unless given three days' notice or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	S be the bearer of your illness upon your head, and may their malice rest on your belly. (This is a traditional blessing in Scottish Gaelam language.)
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	At rest upon your bedchamber, in complete darkness of night or day, without being drowsy nor distracted, and with a relaxed body, correct all that is not good about you for the sake of preserving your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Pause the main course after I have given you orders in which we had before, provided that the dish is subtle for consumption during the meal where it has been served hot; however, if the dishes are hearty, pause them at the beginning of the meal.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The common remedy and advice for a sprain or strain is to be strict in resting for twelve days; and during this time, one should avoid any motion, take frequent baths and apply appropriate ointments that correct and heal such injuries.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the crack is minor and hairline in nature, avoid using it for heavy loads or carrying items within the next few days to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII, commonly referred to as "Capitol," marks a significant progression in the narrative of the text at hand. This chapter delves into themes and events that are crucial for understanding the overall context and character development within the storyline. The reader is encouraged to pay close attention to the unfolding circumstances, relationships, and revelations presented in this section.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Bone fracture treatment in the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The compost of these two bones has two forks; one is small and that's the one you mentioned as the pous, and the other is big and it's the one that was cut from below the small one, on the further side.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	The lion'n't just break the big bone alone; he also breaks them into pieces with his powerful jaws.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	The window is broken a little higher than before; therefore the restoration of it seems negligible, and its healing process is even more insignnificant.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	The lamb's wool is cut off after the left side of the fracture is bad, and its healing on that side is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	An evil woman of that age had two broken bones.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	If the bone that is broken is below the kneecap, it's advisable to see a doctor immediately for restoration; meanwhile, you may take some time off as necessary until it has fully healed.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	The hot water bottle is colder than the closed faucet; it takes longer to heat up more intensely.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If the two foci are closer than before, then it will be harder to pull out a larger extension with force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	In this phrase from the Catalan version of Rosary prayer, we are reciting an invocation for our Lady and Mother Mary's protection over a specific group or cause ("de la restauració de lu e la extenció de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi"). The English translation would be:
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	E be a wise man lounging in the highest tower of knowledge, so that the evil never comes to pass through action.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	The minister extends the hand to receive the offering from his side and another minister extends towards him seemingly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	A mathematician seeks to maximize the area enclosed within that shape, following the next optimal figure possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	If the servant shows signs of weariness in his work, it is your duty as a master to inspire him with all possible means at your disposebility.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	It seems that you have separated the code and it's not what I expected regarding its restoration. Now you find yourself at a crossroader, following the method we previously discussed.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If the fracture is a simple one, I have already made an individual assessment and therefore take charge of that treatment.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you notice an abscess upon starting your meal at the restaurant, apply a soft cotton cloth soaked in olive oil and beeswax cera alba (white wax), ensuring it's gentle yet effective. Cover the area with this preparation over the subtle stricture where the abscess has formed. Afterward, remove the cloth and apply an adhesive bandage prepared from molten beeswax mixed with honey powder. Lastly, place a sterile gauze pad on that fracture, ensabut (binding) it tightly yet comfortably over the wound for adequate support.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	The name of the bronze steles in the major statutes is either broken into one piece or two pieces at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Apologies for my previous rigidity regarding the topic of bone fractures and its healing process, and whenever it extends to areas outside or lower parts of the fracture, please relax the strictness slightly as long as it's introduced in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The linens that cover your fracture should be several layers of clean cloth, and not rough or harsh, and the bandage you use to bind it properly between thin and thick, as we have previously instructed.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	F considers the members of the legion in alignment with their duties each day.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If a limb becomes cold or there's any other reason that necessitates its rectification, wrap it with the material causing the prickling sensation and immerse the limb in warm water until the tingling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	She leaves the member at rest within that pause, and returns to normalcy.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the confession is truly made and the fault has been removed and actions align with such, then all will be restored to you in virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	E considers whether the supplement should be avoided for excessive strictures; however, there may be occasions when providing that supplement in small amounts and less frequently could benefit the individual receiving it over several days as long as the supplement is required.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	If the illness is not caused by any of those mentioned, one shall not be excused from attendance within 14 days or until recovery.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	A sleeping spell has been cast upon the man plagued by restless movements, and he now lies down on his back to sleep.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	This fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, and if the break is severe, it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this according to the circumstances and provisions of the healing process.
Capitol .xiii.	In Chapter XIII, the story continues as our main characters navigate through challenges and uncover new revelations in their quest for truth and justice. As they delve deeper into the mysteries that surround them, each decision made brings forth consequences that shape their destiny within the world of the novel.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Restaurating the fracture of the mother'cuff and removing the stitches.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	You should know that the clumsiness of your mother and her divorce caused you to have broken hearts many times over without even trying.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	Evan accidentally hurts Mary's foot or arm, hours later he feels the pain following closely and continuously like an unbroken chain of equality, so he immediately bends down to look at her extended limb.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	The minister shall extend the fallen branches, and similarly to those within its reach that are growing together, it should maintain good cohesion.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Clean the wound with antiseptic and bandage it; if not infected, leave it uncovered as per the amount of exposure, but you have already wrapped that in a piece of cloth or gauze.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	In the game of Jokgu (also known as Tinikling or Takgi), two players strike sticks on both sides of bamboo poles that are set over the ground with several balls placed in between them. The goal is to avoid getting hit by a stick and collect the balls without dropping them while hopping over the poles.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	H is the armchair with a curved back in which one can recline, so that the body is supported by the palm; and pull on it according to your comfort.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	In case the fracture is outside of the bone, you should apply casts to both above and below the injured part; so that the fractured segment may be straightened and aligned correctly. Also cover the incision site with a sterile dressing as it has been closed by sutures.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	A person with a broken finger is advised to keep the injured area immobilized by using tape or bandages according to its position and then, if desired, use a small straight splint to help elevate the fracture and ensure it heals properly without further complications. It's important to seek medical attention for proper diagnosis and treatment.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in the other hand (as we mentioned regarding the thumb), then it should be treated as follows: if there are no complications and it heals well with the described treatment, that's for the best; or continue all treatments accordingly; or pause on a small step, just as we mentioned with the bud.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	In the design of your restaurant, consider placing a fire extingcuisher and a fire blanket nearby - as per your operations - to be prepared in case any unforeseen incidents occur, according to what has been narrated here.
Capitol .xiv.	In the United States, "Capitol" is a term used to refer to the building where members of Congress assemble and conduct legislative business. The full name for this historic edifice in Washington D. cuisine. C is the U.S. Capitol Building or simply known as the Capitol, located atop Capitol Hill on the eastern edge of the city. Constructed during 1850-1863 and finished with its iconic cast iron dome, it serves as a symbol of American democracy.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Posterior reconstruction of tibia fracture.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the cuayza mute have been broken and it has been declared according to how they were transformed, with one side being subordinate and the other supreme.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The restoration of life shall be performed as follows: the lament must be strengthened over the fracture and another lament beneath it; evil should lay upon its belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The minister extends the entire agreement according to the quality when the fracture occurs in the middle portion of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Mays was walking down the road when he noticed an abandoned box of kittens nearby. At first, he thought about leaving them there and continuing on his journey, but then he decided to pick up the box and take it with him. He couldn't bear to leave them behind, especially after seeing one of them had a broken leg.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the amendment is approved by the majority, then it will be made effective immediately from that date, and its provisions shall apply to past events as well.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	The surgeon shall join the amputated limbs as closely as possible to each groove and make sure that the bone is aligned according to its natural shape; afterwards, he should apply plaster and dressing if there's a risk of inflammation at the site.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	In case of an insect bite, apply a cold compress to reduce swelling and itching, then follow your usual treatment routine as the sting usually subsides within several days.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandage that has been made should cover the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap it around so that it reaches the ankle and the heel of the foot.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	The long spear entered between the chest and the prop beside the duke on both sides; its extremities of the blade from the higher partisan reached over to the shelf and the chest, when they surpassed it by a little.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	A robin perched on the branch at that fork in the road and gazed upon those one star above the ox's bones.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Fill the glass containers between the chambers and the cooling system with molten metal, to ensure that the casting is properly solidified.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	A: Begin by applying a firm bandage directly over the area of the three or four fractures, and as you move away from the location of the fracture, your pressure should become lighter and less severe, and more moisturized.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Article I - Extension of the Field Boundaries and Strengthening of Corner Markers: The parties agree to extend their respective field boundaries up to the stones placed within said limits, ensamocially strengthening both extremities of the corner markers on each side so that their integrity is not lost from its original location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Article 15 - Appropriateness of Strapping Materials
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	In case of an accident involving the bone with which you struck it, report as soon as possible to that location where this occurred and describe what happened so that action can be taken. If not possible, inform about it over the phone or online and ensure follow-up on the matter until resolution is achieved.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some waxes strengthens this ankle fracture when they are adjusted to the stirrups, as we have said in the auxiliary and on the leg.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of lu in such a manner made, it should not result in malicious harm; and if it is restored alone, another water that is applied afterwards at the other joints will eventually cause the one from which it was extracted to weaken.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	The cough lasts for about ten days or a little less or a little more, and it is always according to the nature of illnesses and other circumstances.
Capitol .xv.	"Capitol XVII" is a book written by Simon Scarrow, which delves into the life of Octavian Augustus (later known as Emperor Augustus) during his early years and military campaigns. Although there isn't an exact volume titled 'Capitol .xv,' you might be referring to one of the books in the "Eagle" series by Simon Scarrow, which are historical fiction novels that follow Julius Caesar and Pompey Magnus before they became famous figures in Roman history.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	The restoration of Mr. Denholme's pelvic ring fracture.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	The sentence in Galician translates to "As you know, the broken back of Denol's shield, also caused falls on the nearby rocks." In English, it means that there has been some sort of accident where the shield belonging to a character named Denol broke and fell onto surrounding rocks. This could be a scene from a story or historical event.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Maya decided to watch a horror movie, and afterward she had nightmares or bad dreams every night, so it's a real fright, and that'angs her fear all the time.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of the watercourse should be carried out in such a way that it is made equal to what it was before being interrupted by the upstream sections, which shall be joined and regulated according to justice, ease, and feasibility of construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Press the plunger down gently and place it on that round glass, if you wish to have some water in there; and stretch your arms out for a comfortable reach.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Apropriate care should be taken for all injuries that have been recommended in other sections, as well as with burns and similar cases where it is necessary to take measures until the wound heals or recovery occurs.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI: The Capitol - A Glimpse into the Heart of Power and Governance
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Repair of the mandible fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	In the cage there are two bones of which one is big and is called by its name "cage"; and the other is small and is called "fool."
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	The accident damages a certain portion of the arm's bones and requires reconstruction similar to that of repairing an entire arm, with only one operation needed.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	When two or more bones are broken in the same session, the claim is considered to involve multiple injuries.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the bone is broken and not subtle, the chess piece transforms into a disqualified pawn.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	Se si sono legati i nostri destini così strettamente, che non possiamo più liberarci da loro; è dovuto alle circostanze al di là del nostro controllo.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	The proposed extension promotes equality and cohesion among the stars according to that alignment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, Mr. Cove, if the wardrobe breakage is a piece of glass, I should extend it to you as gently and lightly as possible while also praising your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the cage is a certain operation on your arm and when you reach for the bars and perform all of its operations, then take some pieces of wood from the tree which are approximately equal in size to the causes previously mentioned, and make use of palm fronds; remove those that have little growth and do not include any leaves, and their length should be according to the cage's width towards the front.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Wrap around each bag separately according to their length and pause one end over the neck of one side while holding the other from the opposite end; both ends should be inside about halfway down the bag's body.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	A proper anchoring of the sails involves securing them at three locations on both extremities and in the middle, so that this rigidity does not allow for any lean to the left or right, ensaturating stability.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	He is administering a dose of dust according to the length of the cabinet, and it will be stored in the cabinet for him to retain that motion.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	The majority of times when a wave breaks properly, it is at the point where the water depth matches the wave'amoeba length.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	In this text, the writer speaks about "aquells" (those), referring to students with certain physical conditions who are attending college or university for higher education. The writer advises that these individuals should be protected from possible harm such as illness and other similar causes. Furthermore, if any of those circumstances occur, they must immediately consult a doctor for necessary treatment.
Capitol .xvii.	The provided text appears to be a section of a book or document with the following characteristics: "Capitol .xvii." This indicates that it may be from a publication, possibly referencing Chapter 17 (as ".xvii" is Roman numeral for 17) and related to Capitol. Without additional context or information on the content of this chapter, I'm unable to provide an English translation or interpretation. If you could supply more details about the material or its subject matter, that would be helpful in providing further assistance.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	The anatomy of the ankle and bones of the foot and their functions.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The talus is not affected by total fractures, but some bones of the foot do experience recurrent fractures; and in cases of minimal trauma, it causes little to no injury, except for avascular necrosis during healing.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	Then the bones of their feet are broken and twisted; those bones shall be lifted up above them, then a plague will lay its burden upon his foot as he walps on the earth (Isaiah 52:4).
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	A prop is a handhebag used to collect and carry items such as fruits or vegetables from higher places like trees or vines. The user reaches up with the bag, holds it open below, and fills it by shaking or tapping the branches so that the produce falls into the bag.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	He accidentally swallowed some paste and stopped breathing; he had a small table with two plastic cups on his belly.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	A propensity for strengthening that arm's extension, thus you have wrapped it with towels and other items from which you require support.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	After three or four days you will release the bandage, when you notice the bones healing, or are slightly cracked, or displaculed and the surgical work on them is so complex that it requires caution.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	May's bounty be yours to spend, as the hours restore those same gifts, and equal them so that they are just like you too, and I recommend this in the restoration of these words from my letter.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	The text appears to be in Catalan and discusses the placement of an object near a table with recommended dimensions for clearance or spacing. A possible translation could be: "Place it at a distance from the mentioned piece according to its length, and slightly wider on one side; and shortly after this table that is described above, ensure there's enough space."
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	Mays si aquel que es trinxa dos o tres osos o més, el cap d'aquells hauràs una pausa sobre cada dit a l'estaca de quantitat envolupada en draperia leonada, i estendra la taula en el punt més baix del pes, i tens-te sobre un dels caps de la taula fora el ventre del cap per que la llengua siguin ben retallades.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	E is reminded not to forget that you should not consider all the causes mentioned in other bone fractures resulting from accidents previously discussed, and it applies to any type of accident as well.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII: The Journey Continues
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Fracture of the woman's thigh bone and pelvis, as well as the man's tailbone.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman's husband is tied up, she stays for an hour in that position before falling to her knees, then slightly tilts towards the direction of his release, and stands behind him.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Once upon a time, in an old village nestled between the mountains and the sea, there lived a kind miller who had two daughters of equal beauty - one fair-haired and the other brunette. One day, while taking her steps along the shore, she heard a voice coming from the ocean waves: "Dear maiden with golden hair, come to me!"
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Edema of the lower legs is often caused by venous insuvee. This leads to an accumulation of fluids in the tissues and makes it more difficult for urine to exit through the bladder, resulting in frequent urination. To help alleviate this issue, elevating your legs on a pillow can facilitate fluid return to the circulatory system and reduce swelling. Return to this position periodically according to the method used initially when you first noticed edema developing.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Easy as pie! It only takes seven days to receive your item once it's been restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish to do so, take an ovine bladder and stretch it over the trunk of a tree; then insert the whole bladastery into the hollow part, and by blowing through the cane that is inserted inside, inflate the bladder until it causes the fracture to heal.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	A proper amendment of the bill shall come into effect two calendar days after its re-enactment, on which date it shall be considered to have been enacted and shall become effective.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	The pelvic bones of the hip, whether male or female, are fused, so they manage to provide stability and mobility for that part of the body where the joints have been reconstructed.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	The right one that is not hidden in these closely related faults and that does not deviate much, mainly to the one to whom I have dedicated study and attention to this my free work; for that fault represents you in the most essential principles of justice restoration and strictness herein.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	The hedgehog bitten at home by the dog should be placed in an egg carton; then wrap it up with a cloth and leave it wrapped for three days or until healed.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol Nineteen. In Roman numerals, "Capitol" remains the same as it is a proper noun and not a number to be converted. The notation ".xix." translates to "ninetee," but in Roman numerals, it should correctly be written as XIX for 19. Therefore, when combining both parts with correct Roman numeral representation, you could say Capitol XIX or simply Capitol Nineteen (if noting the number in English).
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Bone healing after a fracture when it is immobilized.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It's convenient to be near the place where an accident with a car occurs, especially if it involves bones similar to those of a cow or an assistant, and using tourniquets as soon as possible if the conditions for bleeding control are met, just as we have previously explained.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If you spill paint on the floor in your home, clean it up as soon as possible using paper towels or cloths that are appropriate for the type of flooring; if there is another reason why it cannot be done immediately, let me know.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	A) Start to restore the break in this piece of art today, and do not extend it further if an infection occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssamo la restauracio de lu entro al ix die, entro che sia cedat le apostema, e non apropinsc te lu en le tertzo dia e·l quarto, quar tu fares accidir malis accidentos.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	If the broken bone protrudes through an open wound, you should seek medical help immediately to reduce it and align it as much as possible with minimal delay.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Mays, let it be known that this instrument is not made for your practice alone or for equality of use among the many; but rather, it is intended to reduce those of whom you have more, and its length should be seven or eight dits [a unit of measurement], while its width corresponds to the amount of plaster required. Therefore, it is essential for a physician to choose from such three or four instruments based on your specific fracture treatment needs.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	S is a discount, and I have a few coupons that may not be doubled; hence you are entitled to redeem them during the time of operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Article I - The land of Acute Extremity shall be determined by the median line between its respective extreme points; and it shall extend outwards to an extent that is significant in relation to those extremities, with the greater portion lying within the designated areas.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	Esta es mi versión del texto en inglés. Aquí te lo presento para su revisión y posible mejora:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	In Greek, "labre volentz atelarehem" does not mean anything as it is a mixture of languages and doesn't correspond to any known phrase in Greek or Latin. The words seem to be a combination of Italian ("volentz", which resembles the present participle "volente" meaning 'willing') and English ("atelareem" seems like an attempt at "atelier"). However, when discussing languages such as Greek (Ελληνικά) or Latin, one should use proper phrases from those respective language families.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	The translation of the sentence "Per què cova que es pauseja l'extremitat de l'acudita elevada sobre l'extremitat d'os eminent." from Catalan to English is:
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	In the fields of a vast valley where rivers return to their source, they are captured by any means necessary.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Then make an effort to align the ends of the fracture between them and if the detached end is subtle, and you cannot achieve a good fit with that instrument, then cover it up with some padding so that you can insert the broken bone fragment into that instrument which has enough grip.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the losses to just water that we have mentioned above, then from now on try to avoid any situations where there may be potential risks as told by the cautious ones; or at least minimize them in whatever way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	The rabbit that lives in the oak tree experiences both joys and small difficulties.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	The bone has been extracted, and the application of intense pain relief prevents the wound from throbbing severely, as if hours had passed without the bone returning to its natural place; therefore, you should consult a doctor for significant improvement in your condition.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	The completion of your restoration work on the oil you provided has now begun, and for a while it will appear dark in color due to the vinification process. However, during summer, do not leave it exposed to direct sunlight or any other factors that might affect its quality; this is to ensure that no spoil age or corrosion occurs.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	A proper positioning of the leg during the completion of a fracture restoration, and leave the wound open unless sutures are required according to the amount of tissue loss.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Be careful not to aggravate the wound while you have it open, as there are often bacteria present that can cause serious infections or complications for your patients, which is dangerous to their health.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If the treatment protocol differs significantly from that of other types of fractures, a specialized approach may be required.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	Is the plague a big one or is it a bad plague, and are you concerned about that awful accident which we have reported to you, and do you feel pain in that spot? For hours now I don't want you to stay on that bed, rather go with that tightly wrapped bundle of sheets at the infirmary.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	On the day when the plague begins to rise and give birth, keep your doors closed longer than usual during that time; then prepare with caution a mixture of remed cups fourfold, as well as substances such as those we commonly use to alleviate pestilences - tetrapharmacist's ointment or similar.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	In case of an injury, gently unfasten the bandage and consider the extent of damage on each day in the morning and evening until it is consolidated and stabilled; ensure that the wound heals properly so that scar tissue forms with ease between the healthy areas.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the rainfall persists for several days and is not consolidated or separated from your land, you should be aware of potential flooding risks that could affect your property.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	A of those ulcers that are only separated by tissue and not directly connected but cause pain due to the affected area, you should proceed with incising them as soon as possible according to your condition.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	In the event that they decide to pluck up and remove or cleanse the infected or decayed portion, it will soon heal as described in the above chapter regarding treatment of such conditions.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	In the water in which my speech and you present your pledge: when your teeth are clenched, hang yourself over the limb just like the jawbone and of the helper and appearances similar to those of large members; do not assume too much weight on it, nor extracting from it any amount often results in accidental death. Beware that which is hidden within, for heavy loads could cause a great fall after twenty or thirty days. If you see the illness, visit it; and if not, leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Certainamo! In the United States, a state capitol building is where the government of each respective state conducts its official business and legislative proceedings. These structures often house the offices of key elected officials such as governors, lieutenant governors, secretaries of state, attorneys general, and other important administrative staff.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The radioactivity present in the residues resulting from a certain type of fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Repetitive stress injuries are caused by this condition in the aftermath of a bone fracture healing process, primarily near the joints, and is characterized by swelling that resembles the shape of the limb; it strongly prohibits the normal functioning of the affected limb.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Adonc, he considersi si la noduscula es recentia e aministra in medicinas quae stipulant assi cum aloe, ensis, seracoli, acrasia et semblantes ad eos; enim quasque prendunt de eiusdem aliqualibus vel totis, et conficiunt illae autem vi stiptica, aut album ligni aut vitium acidum, aut pausant ibidem super noduscula in strutto, et constringent illas super eam per bonam constrictionem.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	The extraction should not be delayed for more than three days; and replace that one with another, as long as it is still effective in the knotting area; or strengthen it by overlaying a layer of lead coating, since lead has the property to remain intact in any body part.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays shall be held accountable if it is turned into stone and thrown away for the sole cause of necessity, then after some time breaks that part which belongs to the higher authority above him, and exploits its abundance and superiority or raises an ambush within that area wherein he was hidden. And in this place where he was hidden shall be saved.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI - The Capital City's Secrets Unveiled
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	In the process of bone fracture healing, the body restores and replaces tissue in accordance with its original nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	A bone fracture is healed, and the appropriate dressing and bandage are applied, but after some time they are not removed for various reasons: one of which is excessive swelling of the tissue and disruption of blood flow as it should be; or due to an overabundance of constriction within the sutures that prevents nutrients from reaching the limb; or excessive wrapping material; or excessive movement at inappropriate times; or lack of sufficient blood supply to the body and weakness caused by illness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The healing of water is to soothe the pain and make your tender heart within which the wound has multiplied in you; it provides comfort and brings joy upon you.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	The fluid passes over the membrane so that it can throw the vital substance and continue its osmosis of the blood stream, in which the substance circulates and returns to its original form.
Capitol .xxii.	Certainamo! Here is your requested Latin phrase in the form of a capitulary or edict from an ancient Roman emperor, complete with imperial titles and formatted as per classical tradition:
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	The treatment of broken bones when they are restored incorrectly and the operation on them is forbidden due to water that hides it.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	The surgeon agrees to restore the health of your curved and prominent bone joint, which will ensure that your limb is properly aligned; however, the member (limb) remains susceptnable to natural healing processes, so do not expect this treatment to make it as good as new.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Mays is so much like those chefs and restaurateurs who have done it in our country, and this operation is truly shameful as they lose the great honor that can be fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	"Mays's claudication and nodosa are recent remedies; however, they contain herbs like aloe vera leaves, rhizomps of the galingale plant, mallow, and other similar plants in a mixture with boiled water that serves as soothing emollients. It is made into a paste by mixing it thoroughly or can be used as a mucilaginous extract from the roots of the altea or oil of ciramio. The poultice can also contain fatty figs, which are crushed with stale bread and resemble the preparations mentioned earlier for treating conditions like claudication."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some feet are regularly washed in warm water due to excessive sweating that makes them very moist; the entire foot is moved gently at all times during this process.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Mays' tortuosity has been worsening and leading to the need for surgical intervention as it becomes more twisted and its continuous dissolution, causing excessive blood flow from the vessel that exceeds the capacity of his veins, which are being slowly torn by subtle scissors. It is administerwed with ease in this area he has requested attention and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23: The Intrigue of Parliament Square
De sermo en dislocacio.	Topic: Movement Disorders and Conversation
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	A dislocation is a displacement of one of the joints in the body, making it unable to move and causing severe pain and injuries. The affected limb's position appears abnormal.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When a joint is dislocated, it's important to seek medical attention as soon as possible and ensure that the reduction (repositioning) happens promptly, because if it's delayed, the area becomes swolaturate and strongly tense with fluid accumulation making the correction of dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	The use of local anesthesia is generally safe and effective for most patients undergoing minor surgical procedures, such as cyst removal or skin biopsies. It helps to alleaderze pain during the operation. However, like any medical intervention, there may be potential complications in certain cases:
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	Mays qu'aquo aguas acariciadas, lloran cuanto tú te acerques a la flebotomía del malestar y aprieta el vendaje en que reposa el absceso; y aprieta el miembro afectado con agua caliente o aceite, y aprieta su reducción para facilitarlo.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	The members of the board shall remain in constant contact with the representative, enscuplimente sui responsabilitates de cussiunie ascuza din cu unii praface cu asecurarea ca rememorarea voia aparire in loculul acordat.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	In case of dissolution, the capital stock shall be divided according to the following proportions as previously outlined in the agreement; from the higher portion downwards.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV. (In Roman numerals, "Capitol" followed by "XXIV" represents the number 24)
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Treatment of Mandibular Dislocation Lateral Displacement
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the lower jaws are displanked at birth and there is dislocation of both, it occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly stretched from their original position and mildly relaxed, or completely dislocated with full separation, between which saliva flows due to pain and prevents them from closing their mouths; the tongue is wrapped around its own palate.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	The occurrence of May's mild dislocation is rare, the hours after major surgery often return to normal without much cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If Mays' displacement is complete and entire, he shall be given sufficient time to respond thoughtfully, without being rushed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The Minister should have knowledge of the pain, and insert the aforementioned finger on one side in relation to the dislocation of the jaw inside his mouth; if the dislocation is on one side, or insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, while all other fingers similarly. He then commands the patient to stop their jaws and absolve them from any displaced position; and the physician aligns the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its original place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	It is difficult to reduce the swelling, especially if both mandibles are dislocated. Firstly administer antipyretic and anti-inflammatory medication as well as plenty of water; then it should be easy to perform bilateral reduction, without delaying the procedure, as we have mentioned.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so they returned home, both equally affected, with the mouth of sorrow closed and unappeased. Hours passed over those dusty rags of red silk, now waxed and scented with oil; and it was made soft to be easily heard by many ears.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	E should sleep of the sickness upon his head, and his hair be parted between two ears, for he may not have that on either side; nor let any cause force him to turn it. His food shall be lion's fur, within which when pains are renewed and jaws become numb, therein should he sleep until the time is right.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	Water can be taken easily, and you should not open your mouth for eating or drinking or sneezing until the jaw is numb and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	It is difficult to reduce the two dislocated jaws at any time and not return them to their original positions; then there are recurraturess of fevers and persistent sores, and often the abdomen swells with pain due to the illness, and vomiting occurs as in pure cholera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	Twice the square root of time in hours since it was crafted multiplied by the number of times water has passed through, and then add a hundred for each day that has elapsed since its creation to the waterwheel'cups capacity.
Capitol .xxv.	Capital XXV or Roman numeral for the number 25 is represented as "XXV". In this context, it may be referring to a volume, chapter, section, or edition of a book series such as 'The Federalist Papers', which has been divided into parts labelled using capital roman numerals.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	The reduction of the fracture in the furcula and distal end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furcula is not displaced from the left ribs due to its continuous attachment at the sternal end; however, in some cases it can be dislocated at the beginning and then repositioned externally, as reported by experts.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The remedy of lavender is that the bad ailment covers her forehead and extends its branches.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	The arrow bends to the left at its tip as it flies through the air. As it returns, the curve becomes more pronounced.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	A) Take the plaster and powders, and strengthen that one.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The tip of the one that you know and it continues to him/her, is not dislocated on any day; hours will pass until he/she has been reduced and equalized according to what we have said and according to how they are prepared for.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	The Lord be merciful and grant peace to that paste, powders, extracts, and orders the illness to attach tranquility and rest within which is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	In this situation, the healing process is reduced when the muscle tip is separated from its original site.
Capitol .xxvi.	"Capitol XXVI" in Roman numerals translates to the Arabic number 26. In this context, it could be referring to a chapter or section within an English textbook titled "The United States Government," which might cover specific aspects related to Capitol Hill (the seat of the U.S. Congress) and its legislative functions during the 26th year being discussed in the book's timeline.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Regarding the reduction of muscle dislocation injuries.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	It is known that the shoulder muscle can be dislocated in three ways, one of which involves displacement from the origin to distal insertion.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second is that it may be displaced from its usual position at the start of the muscle, and so it occurs; but it'n't displaced to positions behind through the shoulder; nor is it displaced in front through the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	The majority of the dislocation and displacement are found in the lower extremities, especially in those whose bodies have little fat, which is often caused by improper lifting; however, in those with abundant body fat, it occurs less frequently due to difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	Fortunately, there are no reported injuries or accidents involving alcoholic individuals in concrete homes and the impact of the earthquake did not cause any house displacamo to their neighbors. Additionally, no one has been affected by an abscess outbreak or dislocated limbs due to the recent tremor.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	I urge you to take the water that is given to you and go oversea so that you can heal from it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	E is the dislocation of the ulna at the elbow joint; thus you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the muscle's sa (tendon), as there are evident differences; and you must identify the concave aspect and posteriorly, the tenderness in touching the tip of the muscle, like a finger. The pain cannot be reduced to its original place nor moved away entirely by any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If you lose your wallet or purse and later find it with some contents missing but nothing is torn, report the incident immediately.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	D of this displacement is a slight reduction when it's fresh and the malady worsens in childhood.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The reduction of salt takes place when the minister lifts your salt to above parts; and he also raises his ties behind you as long as the salt is, and lifts the joint strongly at his own location, and the minister lifts your salt, and extends that within it; and he places it back carelessly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	In case of recurring symptoms as mentioned before, return to the meal that caused the dislocation after several days or hours when it is believed that the pain has been soothed by water and administers a warm bath with ingredients such as highland tea, fenugreek, and melilot in water.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	The illness lies on the top of its head and is covered by the touches of his hope to heal it so that it may enter into levitation and constriction; then the physician places the palm of their hand over the wound, raises the muscle's upper part, and throws the illness away so that it does not harm those nearby. They provide treatment for the top part of the ailment to ensure that it quickly returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to do so according to this method: let it be presented as a man who is longer than the illness, and positioned on the side of the latter, and inserts his muscular tissue just below the itch caused by the sickness; then raises the itch above the areas where the sickness hangs in the air. Otherwise, he uses another technique to pull out the root of the malady from beneath his abdominal region.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the illness is not as serious, then there may be other causes for which to delay treatment, in order that it becomes more severe, because a delayed resolution of the condition will return soon enough.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	E is reduzit in form secondo un'altra maniera: e è che si faccia una lunga asta con capo di forma circolare, come il cappello del petto, la cui estremità sia appuntita, non troppo grossa né sottile; e proprio sopra al capo dell'asta fissi lacci leonini, mentre l'estremità si allunghi secondo la lungheader. E lo sferziere deve essere attaccato con una fortezza, per la cui giuntura ritorna ad esso luogo alla massima velocità.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	It may be challenging to reduce a swelling due to all the mentioned causes; however, here's what you can do for this treatment. Take a stick whose length is about two spans and width of four fingers, and its thickness should be equal to your thumb according to this method:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	A prophecy regarding the Red Lion states that it would lead to great misfortune if its true nature were revealed.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	A thorough examination of the limbs is required to detect any signs of illness or injury, and both arms should be extended across the length of the body, with the focus on observing the joints, bones, and extremities.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	A pair of iron ladders lie opposite eachcuilk other on either side along the latitude line; one ladder is extended to the left section, while the other is suspended from the right section, causing a junction at the intersection point.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	C clean the inside of your ear as thoroughly as possible, and ensure that you stop at least a quarter inch from the eardrum to avoid damaging it; afterward, rest for a few seconds before proceeding further. Prepare a small cotton ball or piece of gauze by applying antibiptic ointment evenly across its surface. Gently insert this into your ear without forcing it and wait for a moment. Then slowly pull the cotton ball or gauze out, ensuring that any debris is attached to it. Do not disturb the eardrum while doing so; avoid causing any discomfort during the process.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	The dish should be paused when the illness is slight, within which time the member should rest, for it is more conducive to healing at that point.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	The food that has been served should be consumed within seven hours and it must be accompanied by physical activity; therefore, it should not be left out but rather consumed promptly as bacteria can develop quickly.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	When Mays' joint is dislocated due to humidity or other causes, it should be treated with three applications of cauterization according to the method mentioned in the Cautery Treatment Manual.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If the bandage has not been removed after seven days and the joint is still stiff, along with swelling at times, then it may be necessary to reduce tightness or apply a new plaster cast slightly higher than before in order for the nerves (which originate from the muscle's head), which are either loose or extended or softened, to regain their proper position and function.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	When the displacement occurs, you should press and pull the shaft or the parts behind it while extending them as much as possible until they return to their original position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	A shall be administere in the other stricture, and cure that within which it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	When one suddenly losps the sense of gravity in his limbs and lags behind in movement, hours later this malaise uses bed rest as if gravity has been temporarily displaired and returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	The treatment of hip dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	"As you know, the elbow joint is dislocated; and it appears that there's difficulty in returning it to its normal position; moreover, when the entire joint is dislocated, most frequently away from behind towards the front, relocation of the joint does not appear as if recently injured or touched according to any figure it may be dislocated. And when you try to adjust a dislocated elbow, this shows that there's a deformity wherein the joint cannot bend nor touch its own muscle."
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	In the event of an impact or injury causing joint displacement, immediate care should be taken to reduce it as soon as possible before inflammation sets in; if you fail to do so promptly, relocation can become more difficult and less likely to heal completely. It is especially challenging when the dislocation occurs behind the limb, which makes it worse than other types of joint injuries, causing intense pain and often leading to death without timely treatment.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The restoration of health is when it's possible to reduce pain, that the mother of pains has been extended by two days and the father of pain has expanded, and the doctor'amoons are over the wound and below the pain, and he pushes the junction with the tips of his moons or in the hollow of his palm turning into its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	The wind blows the leaf off to one side; it returns with such force that double of my mother's hand, before hitting the edge at the right angle of its palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If the displacement does not obey reduction, it results in severe extension and great force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	Article X(1): Two ministers shall lend each other their support in such a manner that it is not detramatory to the essence of this Treaty.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	The arm is fully rotated towards you and it's wrapped around the pole with an extended length over your head or otherwise.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	E represents the friction between the two surfaces (the doctor's finger and the patient's joint), untreated by any oil, which allows for that lubrication of the joint to facilitate; and with great pressure, it pushes the joint forcefully so that it rotates.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	The patient is advised to reduce the size of his testicles that have become swolamoins over a period of time in which it has shown inflammation and excrucacy, and is enlarged due to stricture; the penis should be suspended from the collar, and laid up for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	B and C are separated; therefore, at the junction they meet in their place, you remove the bond from him and leave that one there.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If the joint is not broken, apply the paste there in your iteration and let it remain for several days until it dries out; then remove that part.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Mays decides to take gravity into account when reducing the joint, and its position is in motion, hours administering moisture with baths and subtle friction, feeling relaxation within that's alleviated; or it pauses over the joint, which seems like a smooth movement. And by doing this consistently during the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	The pot is placed in the water; when it starts to boil, fry your joints lightly for a while, and then turn over that side onto the lid of the pot, soaking it with motion, once, twice, and the third time.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	For the Traumatic Car Accident Recovery Drink, mix the following ingnoring exact measurements and enjoy a soothing blend of herbs to support your healing journey:
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you wish to, pause over that cow's wet and scratched crack at the edge and step on it; then sprinkle some water there, because it is moist and restore its condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter Twenty-Eight.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	The Malassez's curvature refers to a curve located at the junction between the arm and the elbow.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When a foreign body is displauted and the reduction of its dislocation is slight, the contrary occurs at other joints; however, it suggests that there should be velocity in reducing the displacement during the time it is displaulated, before it becomes an abscess or inflammation.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the displacement caused by this injury requires you to stop the joint movement at its maximum extent on a table and have the patient extend their arm as much as possible; then the doctor should place his hand over the joint's hinge, applying pressure until it returns to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it should also be noted that the patient's palm may already have been in their stomach; if this is the case, hours after the onset of pain (mal de pancia), you must extend and reduce your mother's arm over a table as follows. If the dislocation occurs before doing so, then the position of her arm should be intrinsically on top of the table in such a way that your mother's shoulder will come into contact with the imminent joint junction.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	Thusly, if it returns soon, good luck; and if not, let the hours strengthen that lump until the abscess is released, and leave it as such; and do not touch this area further, unless you want to worsen the swelling or prevent it from reducing over time.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the Roman joint is after its curvature; and there was no ill will on either side, but that I have become appeased and could not raise any cause; know now that nerves are tightened or loosebound, and at this time it's not in motion but rather firmly restrained by cauterization during the case of its movement and strongly holding any causes.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And so it was that the hour of rest arrived, upon Lu's pasture, which they had recalled, and it had been let go unattended for three days; therefore, it should be cleared out again, and the manure spread evenly across its field to fertilize.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	May's law states that the flow of gravity causes certain movements and changes in it, which results in an accumulation of water behind some vegetation, within a specific location.
Capitol .xxix.	"Capitol, the twenty-ninth studio album by American rock band Foo Fighters."
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	The treatment of shoulder joint dislocations involves several steps, including reducing the dislocation and immobilizing the shoulder to promote healing. Here are some general guidelines for managing this condition:
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some displacements occur throughout the entire speech.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	The speaker tells a story of how some people were cursed and afflicted with an undesirable condition affecting the back of their hand or abductors muscles. They are then urged to speak aloud and attempt to shift this dislocation, until it is corrected.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	A. Apply the compress to the affected area and suspend any activities that may worsen the condition for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	A person suspended between two points shall not extend beyond that which is right in accordance with their own day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	According to the second story, do not lie down at night and continue moving that limb throughout the day and night, doing so for several consecutive days until it is straightened.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	He places an appearance of water in the belly of my horse and performs a procedure on that side; as a result, he restores its first functionality while it is still healthy.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Appearance may seem to place you apart from others, but in truth, we are all interconnected.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital X-Ten.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Curcumin from the dislocation of lumbar spine discs.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When an individual suffers from a complete dislocation of one or more vertebrae in the spine, and the fractured pieces are not properly aligned again, treatment is required for that area, as death may result from such injury if left untrenanted.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	Signs of water incontinence are that the discharge is involuntary and cannot be controlled; therefore, often relieve soreness in affected body parts with lu or two changes of lu underwear or four changes of lu, or one of those creams; additionally, some cases have seen improvement and relocation of symptoms to other areas.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	That one has already been registered in the records and is named Gelbovat.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	My advice regarding flu is that although it may seem minor at first, the hours spent not taking care of oneself can lead to a serious illness and compromise overall health. It's important to rest, stay hydraturated, and seek medical attention if symptoms worsen or persist.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In that which you see by cementation or percussion or imitation of those, the Ancients have expressed ways of curing speech in a very lengthy manner; but I shall return to it with profit; indeed, I am ashamed of that on which little is spared due to my closeness to the idea and its most exposed formulation. Indeed, I have taken out an instrument different from those by which one might show and display this.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	The statement that the one who goes on a long journey should not be hungry or thirsty is true in both cases - whether it's made with two small steps, or directly as described here (in Catalan). It implies the importance of being prepared and well-nourished before embarking on any significant endeavor.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	In case of accidents, I would recommend seeking immediate medical attention at the emergency room that is most convenient for you in your area. If the situation is not urgent but still requires care, visiting a local clinic or doctor's office during regular hours may be more appropriate. Always prior
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	The illness should be extended over his face, like a wall next to the door, and it should remain moist enough that its grains are not visible.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	A prop up a straight pole that has been planted into the ground at the base of its trunk near the head of it and another pole on either side holding the weights at the other end of the beam.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The Bishop took the gavel, and was not confined to a grave; another minister held the other one in that manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The sleeve is attached around the upper part of the wrist and hands, and extends to the end of the forearm where it meets the body; then you strengthen the other hem on the back of its shoulders and sides, connecting everything together so that all parts meet at the arm'cuff.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	The Minister of Justice extends the deadline for submitting documents, and there is no need to withdraw both documents and those related to your places in which you are registered; however, they must not be filed as we have stated before.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	Place your hands on the holy altar within that fortress and remain silent; then place one hand upon this table and adjust yourself to be seated atop it until you return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If Mays does not return in this way, the length or width of it extends three feet from a table against which we have said that having a bad location means being at the edge where there is a risk of falling off the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	The patient lies on the table with a pillow under the affected area and the doctor places their hands over the other extremity; then they gently press inward until the vertebrae are slightly moved and return to their original position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish to do it, place the wheel that is revolving around the moon in such a way that its diameter is equal to one arm's length; and let the center of this wheel be at the end of two sticks, whose total length is also an arm's length. Then each stick should have a cross-shaped connection with holes for the axle so it can rotate freely in any direction on Earth.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	Let S be a hollow cylinder with a rotating top, and let it rotate around the two axes of its two ends.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	The end of the ship is a trunk in which the keel is formed, whose length amounts to three feet that turn around; and on the other two pieces it resembles this one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	I shall strengthen the bonds that have weakened in your life during the time of illness and the period you must bear, as well as the connections strained through events involving you at this point. These are the cords you need to mend.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Near every corner and on top of which stands a minister who turns around at the sound made by their respective shepherds according to what has been said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	Este parece ser el formato de un torno (máquina herramienta):
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	When the spondylolisthesis returns and the location is similar, it usually suggests that previous surgical procedures may have been performed with implantation of a cage or bone graft from the patient's own hip, followed by fusion stabilization using screws and rods. In this case, the proximal attachment point over the instrumented segment (which is three to six inches above) on the table will be determined based on its length equivalent to the curvature of the spine. Additionally, the exact location of the surgical site where the original spondylolisthesis was present should also be identified.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	Upon examination of the facts as previously mentioned, use the subtle malady of poor nourishment that may be present and take it into account when assessing health status.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	There is no indication at the end of recovery that sessions need to be administeruted medicines which will moisturize and cleanse for a long-term care, which we have recommended; and it has already been administered in that location using a copper plate.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	In certain cases, the acute appendicitis is located at the end of the second spines of DOS, and it's adjacent to that displacement; and it's that bone which may be in danger for which one should not undergo this procedure as a treatment, because it could greatly increase the risk of dying.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol XXVII (Capitol 27)
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Treatment of a Dislocated Hip Joint.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	That the meeting point of the arch and the muscle is not only displaced but dislocated solecuplse, and does not lead to those same waters as it does with other joints experiencing minor movements and concavities.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The joint of the wide is dislocated according to four methods, which are dislocation towards the inside, outside, in front, or behind.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	The majority is displaired to the front sections, and few to the back or side sections.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	Signs of the dislocation of the upper arm to the forearm are fourfold when you adjust the wrong bone's health against the correct one; it is longer and more prominent than with the right, and the injury cannot double its own weight; you must rest your limb and speak softly, as this place suffers from inflamm# of abscess cauterization, because the end of the matter has reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The symbol E represents the cause of an event that results in displacement outside its parts, which means that the events occurre contrary to this incident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	Signal of the one to whom it happens displacement of the parts behind extends its swelling according to complimentary speech; however, not doubling that pain which is in the lower back, and if it continues going forward with no ability to reach beyond the parts behind; his urine retention increases and he experiences edema, therefore you must have him walk on a stretcher.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of the vessel in which an accident occurs causing displacement of its parts behind is that it does not expand at all, nor can it bend to double the constriction, and its neck is wider than the other, and the necking is softened, and the head of the cock (rooster) is towards that side.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of spices in this dislocation is that you consider, at times, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already been outdated according to what you administer as a reduction based on its disposition, at times it does not require to be made more prominent; therefore, it should not be done in all cases of treatment.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In this recent dislocation type among the four types of dislocations, for hours you should feel it at the point where you return to the joint and extend that towards the inner and outer parts, as well as to the right and left, which quickly returns and does not require any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If Mayse does not return in this manner, then the hours of preparation should minister fort and extend the gown of light from the departure side downwards, or on his back, as it is laid above the pillow; another minister extends the cloth that covers him from below up to where his own shoulders touches the light. Another minister should hold a lion skin over the head of the deceased, and yet another minister holds the extremity of the lion's skin.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	Extension C shall be an extension of line A or the departure from vertex D to the northeast direction towards vertex F or the departure behind from vertex E.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	Let E be the set of all those inside a cabin in which the malady is highly prevalent, and who lounge on their beds with their feet hanging down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	If the displacement returns water that we have mentioned, it's okay sir; otherwise, many hours are needed for each type of water related to one'amo personal injury case.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the process of self-reduction, when displaced, the dislocation is towards the inner sides, causing pain in its own edge; and as pressure builds up on the site of injury at that location where between the head of the clavicle and the place it ends lies the ligaments; extending the lesion to the side of the scapula belonging to the posterior part.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Another minister strongly embraced the issue and urged everyone to take action against this evil disease; he extended his efforts through various departments in order to expand its reach within their jurisdiction.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This is a particularly mild irritation for which the affected member is reduced compared to other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	Mays excuses himself about not following this entire healing process of all sorts; however, there are times when both the causes of evil coinciprise together with strength and deceit, on both sides and in both actions.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Let E be the length of each side by its quantity from four given values and let the difference in malalignment extended more than the other for a quantity of two units.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	The cargo shall be subjected to an incline test with the head of the mast, and that it should remain in balance; and its length from the ground is two fathoms (12 feet or approximately 3.6 meters).
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	A young man commanded the tree to grow taller and stronger, as well as free from disease, while another boy reduced the height of the tree significantly by bending it with great force, causing the joint to return to its original place at a high speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In cases of proper prolapse, when displacement occurs towards the outside part, it is believed that pain persists in the region below as a consequence of re-tightening in the previously bulbous area; and there is increased tension on the affected membrane specifically and on the adjacent spermatic cord.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Near the time of death, both feet should be placed together and one head should rest on them; then their feet should be adjusted underneebody cloth that covers them, so that evil is not caused by the dead body being between the things belonging to it, so that you may extend these remains lest they are despised.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Article X - The Ministers' and Doctors' Responsibilities Regarding the Reduction of Emissions
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	If reversed, it would be great; if not, pause thoughtfully upon that matter and so as we have said in the quotation for that reason.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	May's Cove finds it a shame to discover its own fault in the past.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	In the case of dislocation to the distal parts, hours ago it was reported that the limb became slightly extended; and according to this narration about the movement, the surgeon placed his right hand on the patient's arm mal-aligned, and then he bent both arms together, extending them towards the direction where the dislocation had occurred.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	If the dislocation is towards the back parts, it may not be believed that the pain spreads to the rear parts and it's elevated above ground; but they believe it should rest on a hard surface, just as when we said about its width being displaced outward. It will then rest over its face, with extensions, as previously mentioned, no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	A bandage should be applied compression around the table where you locate the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	When the reduction is completed as you have noticed— and the sign of the reduction in your left does not fade away, then you shall extend from the faults of two chambebs (chambers), and whenever you touch those equal faults and transfer the fault outside your chamber and expand that excuse, afterwards you will know that the member according to which it was reduced returns— and then you adjust both sides' pacts and pause thoroughly so that the width is not bad in any of the parts; and attach the fault again to rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	A prop of the relationship and the complexity lie in their differences; one embraces change while the other resists it.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see those flaws in your behavior, understand that the dislocation has ended, and therefore let go of any guilt.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If there is no sign of improvement, after three days return and apply that plaster again, following the initial stretching pattern, and leave it on for another three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	A proper dosage of that medicine will allow you to walk quite well after just a few days.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 22
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Treatment of the shoulder dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The dial is displaced in three ways, being displaced to the right, towards left, and to the back mainly from the front parts; it is not displaired ahead.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of Lu's displacement is that the evil forces make use of its charm against his soul, and then the demon appears to be dislocated. Know this well.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The complete restoration of all the limbs of your beloved requires you to alleviate their pain properly as soon as possible; gently join your hands to theirs, and place your palm between their fingers while doing so; then firmly clasp their thumb with both of yours and strengthen it within your grasp until their joint regains its original position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	A sign of a redirection to light is that its beam grazes the edge of the horizon without any effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	In the event of an injury to the tail or testicles, one should apply ice on and adhere closely to the change in color as well as any swelling for three days or four days, then remove it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	The use of crutches in walking rehabilitation aids the individual's recovery and comfort within which they have been healed.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	My apologies for reducing it to you, but I've extended considerable attention and effort in crafting the response to your previous narration about healing a sprained ankle.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capital III
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Treatment for ankle dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Some joints are slightly shifted through small movements and some joints become misaligned following an injury or trauma; the displacement of the joint is made towards either the inner or outer parts, depending on the direction of the force involved in the accident.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of the shoulder dislocation is that it typically presents with an outwardly turned arm, originating from the direction in which it was dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	May's curative process of the removal procedure is considered relatively efficient and it should be extended to facilitate ease for more people while ensnaring a similar level of quality when returning.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	Mays in the act of Lu Quan's dislocation is accompanied by a compliment, ensuring that you alleviate his pain correctly and have at your disposal a strong and capable minister from the party behind the pair present at the scene of Lu Quan's fall.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Here is the translated sentence from Romanian to English: "Put your right hand on top of the highest authoritative body and place your left hand below that, at the location of the gavel."
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Aim your right hand at your friend's forehead and then move it two inches to the left. Extend your arm further, and use the fingers of that hand to gently push their hair back.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	"Et uxor vestras legatae perpetuo dabitur secundum quod habent concinnatus."
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	A prop-empeller the pies of peace at the third corner, and you're on it now.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If a number is even or divisible by two using this method, then it's good; otherwise, the process iterates again with that number until an even or divisible-by-two value returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	May I be prohibited from reducing the amount of water we have mentioned earlier? Let us now discuss the bad news about your situation on earth and create a simple poem here, and that you've already enclosed it in an envelope to prevent any more bad news.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Article I: The Minister of Foreign Affairs shall liaise with the respective ministers for their claims and extend his hand to each minister in order to establish mutual understanding concerning the matter on which they focus; furthermore, every minister should extend that same consideration towards other ministers regarding extensions beyond their own jurisdiction.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The swelling around his knee has caused him pain and he needs to take other measures to maintain the health of the remaining joints, as the displacement tends to return with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Then the displacement is returned to you and declared as the sanity of the reduction unit, in this case pause plaster and externally that same amount slightly, and bind it to the base with another layer.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	Fear not the nerves that lie behind the scalp over which you meditate; let your focus be gentle and steady upon them.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	A prophecy tells of a period spanning two or three days; and if the heat subsides during this time, remove that item.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	From that same day or the following quarter, and forbids any malicious gossiping for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	May's refraining from entering that space is not enough to guarantee that the displacement was not carried out and corrupted, nor ensuring it contains harmful substances.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If you decide to remove the stitches, hours later you may tend to the wound in the area where the water flowed before our story began, at another location of cleansing and bandaging until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 24 - The Capital City and Its Intrigues.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Treatment of shoulder joint dislocations in pets.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	The one who is lazy has little extension in their work; and what isn't difficult becomes more deceitful.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If Mays' dislocation is in the left shoulder blade bone of his upper arm, he should try to rest and avoid any movements that would cause further pain or injury, as if he was walking on a shaky ground.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	A to the right of this text is your foot that hangs over water and under it place your left foot with care so as not to strain your joints; then press firmly with your left foot within its comfort zone, and ensure that you balance equally on both feet without appearing too high or out of proportion.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	The breakfast of our Lord was placed upon the table that took him all over, having two covers, and with a stretcher kept decently strong for three days; after which it was loosened and allowed to rest from walking for several days, during which time he would be nourished and rejuvenated.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital Fifty-five (55) is a numerical representation typically used in different contexts, such as counting or referencing specific items like pages in books, addresses on streets, or designating a particular model of a product. In this case, "Capitol .xxxv" seems to imply the use of Roman numerals for the number 35 (LXXXV) following 'Capitol'.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Among the displacement injuries that occur in flight or due to a fracture or any kind of trauma, several mechanisms can be highlighted. These include:
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	He does not care about the reasons behind that incident and you take on the responsibility of healing it and restoring him, but many times death succeeds.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	In this case, the physician must be a true expert in his craft - knowledgeable, long-experienced, merciful and compassamoius; patient and not arrogant or presumptuous. They should use medicines that only relieve symptoms of boils when absolutely necessary, and above all strive to appease the divine judgment with your illness, rather than hoping for a cure in case of critical danger or alleviating the disease without any sign of hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Thus, firstly, let me explain the cause and then address the issue of how to alleviate it before any further complications arise.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	Therefore, if the injury occurs on the member that is chosen, the doctor shall administer treatment in the form of ointment and water as needed to heal it and alleviate any discomfort caused by dryness or other symptoms.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	A dislocation is a type of injury where the bones are separated at their joints, causing severe pain and requiring immediate medical attention to treat the condition as well as prevent complications that may arise from such simple illnesses that have occurred in these locations beforehand.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	He observes and avoids following the path of fear according to his nature in the faceways as you have preceded me with your preaching; for it is better for you to serve your Creator, and more conducive to your eternal glory, and brings peaceful thoughts to those who witness this during your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Aissis, Fineysse has perfectly recited the words of Albuquerque from which God is not absent.
Amen.	Okay, here's the translation of "Amen" into English:
