Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Aysa learns the words of Albuquerque.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O children, as you complete this book, which is the last of the medical science series, in honor of your coming of age and for your enlightennment from its contents and explanations, I believe it fitting that we present to you this treatise, a part of my own work on surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	The work of which I am now lying prostrate in our realm and at this time has been totally privated, until they took great interest in it; and only some small descriptions remained in the books of antiquity, those were changed most of all, and ended up with errors and heresies to such an extent that their essence is concealed and the truth of them prolonged.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	I understand that you wish to bring this treatise into life by following the guidelebased on exposition and declaration as well as abridgment; and for it to be in accordance with the forms of tools and instruments used for welding, and other equipment related to the job, through the addition of the declaration and preparation necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	"Mays causeth the reason why a craftsman is not exempt from practice in our present time, because the art of medicine is longstanding, and it demands its actor to be exercised in the science of anatomy; which Galen did know that he understood the movements and shapes of those parts, their conjunction and separation, knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, as well as their names and functions, and also knew about veins pulsing and non-pulsing, and locations of blood flow."
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	The phrase "E per aquo Ditz Ypocres qui'am vostre nom est, mai senglar en lo obra petit, e mayormenz en la arte de la mar" is written in Occitan (also known as Provençal), a Romance language spoken in the southern regions of France.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	In the introductamo of this book, we have mentioned that those who are not knowledgeable in anatomy may fall into error and cause deaths; as I have witnessed many times, these individuals claim to be trained in this science but lack understanding from their education and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	I found a written account by Vincent van Gogh in which he describes having an abscess on the neck of a woman, causing some arteries to bleed severely and leading to her death within hours or days.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	A merchant who was passing by saw a man being beaten with a stone from another man who had committed the sin in his lifetime; the stone was large, and he approached it and lifted that stone as lightly as possible, so that on the third day, that man died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	The name of this stone shall be called "Fortune's Fickle Stone," and I realize that due to the size of the rock and the position of my illness, it seems destined for death.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	A certain surgeon in our land received remuneration of one ducat for surgery; and afterward to a black crust that had resulted from the fracture on his leg - he prepared. The surgeon, however, due to ignorance, improperly set the fracture above the plague, using pillows and splints with excessive tension, and failed to address the plague's spreading infection properly.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	The Lord should guide our steps according to His own will and purpose, leading us through hardships and trials on some days; let it be as He wishes, that we may escape the snare of evil and reach salvation in due time.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	The evening fell upon the sky as she called me up to it and unfolded my wings; I achieved serenebility and immaterial relief from her pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so that it could not contain that and did not stop the spread of corruption within the limb where the illness posed a threat.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	A certain surgeon caused an abscess cancerous and became ulcerated near the ears of his lord, in which he greatly increased the wrath of His Lordship.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason why someone might feel melancholamo (sadness) is not because they have lost all love from everyone, but rather that they are part of those who feel overwhelmed by everything and believe it to be hostile towards them.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	The work to be done consists of two phases: one related to health and safety measures, and the other concerning risks associated with major equipment.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	You have indeed been found guilty of violating the water sources in all parts of this book within which I've operated and made errors; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard that and leave what lies therein so that trees do not obstruct your speech and dishonor.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	Hence take up your weapons for the cause and by God's protection, may you achieve success and victory.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	"May all of us use the best means given by God's grace to attain salvation and praiseworthy success; let us lose our great illnesses that are difficult to cure, and lay aside our weapons that make you fearful; for we must remain in your faith and in your name so as not to be taken away. Rather may it remain for your glory and furthermore, in the monastery or at last with your sanctity."
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	In some of his famous speecheß, Cicero often emphasized the importance of virtue and moral character. Here are a few excerpts from such addresses:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"There is no specific medicine for mental illness, but there are some medications that can help manage symptoms."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	Title: The Three-Part Guide to Creativity and Innovation
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Beginning with the division of the land and the first partitioning of the primary territory.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first organized capital of the Cap-Haïtien region, in terms of instruments and surgical equipment, as well as essentials required for operations.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second half.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second part of the book concerns incisions and punctures, as well as cupping, leeches, lancets, extractions from boils, and simulacra thereof; it comprehensively covers and organizes the forms of these instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the Third Part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third capital, concerning restoration and relocation, as well as the treatment of torsion and appearance for those affected; established by royal decree within the framework of law, and instruments' forms.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	The act of cauterization in the context of acute medical emergencies and memory of the opera.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	The treatise on the entire book begins here.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	I inform you that the quality of the jewels found in this treasure and their origin is unknown, as well as what connection has been forbidden regarding the treasure.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	The language spoken in the quality of youth's speech about cautery and mourning is long and prolix, subtle through knowledge, and somewhat mysterious; already many wise people have talked a great deal about it, yet they are at odds with each other. And for me, one small part of their sermons suffices, as I am intimidated by its length.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	Hence, I declare that every complex system relates universally to matter or its properties, except for two exceptions which are tail-related properties.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the case of dry and itchy skin condition; some doctors argue that cauterization should be used for such ailments, while others say this is not appropriate because these conditions are characterized by their nature (dryness) and excessive dryness, which means that using fire - being both drying and scorching in nature - would hinder the healing process of a disease marked by its qualities.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	The one that says the opposite of what is done by cauterization in laughter during any illness or tail and dryness seen on men'n bodies, because when you compare the body of a man to its moisture in relation to fire contact, you find the body of a man burned.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	The year has already brought me some unexpected discoveries. Let's discuss this matter further.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Nevertheless, he who has already been accused and exercised at the capital court in regards to a previous exercise, let him be known for his diversity of complexities among men, as well as their disposition towards diseases in their bodies, along with causes and incidents related to those afflictions, and the extent of these illnesses.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	In various regions, it's not about fear towards you; mostly in damp and wasteful illnesses, as all the physicians are now agreeing on those, and they do not disagree with your treatment involving cauterization for such conditions.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	Ah children, I'll tell you the secret of curative burns using fire and the goodness of oil, so be aware that when treating with medical fire, the flame is simple, its effect reaches only the member being cauterized and does not harm any other part adjacent to it.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	Mays' medical ointment has proven effective in treating patients experienncing discomfort and pain in their limbs due to various health conditions, providing them with relief from difficulty healing and intense agony.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	The warmth of the fire, for its sublimity and goodness in substance, does not produce water but only excess; and we know it to be true by experiment and through long experience of studying the art of truth regarding causes. Therefore, I am excused from the length of this discourse, if not that it is not permitted to my free time in this pause today towards you, secret friend, about how fire expels illnesses from our bodies and demonstrates its effects philosophically, which would be evident in your ailments.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	Children, listen well! You all disagree on the best time to undergo a procedure and rest during early spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	E you declare that cauterization is advisable at all times; for the harm caused by accidental events is overshadowed by the benefits gained from the procedure which has been performed, especially when it concerns necessary pain relief or severe pains and inflammaturms that do not endure delay due to fear of potential side effects, which are lesser than minor discomfort incurred during the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	In various places, people believe that warts are caused by foul and unclean creatures; hence they only seek remedeby folk healers or vulgar methods, which is that the disease treated with cauterization does not always get fully healed, leading to reoccurrence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The cause is not as much the thought that they desire it for this reason, because cauterization is not a substitute for medicine which alters the condition and dries up the humidities, which are the causes why pain occurs.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, unnecessary surgical procedures are performed due to the physician's greediness for profit and arrogance in their work and excessive fees of their services.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It's not likely that his illness will return at any time in the future, depending on the severity of the illness and its location within him, as well as what he has prepared for with a surplus of fluids in his body, and what has come to him through acquiring food from those sources; but rather, if the cauterization performed is for a subtle pain or swelling in small areas, like cauterization of teeth due to pain and symptoms similar to that, it's possible that he won't experience that pain again, instead it will be alleviated.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	In common parlance, cauterization is considered the last resort of medicine, and yet it seems to be highly effective in certain cases; however, I do not fully comprehend how they achieve this result, for I believe that it does indeed provide healing beyond just being a mere medical procedure.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The cause is against the use; and I believe that caulking serves as the third resort of medicine not only in administering remedies for certain illnesses but also if those medicines are unsuccessful, then at the end of such causes it advises to apply a caustic treatment, and it proceeds accordingly.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	Here are the three major branches of medicine as I understand them according to the common and primitive views of simple medical practitioner folk:
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	They said that ancient coins made of gold were better than those made of iron and did not say anything about their weight but rather for the value of gold and its superior substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	They said that the metal of cauldron doesn't work properly when water isn't completely absorbed, because I have already tried and tested that it doesn't produce water unless all other metals are included, and cauldron metal is better than iron in this regard; however, when you make a cauldron from gold, you haven't stated why, as it depends on the quantity you want for the hardness of gold, and also because it needs to be tempered with fire; if you add something onto the fire, the gold forms laminas which craftsmen use in their work.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	E con agua se hace un hierro para nuestro uso ligeramente y más proporcionalmente en dirección a la operación correcta.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	The council has decided to organize this chapter in accordance with the previous chapters, and has ordered that those within its scope provide all information requested by the requester.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	The headache from cold and dampness.
Le capitol primier.	The first capital.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This surgical procedure provides moisture and coldness over the affected area due to two main causes, one being excessive heat flow from the head towards the ears and temples, and many other causes such as insomnia, toothache and jaw pain, universally of all illnesses caused by cooling, including paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions in those diseebilities.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	This is the form of this cauterization, which firstly orders the illness to be evacuated through a laxative medicine that purifies and cleanses it for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the illness, its age, and its habit.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	He commanded that his horse be bridled and led between the trees in the forest onto a fallen log and to have its hoovangs rest upon it.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Gently place the tip of your thumb on the edge of the nail between your fingers and hold it there for a moment.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when your mentioned place arrived the next day, you tried that spot and just above it was an olive grove with this shape of charcoal pits:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	A prop of the glass on that above your head, guide it to descend slowly and gently, letting its warmth envelop you as you rotate in place.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	A) Approach your hand slightly and look at the location, then if you see any portion of the head missing like the quantity of grains from an error, raise your hand again, and do not turn to that iron or another of it, if it is frozen, enter only when it appears as I have described to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	A) Begin by preparing a small amount of salt solution and pour it over the location you wish to cleanse. Leave that on for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Let's start by breaking down the Catalonian text and providing an accurate translation into English, followed by a discussion on safety precautions regarding working near electrical panels.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	A proprietary remedy that acts as a multifaceted medicine to ensure your well-being is present within this text.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	When the Roman Empire fell, the armies became more important and beneficial for it to be better and more justified.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	On the third day after surgery, remove any dressings covering the incision on your head and ensure that all sutures within the wound are intact and that there is no sign of infection around the area of the skull.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	A proper seal on the bottle as well as its adjusted lid is crucial.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	On the third day, other than using a lancet or similar instrument, place your index finger on the strongest part of the earlobe and apply firm pressure for about five seconds. This is the method to remove an ingrown hair from that area. Here'amo detailing the process in English:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	They estimate that at that place the fumes of the head are dissipating.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	The storm has caused extensive damage for long periods of time, and it must be promptly repaired and stabilized as soon as possible.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	In my opinion, these two kinds of cauterization should not be applied to all houses without exception, but only to certain families as a precautionary measure; moreover, that one which belongs to you is more blessed than the others when it is so; because his head has been enlightened by divine inspiration in matters of continuity and similarly to what we have witnessed among other members, especially when it concerns those affected by natural evil.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	The first type of surgery is my salvation and best for me, and from that hospital I have faith in the work being healing.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter of the Capitol.
Del cauteri del cap.	The wound on the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	In total cases of chronic long-term headache and dizziness with water loss, as well as use of gear, crutches, earplugs, eyeglasseinhorns, guards, collars, and glasses, most often it has been cauterized by a caustic which does not address any of those causes. At this point one should consider that the headache's root cause is likely due to excessive strain in its nature; moreover, it would not be such a great loss to try another form of cauterization using different equipment.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	A cauterized wound is one in which the skin over the head of the hair has been burned off and closed within that area where the root end is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the nail and let it be exposed of the bone; the amount which we have counted should be cauterized using a cautery on the part following the head in that location called "vas," - and that is the place where the windpipe rests.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	The altar of my mother is here in Aix-en-Provence, and don't find the bones, because the disease that causes so much pain differs from the pain caused by all other cauterizations on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	The translation in English would be as follows:
Capitol ters.	Capital terms. These are words that refer to specific places, organizations, or institutions in a country's government structure. Some common examples include Senate, House of Representatives, Supreme Court, and the White House (in the United States). It is essential to use these terms correctly when discussing political topics, as they represent important aspects of governance and lawmaking processes.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Ancient wound cauterization for migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	In the case of a severe headache or pain in the upper part of the eye, take evacuating medications that relieve swelling and administer other treatments as I have mentioned earlier for these diseases; but if it does not help, cauterize at length on both sides: either with an acutely burning medicine or with a hot iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Mayes's medical caustic acts as an antiseptic, so you should take a bowl of salt water and then scrub that area clean, removing any dead skin from both sides using your hands.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	The prophecy seems to suggest that the key event will occur within a hidden location related to an old temple where there is a hidden doorway and something secret lies concealed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	The bridge is designed to withstand severe storms and heavy traffic loads; it allows for clearances of three hours or more; it unloads the load on the abutments, and removes debraturd for two or three days; it pauses over the submerged section within its border where the structure extends.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	C is the gas that, when inhaled at low concentrations, can be used for anesthesia purposes.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	If you wish, I will provide some examples of astringent medicines that are mentioned in the previous article on astringent medications.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	My advice on cauterization, following this guideline, is as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	The flower has a distinctive clover shape, as if it's somewhat like the form of a clove with some curvature; in its middle part, it is noticeably small and pointed.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Gently approach the source of pain and slowly move your hand - so that the archery you've left behind is not strained too much - and gradually increase the small iron in speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	If the amount of blood that is attached to the shaft of the bone is greater than the quantity in the surrounding area and you remove your hand such that the artery is not clamped but loosened, then there will be no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	In the evening, prepare a soup with salt and water by boiling it over low heat for three hours; then let that mixture sit covered until cooler, and afterwards apply that oil externally to achieve healing.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	If you want to, use a heated knife blade according to the cauterization method, and be careful of an incision of an artery on this migrating one that is not ancient.
Capitol quart.	In the context of classical music, a "capitol quart" is likely a misspelling or misinterpretation of the term "string quartet." A string quartet typically consists of four musicians playing two violins, one viola, and one cello. These ensembles have been prominent in Western art music since the 18th century, with composers such as Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven contributing significantly to their repertoire.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Ancient practices of emigration cauterization.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	You treat emigrants with the same water you have said about previous cauterizations, and divisions of disecuasels, but do not waste the cautery. Also consider times for disease when it does not suffice to use hot medicines or hot cauteries; then hours later after cooling down, pierce (or incise) with a cold knife at a place where you feel the most severe pain along a long line that ends there. Then leave it alone for one week and afterwards cut the scar tissue until reaching the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	It is necessary for you to take care of the continuation of the jawbone, which can be harmful when it comes to chewing and biting; ensure that the ligament does not become adhered, and that the nerves affected are properly managed so as to avoid spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	The passage in question seems to discuss the importance of careful monitoring and caution when it comes to blood flow interruption during a medical procedure, particularly emphasizing its significance for individuals who lack knowledge about what they are undergoing or those who may not be diligent enough to follow instructions properly. It is crucial that proper care and attention is taken at every step of the process.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	I remember the blood flow incident in the churchyard following its customs at this free place.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	In cases of this illness that do not require a burning cautery or tolerating the painful body parts, use a cauterizing tool on the specified location of the head as we have previously described, and heal the wound which becomes healthy again.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	Certainly, administer the cauldrons as mentioned in the chapter on archery wax, which have two tanks; this results in better cauldrification and additional efficiency.
Capitol .v.	In the United States, a capital refers to a city where government offices are located and where laws are made for the state. It is also often home to historical landmarks and cultural institutions that help define the character of each state. On the other hand, in financial terms, 'capital' can refer to funds or assets owned by an individual or organization which are used to further their economic activities.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Cauterization for earlobe pain relief.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	The ear has pain due to a fracture and is healed by the causes of lacerations; there's also another treatment I mentioned in the section. If pain persists, hours after an ignition (cauterization) is performed without puncturing, here is how it looks:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	The tip of the needle is punctured onto the skin and gently moved around the entire earlobe so that it rotates in circles within each loop as if there's no pain at all in any part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	A long time ago, in the depths of the forest lived an old hermit who rarely left his hut except to gather food and water nearby. He spent most of his days meditamoen si seamareas pe munii, trying to understand life's mysteries and finding peace within himself.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	The cauterization of these wounds throughout the entire ear, and how it heals those areas that are treated carefully.
Capitol .vi.	In the United States, Congress is responsible for passing laws that govern federal land management through various legislative acts and statutes. Some of these key pieces of legislation include:
De cauterizacio de turtura.	TURTLE CATHETERIZATION PROCEDURE
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The poultice that is healed and has not been cauterized consists only of spices brought by sling, according to what we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoiding cauterization of the tissue that is endangered by dryness or neuromuscular spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	You apply that special type of ointment to the jar and capillaries, as well as the varicose veins, but when applying your cure for ulcers, you must use three cautery points: one on the earlobe, a second just behind it at its temple, and finally between both lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	Pause your own cautionary measures for the ailments of the sick party; otherwise, you will only feel better in the contract that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is to cauterize the upper part of the earlobe with a small piece on the tip of the pinhead, and then in the middle, the length should be according to the size of said point. Within this area, insert enough material so that it burns completely, equivalent to the greatest thickness of the cord.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This is the form of a cauldron, and it'n a type of cookware, the shape of which has become more flat over time.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, he was quite subtle about that and not as carefree as you think; rather, he had a knack for cutting to the chase without unnecessary grandstanding.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Article L-24, which deals with the procedure for actions relating to water that have occurred after it has been treated.
Capitol .vii.	In Chapter VII of the novel, titled "Capitol," we delve into a world fraught with tension and intrigue as the narrative unfolds in an atmosphere rife with political maneuvering and social stratification. The setting is one that juxtamo's against the backdrop of a dystopian future, where societal norms have been warped by corrupt leadership and oppressive regulations.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	In ancient times, the treatment for stroke involved a process known as "cerebral cauterization". This method aimaturally sought to prevent blood from reaching the affected area of the brain by using heat or chemicals to seal off vessels. However, it's important to note that this practice is extremely outdated and potentially dangerous in modern medicine due to our current understanding of stroke pathophyscuhes and effective treatments available today.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	Apoplexy is an ancient ailment and the remedy you have mentioned involves using water which was prescribed by them in their treatments, it does not cause fever, so after hours of application, cauterize that area with four cauterizations: on all the hairs of his head; also cauterize under the skull near the eyes as we have mentioned; and cauterize in the throat.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	The procedure of the cautionary burn is done according to what has been previously stated.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	The surgeon shall have performed the operation over the orifice of the stomach, then continued higher up; and he must cleanse it with water that proceeds from his own body.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Cauterization of the fornix made by a flail chest.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	At the beginning, there are big cups and pills with strong medication.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Capability to comprehensively address the various types of pain and relief techniques as described in the Treatise on Bandages.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	That particular plant is a species of waxwing. It has some leaves and flowers that resemble those of the eucalyptus tree.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	E, when it comes to the order of elements as stated by me earlier, I referred to their increasing atomic number in the periodic table. In this sequence, hydrogen is first, followed by helium, then lithium and so on. This arrangement follows a simple rule: As you move across each period from left to right, atomic numbers increase which indicates an addition of one proton for every subsequent element.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	If those animals are healthy; if not, he must cut off the three warts in the rear portion of their head, which should be located from the highest point of the head towards the lower back area.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	There is a pause between each of the hair removal procedures mentioned above and before applying the alcohol that follows the treatment.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	If the pain is tolerable and you choose not to have surgery immediately, consider taking over-the-counter medications as needed; however, if symptoms worsen or are severe, consult a doctor for possible corn removal.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And let the healing oil be applied to that part which is wounded, according to the form here shown with olive oil.
Capitol .ix.	Capital IX
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	The removal of warts and the soothing of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	I will process the procedure of cauterization on your head where we have mentioned; and then approach the area of pain, and use a hot iron over all the hairs on top, and apply the hot iron to every part of it, and cauterize three times on the pins/spines of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If necessary in the treatment of hemorrhoidal vein relaxation and for those who tolerate it well, when the disease is severe, apply a four-way cautery to the anal columns after defecation, and always ensure that you do not exceed the recommended dosage.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	A prop to that within which it is healthy, and let this be an olive grove.
Capitol .x.	In the United States, a capital city is known as the state capital. These are cities that serve as administrative centers for each of the fifty states. Each state has one capital where government buildings and officials work to govern their respective states. Some examples include Sacramo in California, Austin in Texas, and Albany in New York. The term "capitol" with an 'o' is used when referring specifically to a building within these cities that houses the legislative body of the state.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Epilepsy cauterization refers to the surgical procedure known as "lobectomy," where a portion of the brain that is causing seizures (usually in patients with drug-resistant epilepsy) is removed or disconnected from the rest of the brain. This helps to reduce the frequency and severity of seizures, improving the patient's quality of life.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not the seizure that is epileptic, but rather the person with epilepsnse.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, it is advisableright away from the beginning of the disease and other situations in which we have called exceptional in the division when the illness is severe and tolerates no exceptions with regard to medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	Although he did not tolerate the medicines and took various remedaturms for a long time, his appetite improved before it was completely cured.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	He approached the source of pain and carefully applied a heating device at that point in the mid-section of the head according to the previous method, as well as another on the back of his neck, and over each corner of the scalp, he had heated them.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	If the illness is severe and tolerant, hours of caulking can be done on that body part I mentioned earlier, with slight numbness and soothing effects on the spine's vertebrae in the neck and back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	A (X) be cautioned as an olive grove, according to what has been previously mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the disease is present from childhood, treatment should be initiated with subtle caution according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Roman numerals are a numeric system that originated in ancient Rome, using combinations of letters from the Latin alphabet to represent numbers. The word "capitol" is not represented by any standard roman numeral as it refers to an architectural structure or government building rather than a number.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Cauterization of melancholy, also known as trepanning or trepanation, is a historical medical practice in which holes are drilled into the skull to treat various mental disorders and conditions. It was believed that by releasing evil spirits from within the head, symptoms such as depression (melancholy), seizures, and even migraines could be allecuated. The technique dates back thousands of years and has been found in several ancient civilizations around the world.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholia are excessive moisture and thick bile, one should apply heat to that area where there is paralysis as mentioned previously.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	The cause of melancholy is superfluity, and the course of this illness is humid; drinking water that purifies the brain should follow according to the division in the previous step.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	As the sun sets beyond the horizon, and the nightingale gracefully sings its melody in full circle, it then descends to that specific spot of land near the horizon.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	The disease is widespread in every district.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	A proper pause for linen is more than just adequate protection against ancient sheep threats.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	F is the object that revolves around the Sun for heating purposes during early mornings according to a preset schedule, which it experiences when they occur.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	A prop your view at the center of it in the circle and observe that which is enclosed within being embraced.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Every Monday morning I have the habit of performing a ritual treatment for my skin issues; if you prefer, sterilize that device with fine points according to your needs or hold it at an appropriate distance while maintainaturessentially heals evenly and thoroughly. This is a specific type of cauterization technique used in skincare.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	He began that journey in the border area or along the banks of the river Gállego.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII - The Capitol
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	The water of the cascading creek flowed into the valley.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	At the beginning of the water in the pitcher, I declare for the signs which you mention in division, hours begin and end at drink to cleanse your head from evil water that purifies all humidity.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	The fish swims in the clear water by the alpine lake every day.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	The person places their head in the water and cauterizes that part of the hair with a heated instrument at the point where they intend to shave; then, using the same tool, they cauterize another section over two temples if it is accompanied by drinking cold water from two cups, or one cup if accompanied by drinking warm water.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	The veins and vessels that surround the spinal cord should be completely cauterized; they shall be cauterized on either side of the column, in line with the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	I watch if there are any bleeding when you're stitched up, and if you see any blood flowing, use the available medicine as much as possible.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	You must exercise caution in the extraction of archaeological findings and ensure their preservation, as well as being aware of potential health risks from dust exposure.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Some veins are surgically tied off in the lower part of the neck, near two bones that are also ligated.
Capitol .xiii.	Book III (Capitol) is the third book in a series or volume that could pertain to various subjects depending on its context, such as history, literature, government structures, etc. If you are referring to a specific work titled "The Capital," please provide additional details so I can assist you further.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Ancient tears cauterization.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	In the old wounds that have been bandaged and through the veins and arterries which are manifested on the head's surface it is evident that these fluids superfluitatz, frejas flecmatiquas, hourly cauterized that we mentioned in the water springing from the wells at the beginning of this chapter, also cauterized on the forehead and two cauterizes below temples, and two cauterizes below ears.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	If you ask for a blood draw from the acromion overhang of the shoulder'cuote', on a small area, apply heat to the skin using a sterile heating device or hot water bottle before making an incision with a scalpel.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capital XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Nasal mucus cauterization.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	In the division you mentioned, do not take your medicine and in case of illness, drink three cups during nighttime for three days; then touch its head and cauterize it with a mixture of olive cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	A proper technique for hair removal is to hold the tweezebrush at an angle and carefully pluck any stray eyebrow hair above your natural brow line. Pluck in small sections until you achieve a clean, defined shape that complements your face structure.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	B) Don't set fire to that bow and arrow near me.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	Cutting off this thymus gland is done in this manner.
Capitol .xv.	Title: Capital XV
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Eye drops for dry eyes during allergy season.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the lid of a mole is softened due to illness or moisture, its edge may be burned with a hot iron or a silver nitrate stick. This process forms what is known as a "cauter." The appearance of the cauterized area can vary but generally resembles:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	In case of injury or bleeding on the eyebrows above both eyelashes, apply a small amount of pressure with a clean cloth for some time until the bleeding stops. To promote healing and prevent infection, wash gently with mild soap and water twice daily. Avoid using strong soaps, alcohol or hydrogen perox ounce that may irritate the area. If necessary, consult a doctor.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	Let S be the length of each cut according to the quantity of overcasting (stitches).
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	Don't overdo the application of your eyeliner; instead, follow the quantity that covers about a third of the upper lash line and apply accordingly.
Capitol .xvi.	In English, the numbering system "Capitol" followed by Roman numerals is typically used for chapters or sections in books and legal documents. The term "Roman numeral xvi," refers to the Roman numeral representation of the number 16 (x = 10, v = 5, i = 1; so, x + v + i = 10 +
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	The scissor of the eyelid edge has been trimmed and shortened, making it easier to open your eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	The essence of the elixir is transformed into various ingredients in such a way that when you consume it, it acts like two types of remedangs - either as fuel or as medicine to be burned.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If the fire of your foe is upon you, command him before doing anything to read his words as carefully as those which are known; and if possible seize that opportunity to make peace with him, so bind their hands with a band from around yourself until new hair has grown on their head.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Come soon as you see your loved one's eyes close to sleep, give them a gentle kiss on the palm of their hand and remember the second part of their personal symbol, which resembles the figure of an owl in flight, along with the beginning of their family crest.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	A secluded cove begins work on an album of whales or a flock of butterfps over the hill.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Aproximations of the cauldrons that this is the form of it.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	A properly cauterized figure has an appearance somewhat like fir-tree bark in small patches, as if burned by fire, so that the entire surface of the leg looks just like it.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	A sign of your work's wear and tear is that you often squint with the eye, while the skin around it is contracted and the hairs are raised near the wound.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then he shall lift up his hands to the Lord and refrain from doing any work for three days, and rest at the boundary of his own inherited property.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	A prop that is used in the remedy you are referring to?
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	Mays returns for the same reason as before and the eyelid becomes softened, then he places another small piece of iron on it just like in the first procedure.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If a pterygium has formed on the edge of the eyelid fold, it should be surgically treated by excision or cauterization and returned to its natural position, ensamo that the hairs do not irritate it.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	Mays cauterizes with medicine those areas of the body that you want to treat the illness so they become swoln and inflamed, and apply his remedy in the form of a woolen cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	A prop of knowledge and causes living under one sun. In English, the question is as follows: How can one find a good book to read? Upon the quays of water, and in that mixture add those causes well, and let water be hastened so that it is not frozen; then expand the water over the paper which you have made in such a form as a maple leaf, pause halfway through on your hand, and place the remaining half into an album page, with its top facing towards yourself.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	The medicine is not very pleasant and it doesn't smell good either; the bitterness of the medicine is just like that of hot sauce.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then, when the mild pain occurs, take off your bandage and let it dry for a few hours; afterwards apply the medicine you have mentioned again; hence as soon as the pain subsides, wash off the remaining medication with warm water; then check if the eyelid has been raised similarly to how it should be after being treated or in case of an incision or cut, since this can occur within a few hours; and if not return over that part where you did not apply any medicine and which does not darken inside until your operation is completely healed and the area is no longer inflamed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	In case of a pause before reaching the border where the code for adjustment has been removed, and in care that he is injured or otherwise within that area, sanitary measures should be taken.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	E is necessary to you that you guard your work with great diligence so that the hue does not fall from the medicine; if the edge of the eyelid becomes softened and some cause affects the hair, repeat your treatment on that place where the eyelid has become softened, as well as at first, and also do likewise during recovery until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	This is the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	The sizes and shapes of men's shoes are diverse according to their magnitude and stature, so your choice should be made accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	"E, however, does not deviate from the path of righteprise that he has studied in this article."
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII (17) is the chapter of a book or document in the English language that follows the Roman numeral system for numbering sequentially, where "Capitol" could be either the title or subject matter related to Capitol Hill in Washington D.ameliorate or simply denoting chapters within a work on political structures and processes.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Cautery of the nasolacrimal duct fistula on the left side.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	In the divisions of illnesses and diseases, I do not heal with the water you have told me about; instead, I cauterize that according to this manner: command the disease to pause its head on your head, while holding it in such a way that it is neither harmful nor agitated by its own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Pause an enthusiatur in a grape harvest book or on the must of pomace under the heat of sunlight.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Certainly! Apropions to the subject of electrocautery, which is a medical device used for surgical procedures. Electrocautery uses electric current to cut tissue or stop bleeding by coagulation during surgery. This technique offers several advantages over traditional methods such as using scissors or a scalpel.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	The procedure is performed with a scalpel or heated iron rod in the form of a cane or penis extension, from one end to the other where the incision has been made on the glans.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	If you will, let's delve into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	Let's try again, then! Here are the translations for each line of your original text into Italian and French:
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is flawed is better to your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	An abscess near the anus may lead to over-drainage and subsequent tissue dryness.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	If not wasted, those hours would be over there in the abundance of light.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	A proper pause should be taken before igniting the wax that is placed in a small cone at the tip of your nostrils, so that you do not irritate your nose or cause any discomfort, and then pause with the candle ashes on the grey hairs and spread it over them.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	If your cauterization goes into the bone, it's okay; otherwise, repeat the cauterization after a few hours or days as needed; and leave that wound to heal in this manner for three days, placing a bandage over the area and using an antiseptic ointamoent within which is healing.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	After eleven days and not healing, it was time for a break from the acute corroding medicine within which the bone had been discovered and should be addressed in his capital.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	E is another method of cauterizing a fistula which the first doctors described: at the location of the fistula and in that area, creating a small opening through which very fine platinum wire can be inserted; and during your own procedure, ensure good retention, so that no harm comes from the melted platinum reaching any sensitive areas. Moreover, it is advised to pause above the hole of the wound with either an albumen solution or water, as remaining platinum will eventually cauterize the location of the fistula and heal it wonderfully.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is not healed after cauterization and dressing, it must be treated with an external approach to the nose and reduced to its proper course as determined later on.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII: The Legislative Process at the Capital
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Cauterization of the perforation wound.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Repetitive friction causes cracks in the lips, mostly on children's lip edges.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Alright, here's a brief guide on how to treat small water cracks in pipes using a soldering iron (small torch):
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	Let E be the eloquence of you second to the subtlety of quill.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	The old man carefully entered those cracks where the torch would lead him to the root of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	B) "Either you are guilty or you have been honest within that time when you were supposed to be sick."
Capitol .xix.	Capitol XIX, often translated as "Capitol Nineteeen" or "The Nineteenth", is a historical reference that might pertain to various contexts in literature, history, or other fields. Without specific details, it's hard to provide an accurate explanation. Could you please provide more information?
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Cauterization of oral fistula.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	In the event of an abscess in the uvula or on the palate or between teeth, if it swells up and breaks open, becomes old, and a fistula forms, do not leave it untreated as this may lead to further complications. After consulting with your doctor, treatments such as cauterization or other appropriate procedures should be considered depending on the severity of the abscess. Follow all instructions carefully for safe and successful healing.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the wound is superficial and heals, it's okay; otherwise, it may be necessary to expose the area and treat the affected bone according to what comes up in your case history.
Capitol .xx.	CAPITOL XX
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Cauterization of the teeth and soothing of the sores.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the cavities are alleviated by moisture and the teeth are healthy, and those wounds heal without infecuity, then it's possible for the pain to cease within your mouth, and you should ignite a cauterization of the shape that will approach as such. Then place the needle on the cavity and insert into it so that the heat from the flame quickly reaches the depth of the tooth and brings warmth throughout the affected area.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	A propel your mother and iterate the cauldrons in some intervals according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	"A person suffering from bad breath can rinse their mouth with salty water for an hour, and then wait a while; as this will cause the offending tooth to be stopped, the swollete gums to become softened and healed, and any corrupted moisture in the mouth to dry out."
Capitol .xxi.	I'm glad to assist you! If you have any questions or need information, feel free to ask and I'll do my best to help you out. Here are some general topics related to "Capitol" that might interest you:
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Toothache cauterization.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When a tooth causes pain or there is swelling in the gum, or you do not heal with medicinal treatment, two methods of cauterization are used on that area: using hot irons (cauterizing with an iron rod), or using heat (cauterizing with fire).
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	The Caudal Block is a procedure used to allewart postoperative pain after foot surgery or trauma in animals such as horses and cattle. Here are the steps involved in this procedure, translated from Catalan into English:
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	A certain amount of time elapses before the virtue of the fire reaches the realm of teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	If you wish to numb a gum or root area below the indicated spot, place that over the painful tooth and hold it against the heated metal (which should be brought close but not touching the nerve) until the sensation of the tooth's vitality is lost.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, the cauterization procedure requires you to focus on either an iron or silver piece and place it in your mouth while ensuring that the heat does not reach the wound's cavity.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Approximately 10 applications are needed to complete the electrocautery procedure, and place it on the dent with your mouth closed so that the cauterization is securely fixed; and apply some water at intervals as the pain subsides either in that day or the following day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	The bishop who suffers from the malady should have his mouth covered with good bandages and keep it in this manner for an hour, then he shall quickly spit it out. This is the method of cauterization.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	A, I shall cauterize the wound according to what you wish and as soon as it is feasible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the shape of a catheter, also known as a cannula. A cannula typically has a flexible, hollow tube with an opening at one or both ends to allow for fluid transfer into and out of the body. They come in various lengths and diameters depending on their intended use. Common types include intravenous (IV) catheters used for delivering fluids and medications directly into a vein, arterial cannulas for blood sampling or monitoring, and urinary catheters inserted into the blad cuff to drain urine from the body.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII: The Legislative Process in the United States Congress
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Cauterization of the foreskin.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When an abscess is formed and it becomes inflamed, take a fleam or lancet to puncture the abscess carefully with medicines in order to release its contents slightly; then ignite two pointed iron rods (which are attached together) at one end, while keeping them apart on the other. Hold this flaming instrument over the abscess once and repeat if necessary until you reach the head of the abscess or until it's healed.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, apply heat periodically according to its size and wrap it for three days with a bandage after cooling down in place where the heat has burned off the pus.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	A proper care includes the use of cleansers and trying on clothes that are sanitary.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The shape of the cannula or electrocautery instrument is such that it allows for effective use.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Cauterization of the vocal cord folds and laryngeal sphincter spasm.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidities come over the pulmonary channel, mainly when it is caused by excessive mucus secretion due to irritation or inflammation, conditions that require the discomfort to be relieved at mealtime with laxative medications and also cauterization of the affected area in the previously mentioned location.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	I watch over you so that the fire doesn't burn your clothes or consume your leg, but just a little bit.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	She cuts the second stitch near where the skin meets the last spine of his back.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	The procedure of electrocautery to seal the clips should be done as follows:
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	A proper fraction is any number that lies between the preceding whole number and zero, provided it is positive.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Curing of lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	Both lungs are humid, with no inflammatur or tuberculosis, and it's an old illness without fever or coughing. Two caustic applications should be placed over the furcula at the depressed points of Leo and Virgo; another application in the middle part of Gemini between two nipples; and a third caustic on the clavicle, following the previous pattern.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	If you wish to proceed with the procedure, please ensure that your earlobes are clean and dry prior to applying any cauterization tools such as those referred to for piercing punctures. The shape used in this process generally follows the contour of the area where earlobe pain is experienced.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	The pus enters through the pores and along with that comes the liquid called pus which has been mentioned before as being produced during healing.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	Either the patient has three wounds that require cauterization or one of them needs it. In this case, you can perform up to three cauterizations during one visit as follows:
Capitol .xxv.	Title: "Capitol XXV: The Rise of the Resistance"
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	The sterilization of the tittled teat that is at the tip of the udder.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	The epiphyseal plate (growth plate) is displaced due to excessive lubrication and it must be reset during its usual return time; if not corrected promptly, the displacement will continue in that direction until we have observed, so within a few hours you should initially reduce the displacement and appropriately relocate the malady onto its own head or towards its side; furthermore, elevate the limb wherein the displacement occurred on the inner part of the affected extremity.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Approximately two-thirds of eyelash curler applicators do not have protective caps, which is the shape as follows.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	Cauterization is performed on the affected nerve, where it enters that into another vessel or gland; and the result of cauterization will be hours to days of numb sensation in that area.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	In this subtle manner, according to the quantity of attempts; and this is the method:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	Some vegetables are adjusted according to this count and because they have eight cauldrons.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Let'cuh shave the burnt area with salt and apply it to relieve the pain and ensure that the member is not uncomfortable for any length of time afterward.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	If the dislocation is at unusual places and requires it, hours of cauterization are performed over the muscle or the clavicle joint or the affected points, as the joint connection is confirmed and moisture is removed and illness is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	"Capitol xxvi." translates to "Capitol twenty-six" in English, using Roman numerals where 'xx' equals ten and 'vi' equals six. So the number is twelve (10 + 2).
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When the sickness arrived in his stomcuo and caused watery effusions which entered into it, if you continue with treatment methods and do not perform incision, then soon the disease may be on top of him and extend its pains and swelling, so cauterize that point three times: one cauterization on his loin by the amount of a fingernail, and two cauterizations at the edges of the same cauterized spot, making it triangular in shape; also stretch between those unfit for bloodletting.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	The depth of the burn affects the amount of fluid in the third layer of the skin (dermis).
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	Figure E is shaped according to this form, and if you wish to cauterize a large wound on the upper part of the stomach using this method, then make a circular incision in the following manner. This technique can be used for surgical procedures such as treating ulcers or removing tumors from the gastric mucosa. Please note that only trained medical professionals should perform cauterization techniques to ensure safety and effectiveness.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	B is to be incised and the stomach punctured where you feel uncompressible pain due to that of the burning heat; then apply cauterizing agent according to the quantity desired, touching it gently on the points; afterwards treat with appropriate medication as described earlier for healing.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII. In the heart of the bustling city, amidst towering skyscpsers and winding alleyways, lies a place where history whispers through ancient walls - The Capitol Library. This chapter unfolds within its hallowed chambers as our protagonist steps over the threshold into a world filled with wisdom, knowledge, and secrets waiting to be unearthed.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	The circumcision of the foreskin, also known as fritzeflet in German or flipping/foreskin removal procedure in general terms, is a surgical procedure that involves removing part of the male foreskin to expose the glans (head) of the penis.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When an abscess occurs due to cold or humidity and excessive winds in the normal tissue, causing it to be expelled through excessive discharge, one should treat the illness with warm water as mentioned earlier, and do not give them anything else; three times a day let the illness be placed over their head, and then apply three cauterizations according to this method and quantity on the residual swelling from the hip bone. The patient should lie down in the supine position.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	Let S be the surface that bounds a body of any shape according to its area, and let E be the edges following the length of said boundary curve.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	Don't buy the apple juice in a can.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	If the amount of water that adheres to the quantity of salt in the sea is not excessive, and if malady does not afflict its fish; and if there are no storms, then let hours be spent exploring, for it has extended its borders, and raises its sails.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	A: Yes, "E" is the Spanish equivalent of the letter "H" in English. Both letters represent a similar shape and sound. However, it's important to note that the pronunciamo of "e" in Spanish can vary depending on its position within a word or phrase.
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	It is possible that you may perform the surgical procedures with scalpel or burning tools if you have subtlety and wisdom in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Look and see that you do not process too much in the caulking, so that the entire edge is sealed properly to ensure it's fully sealed along your entire body, thus reaching into the cavities; for the cord is subtle here. Know this well.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	The drainage of the abscess in the foot was performed through cauterization.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	Quan Endeve examines the phlegm and wants to know if that pus is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunica lútea, a few hours later if it's in the flesh of the foot, the illness intensifies pain and becomes acute.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	If S is in the tunic of figs, then the pain is intense and often makes surgeons tired from its treatment.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	The disease has turned against the body's own brain; and then he tried to locate the lesion; and with caution applied heat using a tool resembling a rod, which was mentioned in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	He cuts the flesh and cauterizes within which the entire name is concealed, until it reaches the crossroad, where in a blaze of glory he shall be saved.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	A proper care for the healing of other wounds within which it is cured.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	In this particular covenant form of circumcision that you use is not the one which he learned in the study of medicine and prolonged; rather, he knows many diseases from the latter type as well. However, some experiments have been daring regarding this procedure but let him follow our advice instead, for it is best.
Capitol .xxix.	Title: Capital XXIX (29)
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Cauterization of varicose veins.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	In the field of arboriculture, cauterizing techniques are applied to grafting according to this method to become a creator, and it is what you take from the long rootstocks - one long scion that can be found, and its girth matches that of the stock.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	In the abdomen, at the level of the navel and a bit to the left (from where you stand), apply three small burns in a straight line; one on each side of the navel. Then, submerge that area with oil, and cauterize for a short while over it. Proceed by applying two more burns slightly declining away from the direction of the belly button towards the chin. One should be between the fifth rib and the sternum, inclined a little bit downwards; the other is at the level where the breastbone meets the xiphoid process. Additional cauterization points include: one on the left side of the abdomen just above the hip bone, two small burns at the lower end of each pectoral muscle and three tiny burns between the second rib spaces; as well as a burn between the shoulder blades and another beneath the right breastbone.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	Certainnly! Here's the translation of your sentence from Occitan to English: "Use a cork that fits in your wine glass; it should not be visible during serving."
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	The following is a translation of the Middle English text into Modern English:
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	In this performance of cauterization, May doesn't feel fear, as he often causes it immediately in the spot where there is an abscess that cannot be healed.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital X!
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	About the treatment of leproseburning.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	I treat the sore of psoriasis with water that we have discussed in the treatment section and do not transfer your recovery to another division; now apply the hot iron according to three methods, all of which are appropriate, depending on the length of the psoriasis as depicted by the figure of cauterizations shown below.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Article E - Equalization of Custard Size and Heating Method
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	Don't buy my old hens, and may evil befall on your head!
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	E is another mode of cauterization; it involves the use of two agents to heat and seal a specific area, causing numbness in the region where muscle displacement occurs and alleviating pain near the nerve root that causes the troublesome malady.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	Let S be the area of your property and let L be the length along the course. To maximize the width (W) according to the length, you need to distribute W in such a way that it follows the latitude of the compass direction.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	A trespasses may interfere with the boundaries between two properties, causing disputes and conflicts when one encroaches on land belonging to another party.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	A physician performs the cauterization, and then creates four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	If you're looking for a reliable caulking gun with three trigger options, I recommend the GBB5003 Caulking Gun from Graco. It has an easy-to-use dual action handle and comes equipped with different trigger modes for various tasks. You can find it on Amazon or at your local hardware store.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	A quick treatment with cauldrons can prevent aches from lasting for several days; however, they are more effective than other previous remednants in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXV. The Legislative Process and the Role of the Capitol Building in Democracy
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Cauterization of varicose veins.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	The Catari, also known as Albigenses or Cathars, were not primarily water drinkers but rather wine enthusiasts in a way that is inherently unique to them.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	I will treat you with hot irons at the following points of treatment which we have mentioned in the division and do not confuse your treatment, thus four times around the circumference of the elbow, one over the stomach, one over the knee, one over the groin, two between the vertebrae of the spine, and one on the right side of the chest.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	The quantity of the depth of the cautionary measures is proportional to the severity of the threat.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Properly applying the caulking to seal the joint ensures you get a tight and long-lasting seal.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	The person with the illness should not use any cream or ointment before taking a shower; this will allow the cautery to be applied more easily and for them to receive prompt medical attention, and they must also seek immediate help from their healthcare provider.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the caudal fin used to cauterize the belly is similar to that of its clavicle, and it resembles an olive in shape as well.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXII: The Halls of Legislation in the Heart of America's Capital City
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Sterilization of instruments and materials.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the fish are baited with drops of blue water, cover them thoroughly on their backs in lukewaturgy water that is between the ear and ring finger; then raise your right hand above the cauterization and do not turn it away. Lift up your left hand as well but do not let go until all the saffron-tinted water has dripped out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery shall be applied according to this method: E place upon each pair of wounds the two cauterizing agents, and on every instance apply with a knife at the edge of the instrument for cauterization.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	E should follow the length of the caul on both sides, removing any excess tissue and leaving only a thin layer along each edge of the caul. Then, two cauterizations are to be made per caul.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Layla's hand got burned for a long time because she accidentally touched the hot water.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	The law abides by those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capital Letter C - Roman Numeral XCIII (103 in Arabic numerals)
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Cauterization of the umbilical stump.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	In the matter of digestion and humidity that causes the eruptions to occur, it is related to the digestebile and retainive faculties, which are located in the stomach and intestines, and they can be treated with medicinal decoctions as prescribed earlier for stomach cauterization, along with following procedures: a cauterization on the great sigmoid colon area, four small subcutaneous circle cauterizations (subtle), and two clavicle subtle cauterizations. Additionally, a cauterization should be done over the alcatin above the haunches, or alternatively, two additional cauterizations can be performed.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	When there are excessive humidities and intolerance to water, the hours efficiently sterilize that above the linens and over the buds, as well as strong ajustments of cauterizations on the stomach and near the groin, which is perfectly curative for the swelling you suffer from.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capital Forty-four. In Roman numerals, the number 44 is written as XLIV (50 - 10 + 1 = 44). However, it's unusual to see "Capitol" followed by a numeral without context; it could be part of an address or reference within a document.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When someone is affected by ancient ulcers or a thick and foul humidity, they are treated with the water previously mentioned in the division (referring to section 1) but not using any other treatment; after this, the area is cauterized on three sides of the remaining pus from the small spondylolisthesis. Also, two cauterizations should be performed above the navel at a diagonal direction.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	In order to heal your stomach and prevent food from spoiling or being overcooked, and if the skin of yours is heavily scalded, follow these steps for cauterization on your stomache using a large cauldron as described before; use another cauldron on your feet, and yet another one to cauterize your groin, clasping each cauldron firmly in place. Leave the cauldrumps on you for some time until healed while keeping them securely positioned.
Capitol .xxxv.	Title: Capital V.35 (Capital XXXV)
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	The excision of the hemorrhoid is close to the anus.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	I will remove the rust and scorch marks from your iron railing using caution.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	The vessel that enters this artery in that aortic branch and ultimately reaches the first one to reach the caudal end where blood flows from the said vessel.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Efficacy of Aqua Vitae in the Treatamo of Wounds and Ailments - An Old Remedy Revisited
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	If you get burned by a large alkathene welding rod, it is even more painful in youth.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capital City, Roman numerals represent the number 66 (XLVI + XXX). However, it seems there might be a confusion in your query as "Capitol" doesn't have any direct relation to Roman numerals unless you are referring to a specific context where Capitol is associated with the number 66.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	The cauterization of natural fistulas results in the disappearance of these portions.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the remedy that has been recommended for use in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, they are treated with caution therapy (cauterization).
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Whenever we come across an old fistula in nature, it is antique and provides health relief from corrupted humidity and moisture; therefore, the water that flows from there is more deserving to be used than others attempted with such subtlety, as well as being akin to the quantity of depth previously mentioned.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Approximately ignites that seem like sparks of lightning.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	A) The practitioner then applies the heated iron to this abscess, and according to the amount in which they have attempted it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	It is advisatur for thee to apply a heated blade over the lesion which causes them discomfort so that they may be cauterized or burnt after one, two or three seasons according to thy need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	The translation of the given text from Catalan to English is as follows: "E watches for inflammamation and vein rupture; if a fistula goes towards the bladder or into the abdomninal cavity, then he observes all those places. Don't treat it unless the fistula is in a non-penetrating location that you consider."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	A person who commits an act within their knowledge that is likely to cause harm, without exerciseing reasonable care to prevent it, may be considered negligent under the law of torts.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	If the land is sealed and all substances are divided from it for a long time, in time you will know that it has been completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the matters are not of your creation, spare some wisdom on how it may have penetrated or become tainted in its course to you, and what causes led up to its arrival here.
Capitol .xxxvii.	In Roman numerals, the number "xxxvii" is translated to the Arabic numeral system as the number 37. The prefix 'capitol' doesn't have a numerical value and it seems like there might be some confusion or additional context needed regarding what you are asking for with the term "Capitol." If you need further assistance, please provide more details!
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Cauterization of the warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When the ears are affected by severe pain or inflammatur, and as a result of such illness, one experiences hearing impairment; after some time, this requires that electrodes be placed upon the earlobes where an electrical current is applied to each lobe with the cauterization of the cartilage.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	The second one was lightly cauterized, so that three small lines will appear in succession, and then the last ones during healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	In English, "Capitol cxxxviii" would be written as "Chapter Thirty-Eight." Here's the breakdown of the Roman numerals:
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	Healing and soothing measures for inflammamoins of the bladder include poultices and moist compresses that prevent urine retention; later on, you should cauterize those areas where pus remains using a hot iron in the respective positions - right below (suprapubic region), above, and left to the affected area.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	S is the length of each incision according to the number of teeth in a mouthful; and make that as one incision on the lower part of the back, or two if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	Surgery should be performed on the cauliflower-like lesion according to the procedure followed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capital III.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Cauterization of the hemorrhoids.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When a woman comes in her monthly period or menstruation, engaging in sexual intercourse is prohibited, and the blood flow is disturbed; as a result, ovulation may be delayed, causing painful uterine bleeding, so three times around the navel should be cauterized with three small cauterizations. In addition to this procedure for the bladeroid, it also involves two or more cauterization points on the lower part of the belly button, along with a clavicle cauterization.
Capitol .xl.	In English, you would say "Capitol I" as pronounced in the Roman alphabet with a dot above the capital letter 'I', often used in handwriting or calligraphy to indicate that it is an uppercase letter rather than lowercase 'i'.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Cauterization of the ankle dislocation.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	The humidity of the fog increases at the start of dawn and is caused by the earth's rotation, as well as a sign that this condition lasts longer than when compared with others.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The location of the displacement is detected in a way that involves boy's.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Ensure that you cauterize the wound on the lower limb before attempting to wrap it with a bandage-like material; and as you try to secure it at the affected area, make sure the end of the bandage falls below the circle so that it does not roll up.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	S be the set of all surgical burns, which include the procedure for gastric cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this cauldron is not here with you now, three times burn that olive tree with a firebrand.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	E, let the wound be cauterized according to the extent of the infection in the whole limb; and carefully observe as long as it remains healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL-I (41) - A Continuation of the Journey in Washington, D.C.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Cauterization of the sciatic nerve.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When dealing with the pain in your ankle and its causes, such as inflammamation or dampness, the disease is cured by drinking water that we have mentioned, and not consuming other beverages; this ancient remedy suggests that you should get rid of the illness caused by thick humors through bitter pills or artificial pills or similar substances. Furthermore, take caution in applying a healing process to the affected area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cauterization is according to two methods: cauterization with medicine that causes burning or cauterization with heat (fire).
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Following two scientific approaches, one of which involves using a triangular heated strip according to this method and making sure the depth is adequate for proper treatment.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	Let S be the spaces between each cut, where the quantity of width corresponds to the thickness of the aforementioned and the cuts are either olive or grain-shaped.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Some of its waxes are used for creating small candles, placed on the top part of an anchor symbol where there are four such candles.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you wish, I'll describe the method for performing a circumferential suture around the area of interest in the surgical repair of shoulder dislocation, ensuring that it remains continuous and covers the entire contour.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	This is the keyhole surgery method where pain is attached to the spine and not extended into the chest.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	Mays is stretched out on the bed, hours healing with those two pieces of metal (cautery) over the wound on the area where you will place the poultice to relieve pain; and one piece is placed perpendebrously near the injured part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	The depth of the scalpel burns depends on the amount of skin pigmentation; less pigmented skin requires shallower cauterization, while darker skin may need deeper cauterization to ensure complete treatment and reduce scarring risks.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	If the illness spreads and the pain extends to the proper location where you inserted it, remove these stitches or cut them at three points or four (or as many as necessary).
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	If the pain persists and seems to come from the colon, you can try cauterizing it here with a sterile surgical knife. (Note: This translation should not be taken as medical advice; please consult a healthcare professional.)
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	In this text you see the complete caution not to exceed the burn by covering any nerve or large area, and that for your own harm in case of improper healing or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	You should avoid using any other tools than those recommended for the procedure to remove a skin tag or mole via cauterization, as well as maintaining sterile conditions and proper healing care of the affected area. Failure to do so may result in inflammamo, infection, burns on the skin, perforation, and total damage to the tissue.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	An accidental poisoning leading to severe stomach pain and eventually death by water.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	The pain is in two episodes; treat each one separately according to this guideline.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	Certainly, here's the translation in modern Spanish:
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Certainly! Here is the translation of your text from Occitan to English:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Put some wood into the fire so it smoulders and emits sparks, then place your hand over the hole of the chimney where smoke rises up.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Then let's rehearse that one more time in another session.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	For three days, apply that ointment on the affected area; then let it dry at room temperature for several hours; and finally, keep applying this cream until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Dis Albuqasim (Al-Buhassin): We have seldom used this type of cauterization due to the fear it may instill and because few cases of such nature exist that concern you, my lord.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	The fierce winds blow on these fields of scorched land and respect the place where it originates.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Mayes' cauterization method for medicines consists of making two circles with an armillary perforated in the center, from which a thread is dropped; their length should be equal to half of that space between two stars or those like them.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	Se il spazio è compreso tra due quantità della stessa grandezza; ed essendo uno sopra l'altra, contengono in sé di seguito e sopra come indicato qui:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	The apple of discord causes strife among friends, so buy the wine for your friend's departure and prepare a bath with fresh water in between two circles; the quantity should be such that it gradually becomes hotter over time, allowing them to endure the heat - which is as sharp as fire - until the burning sensation subsides.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	He elevates your hand, wields the instrument and removes all the hot water from every jug.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	In accordance with the rules for three days and a break within that border where is the shadow of the August sunset, let him sow this grain; he should leave it fallow, and let it run wild like grassy fields; this is done last in lamentation.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	He who enters the house must wait until healed. (Inspired by Basque)
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	If the pain spreads to the arm or leg, make a statue in which there is water as per instructions provided with the charm.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	Here is the method of cold water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of drugs.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for a Lively and Flavorful Seafood Paella with Saffron and Artichokes
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	When you approach the foamy crest of one wave receding, and ride upon that saltwater, causing it to surge twice as much, and then compress those waves with your hands, let go so the sharp water at its edge turns into the crest of the oncoming wave.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	A prop is adjusting the water flow, and it pours over another living cause and other alkaline renewal, for that time of strong humidity, which is administeramo in various medical operations and cauterization of the other body parts, a procedure that acts as a remedy.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	So, some medicines are those which have a broad application; thus, they are used to treat various conditions and should not be mixed together without proper guidance or consultation with a healthcare professional.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	"E Guale's remedy from an ancient man was successful in treating both back pain and sciatica. Its effectiveness is so remarkable that it seems like a miracle, as the person told stories of bathing and exercisebut then felt completely healed within just one week."
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	It is that which you seek near the healing herb, and if it has not been tested for safety, take a fresh sprig; and as much as necessary, wrap it around your limb in the form of a bandage or sling, wherein lies the pain.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	S should pay a quantity of three hours' work or the amount that malady causes incapacity due to injury.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	A person who falls into the bath and gets their clothes soaked should get out of the water as soon as possible, because once they do, the pain will subside and they'll be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	These herbs, which I have prepared in the vial that you shall acquire through careful selection, are not for internal consumption but rather to aid in the expulsion of bodily humours.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Escorides mentioned that when cutting the vein of a goat on St. Vitus Day, it is customary to cauterize it with this method: Take some wool and dip its end in ancient oil, then press between your thumb and index finger until it glows hot enough to seal the vein.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Preheat the oven to a low temperature and prepare that metal tray which will be used later for charcoal. Then pour water onto the wool until it is fully soaked, place them in the prepared tray, and let them dry naturally.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Upon the healing waters, and as they cease to flow, within the glow of warmth that soothes lies the quiet and respite from pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of cauterization is called cattle branding.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42 (Capitalizing the Roman numeral "XLII") or simply Ch. 4n for "Chapter 4" in common abbreviuted notation. However, if you are referring to a specific context like a book title or similar use case, then it would be best represented as is: Capitol .xlii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Cauterization of second-degree burns.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some types of back pain are caused by trauma or impacts, as well as excessive strain from heavy lifting and strenuous activities, and also due to causes seemingly related to these factors, such as the ingestion of greasy foods and damp weather.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	A caustic does not affect all cats, only in this specific way which is done by the spraying of irritant matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	In cases of inflammation or pain, apply the following creams and similar remedangs over the affected area in accordance with the size specified by you. However, avoid using too much pressure on any particular line; instead, gently massage the area as per your tolerance level to the discomfort and the effectiveness of the product.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	S was made to undergo a cauterization procedure involving the use of hot irons or electrocautery tools to burn and seal tissues, typically for stopping bleeding during surgery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	If you want to perform a median sternotomy and need to divide the sternal structures, follow these steps for proper surgical technique:
Capitol .xliii.	In the context of government buildings, "Capitol" typically refers to a building where legislative bodies meet. It is derived from the word 'caput', meaning head or chief in Latin. The most famous example is the United States Capitol located in Washington D.C., which houses both chambablished by Thomas Jefferson and designed by William Thornton, it is an iconic symbol of American democracy where Congress meets to draft laws for the nation.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Cauterization at the onset of gangrene.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Misfortunes often accompany this illness in children; and a sign of its onset is when it affects their structure, causing swelling and movement issues.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	A lot of attention in the last two paragraphs and on the notes that just start to surpass the others.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, if you wish to make a circle using the method described in this way:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Take the cautery over the entire area of the spinal deformity.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you notice a disc herniation, it should be treated with caution in the neural circuit by using a cautery to create two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	The French phrase "Eh bien, les points positifs par rapport à..." translates to English as "Well, the positive aspects compared to..." or simply "On the plus side, compared to...". This expression is often used to discuss the advantages of something when contrasting it with another option.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	A proper care of the location within which water has been mentioned requires regular monitoring and maintenance to ensure its cleanlinamo, healthy, and safe for use. This includes removing any debris or foreign objects that may have entered the water source and testing the water quality on a periodic basis. It is essential to fix any leaks promptly to avoid wasting this precious resource. If there are concerns about potential contamination, it might be necessary to treat the water with appropriate methods like filtration, disinfection or boiling before use.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Mays advises that cauliflower should not be consumed in cases of gout as it may cause nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV: The Capital City
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Treatment of gout and joint pain involves various methods, including medication, lifestyle changes, and sometimes surgical procedures such as debridement or synovectomy in severe cases. The goal is to reduce inflammamoent, relieve symptoms, and prevent further attacks or complications.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	The joint pain of the body is caused by excessive and imbalanced bodily fluids, which accumulate in each limb; therefore, when they come to pass as pains in the limbs, it is customary for physicians to apply a poultice directly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	Therefore, if you have gout caused by alcohol consumption and the pain is unbearable, it should be treated with appropriate medical care and not just home remed cupping.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	It is necessary to cauterize that effluent evacuation in the circuit at the junction of the femoral vein.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Let S be the oval shape of which this is its form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	It is necessary that the stitching on the wound edge be done as soon as possible, so that sutures can be removed after healing occurs.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	When the pains strike into the joints or other connections, and then move to certain veins, after a while they are cauterized using three cauterizations or four in total from each affected area with this olive tree cauterizing tool.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	Cauterize only what is essential; do not excessively perform this procedure, gently warm the area with the caustic substance beforehand and expose only the skin of the wound.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	The pain struggles within the cauldron and potion, hours administering the cauterization we have mentioned in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	The pains are immense for the most part alone, and it is called a seizure, hours point in the cycle of lamps as they rotate, so too do these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	As night falls, the pains recede in words, hours marked by the ticking of clocks over each note and over the edge of the dawn.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If the pain is near bones or muscles, then times of cauterization completely cut off all helpers.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	In the village of Bon Regimen and Recepcion de Medicinas, there was a man who suffered from an illness. He followed good regimabon and took his medication regularly, but unfortunately, he did not get better. The villagers prayed to God for help.
Capitol .xlv.	Title: Capital XLV - A Political Tale of Intrigue and Ambition
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Cauterization of ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	The old man began to rant angrily about the youngsters, saying their beds were placed right in front of his stove, and he started complaining that you should order them not to waste food during the day, and find some lenient reasons for letting them go hungry.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	A) Go forth and avoid all evil; command that thy soul be within the bounds of goodness, so that it does not fall into temptation or appear in disgrace.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	A prop returns the key to those who tell truth and password, it attempts the breakdown of the cipher at the extreme end that seems similar to the majority of circular uppercase parts of the sentence.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Approximations of the cauldrons in which this form is found:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Por favor, entre com o seu nome completo e obtenha um número de identificação exclusivo para receber suas cadeias de contas.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Person A decides to reduce their expenses to save money for the purchase of a new tablet, and also secures an extra job on the side that only occupies them during the time they do not need the tablet.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	Though you've been through the hardships of illness and loss, I pray for your well-amooring; may other services be rendered on behalf of you, both in spiritual matters and in earthly needs—may it sustain you all throughout.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Aprop pausa the cuts on that mark, and your mother's cuts are straight, and in that place where they follow each other, enter through the skin between his fingers; if you do not succeed at first, try again with that same hand within a few days.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	In the hour of your circumcision, observe diligently the healing of that wound; it does not cause any harm through its illness or other great malevolence.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	The horses you choose do not have the cauldrons tied to their backs; thus, they cannot perform your work.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	The child's circumcision should be performed with great skill and according to the size and measure of his body.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	A proper use of the healing ointment for three days will ensure that the burn wound is adequately protected from infection.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	A proper care for others, even if they are not yet healthy.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	The illness shall remain silent on their heads for forty days, enclosed within the room and the curtains.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	The process of healing takes time and each stage requires a different type of nourishment to support the body's needs. During this period, it is important not to force your belly with too much effort in an attempt to recover quickly.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	After about 12 days of proper rest and nourishment, you will be fully recovered to undertake other tasks for the next few weeks.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	A is to abstain from work and nourishment, as well as drinking, and with such an entire regimen of health shall be completely cured.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	The healing of the ruptures in other parts of the abdabdominal cavity shall be addressed firstly, and you are to ensure there is no delay. Cauterize the rupture as follows according to its extent, along with any fluid that has been expelled from the blood vessel; use also the third portion of said liquid. Apply it directly at the site mentioned before without hesitation or delay.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	In the first case, a break was sealed with a triangular caulking according to this method, but it attempted to be reinforced.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	The line that represents the latitude and longitude of the earthquake's epicenter is divided into two parts; pause your car at a traffic light on the main road, but the first junction is further and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI: The Capital City - An Overview of Capitals Around the World
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Surgical treatment for torticollis (also known as "wry neck").
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	A person experiences persistent pain due to cavitation or impact trauma and does not alleam with any medicine; they seek treatment through heat therapy using point cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	E be the cauldrons of all members according to their size and smallness, value and worthiness, location of tension and pain they cause.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If you're not satisfied with the first cauterization, then go ahead; otherwise, let hours pass over it. Because of its usual nature to cause pain that feels like a puncture in the member near the affected area is common for achieving those desired results from the cauterization process.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII - The Capital City
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Cauterization of leprosatury.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	The Lebrus plant is widely used for burns due to intense pain and minimally also for the species of leprosab that results from decaying flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	So that you may cauterize it, consider whether the disease is common and this one has been healed with the water mentioned in the division and do not neglect it or delay it, but also beware of the evil contagion which corruption encompamoors all of your body and the whole complexity of you; now cauterize that on top of your head with a hot iron: one to the middle part of your hair, and another just behind them; then towards your forehead near the temple where your hair ends; and again two at the back corners.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Elymas was burned with a few drops of oil poured on the skin near the bone, causing previously lodged pieces to dislodge and allowing thick vapors to be released from it; then he was cauterized over the wound as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	In case of leprosy, which appears to be expanding and is visibly manifest on the body, thou should cauterize all those areas as mentioned before in the head; and apply cautery over the extremity of the nose, and two applications of cautery over both cheeks, and two applications on collar bones, and six applications on spine vertebrae, one application near the neck, one at the nape, two applications on each shoulder, one application for each arm, two applications on hipbones, one per hipbone, two applications on clavicles, and apply cautery to all joints of limbs and hands as well as fingers. And thou should also apply cautery over nail beds.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Look at the nerves on your feet which you don't cover with those shoes of yours.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Some veins are cauterized using a heated iron rod (cautery) on the surface of the skin at certain locations - one over the shinbone, another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the ankle joint.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Know well which type of ointment you apply after a cauterization; the more effective and beneficial it is, the less painful it becomes. And know that if there's no bad ulceration from the caustic burn, then like with your hands, so too will your body be amazed at its own healing ability.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	Cauteries should be small or large according to the members and joints, as follows in reference to the types of tools made of iron.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	A proper care should be taken while using the caustic cream, apply it sparingpertly and allow it to dry before applying any other treatment until the area is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Stubbornness cauliflower treatment.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	If anyone has broken or injured a limb and is treated with medicines, ointments, and bandages, but they do not heal, then you should burn that wounded part using cauterization according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	E was the light entering the window of a small room.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	I'm afraid the provided text is in Catalan, not Italian. The translation to English would be: "This medicine should be taken within the time frame indicated for it to work." If you need an Italian translation or more information about the context of the phrase, feel free to ask!
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Some scars are treated with cauterization; this method involves heating a metal rod or probe and applying it to the scar tissue, causing localized burning and destruction of scarred skin cells. This process may also stimulate nerve endings in the area, which can reduce sensitivity and allenate pain associated with scars. The scar is subsequently rejuvenated as the surrounding healthy skin regenerates and replaces the treated tissue, resulting in a smoother appearance.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Mayes does not presume on water, but rather that which is healthy in the dissection of limbs and nerve exits throughout the entire body.
Capitol .xlix.	In Roman numerals, "Capitol xlix" translates to the number 149 in Arabic numerals (since XL = 40 and IX = 9). The year 149 AD was during the reign of Emperor Antoninus Pius, a period known for relative peace and stability within the Roman Empire.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	The treatment of the morphea patches that are undergoing cauterization.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	Quan barras es antiqua e no comferis amb les engrunes de medicina, tostem's sobre aquella al cu que haguin prougut un poc segon quantitat de l'especiut de la còdna entrant remugada la blancor e la color de lu, i és mudada.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Take equal quantities of whole wheat flour and lentils, roasted chickpea flour, and chopped coriander leaves. Combine them all together in a bowl. Add warm water little by little until the mixture forms a dough-like consistency. Knead it well to form small balls of parathas.
Capitol .l.	The capital of the United States is Washington, D.cu. It serves as the seat of government and hosts various important institutions such as the White House, Congress, and Supreme Court. Located in the District of Columbia along the Potomac River, it has a rich history dating back to its founding in 1790 by President George Washington himself.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Cerebral cauterization refers to the medical procedure of destroying tissue in a specific area of the brain, often using heat or electricity, typically for therapectical purposes such as treating certain types of epilepsy or controlling severe pain. The term "de cranc" seems to be an incomplete reference and might relate to something else not clearly defined here.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	Quantum theory begins when one observes an electron; it then behaves like a wave that is circulating in the same manner as if it were being observed, thus creating a quantum circuital loop of sorts.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	Several times they have advised that it should be cauterized on the lower part; however, I did not see this either, because I feared it might become an ulcer and I had already seen it once or twice before.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	In the electric circuit of this round coil as we have mentioned, there are several contacts.
Capitol .li.	Capital.li
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Sterilization of soil fertilization tools.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some animals are delayed in their maturity, and so they are overfed to that extent due to poor health or old age with little fat, or for the sake of time; you wish to hasten the maturing process of such animals; here is how to cauterize a certain area on the animal's body using a hot iron rod.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	If you wish to perforate your dog's ear, the following is a description of how to do it with cauterization: first, sterilize the area around its ear where the puncture will be made and make sure that it enters deeply into the cartilage.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	He shall let the cauldrons be in that place where it is buried, so that the body of the arm may be raised up; and he should apply them immediately after it has been cured.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter XII. The Capitol.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Cauterization of the ulceration.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	The term 'corrosion' refers to the process where deterioration occurs on materials as they are exposed to certain environmental conditions, which can weaken and damage their structure over time. This is similar to how fire consumes dry wood by breaking down its components until it is reduced to ash or embers.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	If you see that a wound is infected with an open flame nearby, then apply hot iron spikes, few or large depending on what is suitable in the location where it's infected.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	A proper caution should be exercised in order to completely eliminate the corrosion and not cause any further damage.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Apply it for three days, and pause on the treated areas until all scars are completely erased and total corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	The fish that have this oil-producing organ are known as oily fish.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	May should not consume the meat of a cow that has just been born and is not corrupted; otherwise, she must apply heat to any area on her body where there are signs of contamination.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	The substance is a component of some ointments and is used in the treatment of acute wounds, which are usually applied at the site of cauterization.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But she, however, with the hot iron of a lie, silenced those who doubted her.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	You should take your acute illness medicine as prescribed in the dosage instructions, and continue taking it until you no longer need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter IV.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Cauterization of the gums (gingivectomy) and other similar procedures.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	In cases of skin lesions caused by the disease known as clavus (corn), which are considered a significant factor causing discomfort and pain to the affected person; there are two types of treatments, one with hot oil and the other with cold water based on their respective properties.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The heating iron must have the appearance of a very sharp penaltamo; it should be made of fine metal according to the quantity that contains the tip of the entire piece and composed of subtle layers.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	A spark touches that key, and you rotate your hand around the metal pole within which the current arrive at its depth in the key.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Elissa said it would take three days before he began to grow arms.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	To heal the wounded herbs with a marvelous balm made of salt and water, apply it to them at night; then they will be freed from their afflictions.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	A proper care of the location where cultured meat is generated ensures that it remains safe for consumption.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If you do not convert it to milliliters, and pour the liquid measure into the cup (being careful), mainly in cases where your doctor recommends that you take a certain amount of an herbal remedy or tincture made from volatile oils, then pick up one fluid ounce using a measuring spoon or syringe. Place it over the edge of the cup and let a small quantity drip into it; then swirl your hand around inside to mix thoroughly, ensuring that the measurement is completely blended at the bottom edge of the cup. Wait for approximately an hour before drinking the liquid measure. This will allow the herbs' oils to properly diffuse through the body.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	The angelic host surrounds the other, coming from all over who are in their hearts.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	In this context, the correct sentence would be "El aceite de oliva es pot usar per eliminar los pus que quedan cuando las heridas se curan y para hidratar la piel donde la sangre entra."
Capitol .liiii.	Capital, LIII (the 53rd) in Roman numerals. In the context of cities and countries, it is not usually represented with a number like 'LIII'. However, when referring to specific chapters or sections in books, legislative documents, etc., 'Capital LIII' would signify the 53rd capital section or chapter.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Cauterization for tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you notice a tremor due to an irritation in the nerve or fever caused by an inflammation, or another similar cause, it is advised that you apply four points of caustic hot oil on each vertebra of the back, between each vertebra, one point at a#wrist and one on top of its foot. Additionally, apply two drops over his stomach.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	The earthquake of love brings respite and accelerates the healing from the wasting disease.
Capitol .lv.	Capital.LV is a Latvian online news portal that provides up-to-date news, analysis, and information on national and international events. The website offers content in both Latveborne language and English translation for its diverse audience. It covers various topics such as politics, economy, culture, sports, entertainment, health, science, technology, environment, lifestyle, and more.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Accidental cauliflower burn on the leg.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	In the case of an open ulcer or pus-filled sores which are caused by corrupt substances, apply a gentle heat during meals using a caustic solution all over the fistula area up to a subtle subcutaneous cauterization with myrtle twigs; the tip of which is extended towards fire; or through long earthing therapy; or with lenticular cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Some wounds may require cauterization before the removal of a foreign object according to this method; they are not suppurated, and excessive fluid is reduced in them, thus healing those affected.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, he also knew that this time it required immediate evacuation and surgery.
Capitol lvi.	Capital LVII in Roman numerals represents the number 67 in Arabic numerals. The capital letters "L" and "V" stand for 50 and 5 respectively, while the lowercase letter "i" indicates that we subtract these values (as opposed to adding them when they'n written as uppercase). Thus, L - V + I = 50 - 5 + 2 = 67.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Cauterization of a fistula from an accidental incision with electrocautery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Troops that have been wounded by arrows should be allowed to rest from the plague, or else they must undergo surgery for abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and then similar treatments; it is difficult to recover after such experiences.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Come waves crash against the shore, may your thoughts carry you through the memory of your mother's harrowing experience at the archery range, and pause on that moment when you spoke out for those times gone by where there was still blood from your own words left behind, but never forgotten.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	The smoke from the large and small olive groves, by hundreds of numbers, suffuses above those within who are ignited with passion.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	In case of an incision or a small puncture wound that breaks the artery and rapidly fills up the nearby vein with your bleeding blood, you must enter the tissue through which this has occurred and cauterize it so as to seal off that vessel.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	When you remove your instrument from the dreadful artery and extract the clot, it is then that another clot immediately takes its place among those being prepared in the heat, so do not cease this process until the blood has been constricted again.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Fear not the nervous energy present here; instead, bring forth goodwill and dispel any ill will or malice.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	E sapiens quiquam de arteria fluxus sancti, lorica non est possibile in aliis, quae magni arteriae sunt, nisi ut unus ex quattuor modis habeam: aut cauterium ita quod dixim habemus; aut excidio sine extractione extrema membrorum nostri comburuntur et sanculentius remanet, aut veluti ligaturae vel liaminibus per fortissima strangulatio, aut valde strictas super medicamenta quas in eis virtus est sanguinem restringere; et sunt firmantes veli palantium vel cordis.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	The one who enforces a reasonable restriction of my freedom and imposes strict regulations shall not be allowed to do so without proper cause or justification.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	In the event that you are experiencing a vein puncture, and if there is no doctor or medical professional present at the time, please follow these steps carefully as described below:
Comensa la segonda partida.	Chapter Two begins now. Let'ebre in the story and discover what lies ahead for our characters as they continue to navigate their world. Hold on tight, because things are only about to get more interesting from here!
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	"Of Cutting and Puncturing, Vein-Grazing, Flea Control, Wounds, Their Appearances, and Plagues."
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are sentences from a Spanish text by Albuquerque.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	I have composed the first capital on all diseases in which cautery may be convenient and medicine has been burnt, along with its occasions and causes, as well as the instruments needed therein; also the chapters of uremia within the head are to be included.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	In this particular chapter of the procedure as outlined herein for that manner, to ensure that the plaintiff shall be thrown over there onto that object, after hours upon which they have requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Given that you have started the water flow, cover the vessel, son, I warn you that in this chapter there is a reference to the drought which takes place in the first capital of cleansing (referring to purification rituals).
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	In water, that is to say, be very cautious during the operation mentioned above, which involves multiple instances of gas evacuation and sanitary procedures such as spraying or injecting into an abscess, draining or cleaning a wound, or extracting a splinter. Similarly, there are also invasive procedures like incision or stone removal using specialized equipment.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	Among those who accompany it, there is fear and trembling, as well as in the minds of their hearts, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Forgive me for my sins; I pray that this water does not fall upon you in the manner of temptation, lest it brings forth memories like a torrent causing distress and illnesses to others.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	E of his love he is determined to go with her in her illness and lies about her death, and so because of the intensity of the emotion that arises from his own illness, and due to the prolonged nature of her sickness, and for fear of the sickness which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	The one who gives you the power to create and speak is that wisdom; hoping for that health, your sickness becomes harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Then do not let greed lead you to that which is the path I've described; and may your caution outweigh desire and your rapacity; and never assume any reason for it without certain knowledge that verifies what must be done, and with whom a commendable success will follow.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	In the treatment of all your illnesses regarding prognosis and indication to which healing is converted, therein you shall find help for achieving fame and memory, glory, and praise.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh Lord, hear us, our Father in heaven; guide and direct your children to the paths of truth and protect them under Your care. Amen.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	The following chapter is distinguished by the order in which it appears after the previous chapter on Cauterization, regarding the treatment of head injuries and associated issues that you may require assistance with or find necessary for your knowledge.
Capitol primier.	First message.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	The radioactive content in the water found in a child's bottle.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	It is said that this illness causes fits in infants during their weaning period and when the queen (mother) has her first child, she experiences seizures.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	Some claims are made without apparent cause and which cannot be substantiated.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	In Hebrew children I did not see this disease, but in the offspring of all those whom I saw succumbing to death; thus it seemed to me that my labor was in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	The child had hair so wet that his head was completely drenched, and the hair on his head was always so magnificent that it could not be contained due to its greatness, and moreover, the moisture increased inside of him until he became extremely ill.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	Is this humidity added between the chain and the bone, or is it added after the bone to the collagen?
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	In this case, if the humidity is between the gland and bone and the abscess is small, you should make one or two incisions on the top of the head at a distance equal to twice the length of the fistula (the track) so that it runs along the width. This will be the shape of the spatulum:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	If the humidity increases and the crack is larger, then according to this method, there will be two cracks. This statement seems related to some kind of process or phenomenon that involves physical changes due to environmental conditions such as moisture levels affecting materials, possibly in engineering, geology, or material science contexts.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	If the humidity is ongoing, it's an indication that you will see your eyebrows turned upwards entirely and water dripping when you squeeze them as if wringing out a towel, and not because they are slightly damp.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Describe cómo hacer una marca en el lugar donde está la cabeza de un triángulo usando tres rayones siguiendo esta dirección:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	The text appears to be in Friulian, a Romance language spoken by about 600,000 speakers worldwide primarily in the northeast of Italy and parts of Slovenia. Translation: "The herb has been used throughout history for various medicinal purposes; it helps cleanse all types of dampness within the body; strengthens cracks with threads and feathers; encourages water to rise above on day three, detaching malaise from tents, and unblocking the head towards balance; and eases pain in members confined to dry foods low in humidity, where they are comforted and healed."
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	E is another method of incision, which I consider more important the size of the abscess and water collection, as some cases occur in the occipital region or behind, right, left; therefore pay attention to where you make the incision so that it appears close to the abscess and replenish with fluid. It is best done according to what is most feasible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	He observed that the inspection did not split the artery and increased flows of blood, as well as removed bad health due to this flow of blood through the removal of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Capital II.i, also known as the United States Capitol, is a prominent building located in Washington D.C., serving as the home of the United States Congress and embodying democracy for the nation. It is situated atop Capitol Hill at the eastern end of the National Mall, near iconic landmarks such as the Washington Monument, the White House, and the Lincoln Memorial.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	The dissection of the arteries that supply blood to the ears, also known as carotid branches.
Capitol segon.	First Runner-Up Capital City.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	The heart of the issue is that cough suppressants and expectorants should not be used simultaneously, as they are outdated methods and do not contribute to the healing process when taking medications; instead, these early stages focus on those two major blood vessels.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Hence comes the skilled healer who knows how to treat those diseases that plague his own kind, and skillfully uses strong herbs for their relief; and attentively examines each vein; and notes which nodes are located above any swolnish spots, as well as where they become concealed beneath the skin in certain individuals.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	The archery contest is about to begin and I decide which one should have the advantage of choosing their position beforehand and that's how they ensure a fair competition for all participants.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	If it detaches the plaque blockage from the vessel and pulls it towards both directions of the branches.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	E is the length of the incision that accommodates two cuts adjustments; when any vein is not clamped, blood flows out and causes a pulsing ejection, which then jumps through frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If your earring is not pierced in the lobe, cover it with three inches of fabric and try to securely attach it; then insert into the hole.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	What is the volume of a cone with radius r and height h? And for the lack of his son and his maidens he got no more cows or sheep, and all that was left he sold according to the value of the illness and the recovery from his joint pains.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"E advises against the use of this medication during pregnancy; therefore if you become pregnant or suspect that you may be pregnant, do not take this product without consulting your healthcare provider."
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	A proper strain of the plague can cause dark spots and swelling on the skin, as well as pus-filled blisters in severe cases, while an improper or weakened strain may result in milder symptoms. Appropriate hygiene measures are essential to prevent the spreading of the disease, including washing hands regularly, avoiding close contact with infected individuals, and disinfecting contaminated surfaces. Additionally, proper treatment involves seeking medical attention as soon as possible and following prescribed medication regimens.
Capitol .iii.	III. The Capital
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	The removal of the arches that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	In the past, many people migrated to these lands because of agricultural humidity and for a better quality of life in the lakes near the temples; or due to the ancient strong and seemingly healthy soil. Moreover, they were cured from various diseases through medicine and water that were not contaminated. Nowadays, we have observed an increase in these illnesse
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The manner of the operation and extraction of such evil influences involves the use of a specific ritual object that is prominently displayed in your palm, although it remains hidden to most people due to its potent nature.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	If you are skilled in the occult, use herbs to soothe your pain; and apply either oil or water within the archery bow'aturd area as it appears.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	A long time ago, in a land far away, there was a magnificent kingdom ruled by a wise and just king. The people of the realm lived happily under his rule, but beyond their borders lay an ancient and mysterious forest that held untold secrets within its depths.
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	To unlock the code and access the archive within which you arrived, please proceed by placing your hand on top of that stone panel over there and pull it open. Then go inside those higher doors through which you extract the scroll (or parchment) that was left behind and discover the tunics lying around, from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If Mays' artery is very slender, he winds it around the end of a rod, and cuts off one part from it according to the length needed for the ends of the extremities to be tapered, and there won't be any leakage of blood, because if they are not divided, the blood will seep out completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	A proper drainage of the waste from your sink is crucial for maintaineing hygiene and avoiding plumbing issues. Here are some steps to ensure effective drainage: Within three days.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the arcade is great, there are hours of work to be done on that place with double faithful support and long cords, without letting it decay in front of the consolidation of the flood and subsequent overflow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	A prophecy, the surplus between two harvasters; and strike at that time or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you want to perform a caustic procedure on it, make incisions along the margins of the tool so that they are slanted and insert therein into the desired location for the surgical work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	F is better than malady or fever in this case as it indicates a mild inflammaturm; therefore cauterization can be helpful for those causes that favor the final stages of humidification, and so it is more appropriate during convalescence.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	A cloak surrounds the removal of old arches that are in place at this site, and stands over them gracefully fashioned from powders, as well as carefully prepared medicinal herbs to help preserve the flesh and provide comfort within their healing properties.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	While performing autohemotherapy, if there is any leakage of blood from the injection site, now you should try to stop that bleeding by applying pressure with a cotton wool or gauze pad, and strengthen your hand tightly over the puncture site.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	If there is any cause for that not to be at your disposal during those hours of rest, the room should have an air conditioner with a strong cooling effect so that the humidity feels reduced and it's tightened accordingly.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	The reason why it is more dangerous to extract arsenic with this caustery is that you will cauterize the vein in two places because the caustery has two spouts; and since you have sealed both ends, whoever moves, a spark enters and splits the vein into two parts as long as it's elongated between its extremities, so they are not held together with this caustery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	Yes, this is the form of a cautionary tale. A cautionary tale typically serves as a warning to others about the consequences of certain actions or behaviors through narrative storytelling. The structure and purpose can vary depending on the specific culture and context in which it's told.
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	Let's denote the sharpness of the two knives as S1 and S2, respectively.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the knife is too blunt that it has two edges, it's better to use one with sharp edges as soon as possible in any task; do not sharpen the blade hastily.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Then in those cases where there is swelling, it's due to the heat of the fever and the flesh splits greatly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than all others and I highly recommend it.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Let S be the space between two walls, which is equal to the thickness of wall D.
Capitol quart.	In the United States, a capital quarter refers to one of four divisions or districts within a state that serves as its administrative center, usually housing significant government buildings and offices. For example, Washington D.cuartel is the capital district of Puerto Rico. The term "quart" could be used metaphorically for any similar division in other contexts.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Treatment of Acute and Sour Coughs from Pine Hues
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	In the case of those with acidic tears and the veins on top of the forehead test not bleeding for any medical reason, sometimes their faces begin to redden and feel a sensation as if crawling ants were roaming around them. The skin from such exhaustion is so dry that it cracks like old leather; scalded pores result from tearfulness, ancient wounds mixed into the healing process of these conditions, without any relief coming from this treatment method.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	Command to create an illusion on your face by drawing lines across it and then making three evenly spaced incisions along the length of your forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	"The length of the tear duct is determined by two measurements: one according to the distance equal to the width of the nose at the location in front of the forehead; and the second following a small measure of the movement of the lashes which are on the lacrimal bone, and the third from the other side."
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	Focus on the beginning of the arches which are at two levels and extend your jaw from the continuous development of both lower jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	Each space of any material is subject to the same amount of three adjustments.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	Is it a piece of sponge, cloth or bed sheets which dry up the blood?
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	A prop between the two pointed tips, which is the shape of this incision as follows:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	In the second stanza of this poem, we find ourselves amidst the grandeur and solemnity of magnificent temples. The poet seeps into the essence of these divine structures, exploring their spiritual significance as well as architectural brilliance in awe-inspiring detail. Here's my translation:
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	The entire text between the two specified characters is "le cipher which is over the letter o". This phrase lies between the first and second instances of 'x' in the given sequence.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	A proper translation into standard Italian would be: "La striscia deve attraversare questa spaziatura ed entrare nella prima incisione per accostarsi ad un altro strumento chiamato coltello, che ha una lama affilata."
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	The eagle pauses on that high branch as it gazes upon the flesh adjacent to its talons, and the length of the lion'nuts goes into the bone, while pushing that object which reaches the crack until it separates all teeth that descend from the head to its gullet.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	The water continues to flow along the crack and seeps into another crack nearby.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Collect the amount of blood that flows from a cut by pressing around the area with your fingers until you see bruises forming. This method is commonly known as "digital pressure" or "manual compression." However, remember this technique should only be used in emergency situations when medical help isn't immediately available and it's important to seek professional medical assistance as soon as possible.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	In the tiny cracks and crevices of an old house, a small amount of dust settles; it rests upon those delicate particles formed by wind and rain, and as it does not become contaminated with mold spores, cleaning becomes easier.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	E in the third day of May, people make the offerings and show great enthusiasamo de agua atu dia della tabeza or dell'occhio; approprio cura aque mai encontri basilico o alloro e altri erbe che le piaghe si sanano.
Capitol .v.	In the United States, a capital refers to the city or town that serves as the seat of government for its respective state or territory. The U.S. has five federal capitals in addition to Washington D.C., which are designated by Congress and serve as the locations where members of Congress meet during their sessions:
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	About the treatment of grief and sorrow, descendants from those mentioned in Chapter One.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	Those who suffer from chronic constipation often experience the following symptoms, which become more severe over time and include:
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	The best remedy for those suffering from this condition is to command the evil influence to approach your forehead, and then proceed as follows: make a small incision at the width of your thumb (and begin with an incision on the left temple, entering into the right one; let it pass through to the bone undernenath them. The fragments you encounter are remnants of the evil spirit, which must be crushed). After exposing that part of the skull, proceed with caution.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	The entire blood vessel is pressed or clamped between the two lips of the incision using an absorbent sponge or a sterile cloth pad.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	In the past, it was common to use powders containing lead and mercury without knowledge of their potential hazards.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	Evan's poultice has made the swelling begin to decrease, and it seems that he is starting to use his hands to feel whether there is an increase in natural flesh; moreover, with the drying regime of which I have spoken before, so as if you took flour from wheat for two parts and colophony for four parts and mixed them together, then made a paste and applied it on these plagues, it will aid the natural flesh.
Capitol .vi.	The English equivalent of "Capitol" is "Capital," which refers to a city where the government meets and conducts its business, or it can also refer to a building where such activities occur in some countries like the United States (e.g., Capitol Hill in Washington D.C.). In other contexts, "capital" can mean wealth in the form of money or assets owned by an individual or organization that can be used for investment.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Healing water from the fountain in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The reason why cat'hem on the ears is one of four essences; it may be a kind of mineral stone or similar to rock, so like iron and copper, or it is from a plant such as lentil or bean, or it is fluid-like water and wine with their resemblances, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Then, if any stone or other similar cause enters the ear, and it is not believed to be one of those causes that typically occur in the ears, stop the flow of water into your ear, and if you sometimes see the stone, distill it at a lower temperature or by gently warming it up. Administer the extraction using proper conditions and induce sneezing, and fill the nostr
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	An ear infection can occur when water or wax accumul cuidar the auditory canal, and pressing the ear towards unusual positions due to these reasons may lead to this condition.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	Sí que no está mal empleado el tiempo cuando se aprende a tocar un nuevo instrumento musical. Aunque parezca aburrido o difícil al principio, con práctica y paciencia puede convertirse en una habilidad gratificante y muy entretenida. Este proceso requiere dedicación y constancia, pero la satisfacción de tocar melodías que antes no podías es inmensa.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If you are a beginner, I recommend starting with the basic exercises and gradually adding more subtle variations to double your progress in no time!
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	If it's not an ear infection, use a bulb syringe and gently insert the tip of the bulb into the outer part of your ear canal. Close the container end with tape (use medical adhesive or other appropriate materials) so that only the bulb is exposed. Squeepressing the bulb will suction out the liquid from the ear, but be sure not to insert it too far in order to avoid injury.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	A prop to your attention is the following report regarding troops advancing with water supplies that have been replenished.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If Mays is not properly treated within this methodology, before long she experiences intense pain or requires an apparatus which involves using straps for her arms in large quantities; then placing that on the extremity of her arm and adjusting it carefully around that area with sufficient padding.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	A prop is inserted into the ear canal and helps to allenate discomfort while removing excess moisture from the ear.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	If it's not due to any of the causes we have listed, then your discomfort could be caused by an external hemorrhoid thrombosis or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	In the first phase of this ear piercing procedure, you must sanctify your soul from the venial sin and excess with the method of virtue; then, choose the desired earlobe to pierce, and make a small incision in its upper part using clean tools at the designated spot.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	The moon has an opening through which light passes to reach the rock, and if the rock is dislodged, you may use appropriate instruments; and with that crack at that moment apply velocity (force), and care for it while it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the swelling on your ear is caused by one of the fats you consumed and accumulated, in time it will heal and disappear. However, if you don't pay attention to its growth, eventually it may take a more subtle form according to this pattern:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	The patient had an accident at work and sustained a hearing loss of that kind, which he suffered in his ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	E cannot make water that you think has become moist from the heat of the air; and pause it at various heights, and place it in shallow vessels. Then either by licking or gentle stirring as said we have, because it is extracted completely from its original state.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	In Mays, the water that enters the ear canal causing an itching sensation at the start is considered as well; and fills up its entire canal almost to the end, then drops over that canal where the water is located, if for this reason it's removed, it works. If not, hours take large stones or lions according to the length of the said ear canal, and they lie on those in the heat a little while; then the patient inserts one of those into the opening of his ear and jumps over that rock onto another rock, which hits against the first rock inside the ear canal.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not cease, as long as there is water within the stone that has been poured out entirely.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	I have always had a preference for writing with either paper or a typewriter. In the ear, he placed one end in the cold and extended the other end to a flame that was being burned with the most intense heat.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	In E prop met i altre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aigua sia fora-gida, e stratz aquel am canula aissi com desus es dit de la peyra extrasora.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of animals entering in that earlobe, if it is a small amount, so much more difficult and similar, as we have said in the division; but if it is a large quantity which causes an obstruction at the entrance of the vein, then hours must be dedicated to the extraction of such objects and cuts, and the cause for this is much more serious than all other causes that occur in the earlobe.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	In the extraction of wormwood oil from the ear, when you apply that warm water we've mentioned in the division and treatise on distillations, do not disregard the care with which you observe your ears to the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If there is any cause related to worms here, it may be due to activities carried out or actions undertaken previously in a subtle manner. However, if no such cause exists, the symptoms manifest through a narrow and slightly wide tube-like structure as follows:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Fever, on the subtle extremity enters the ear according to the quantity it is subjected to and then causes a bad illness; hence, one must apply warmth there with force, which may cause many swellings until all parasites are expelled from the body.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If Mays does not obey the rules of this treatment and closure in the circuit with wax as we have mentioned; then administer the distillations which had previously been used in the treatment of vermin, and you will find them in the section on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	S is the musical instrument through which this song flows, and it takes its form in the shape of an oval that holds the medicine. This description refers to the lute, a stringed instrument with a pear-shaped body, often used during the Renaissance period for melodious expression.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Within a narrow field of silver or gold lies a small circle, slightly above.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	So it's also essential to have the container in its entirety here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	If you wish, take the rod and wrap it around the extremity of your painful joint, then gently insert a cannula into the concave part while administering oil from an herb or water-based solution through the tube - which is in the ear. Gently push the rod above the joint and compress to allow the oil to be expelled into the concave area of inflammamation, so that pain relief occurs as a result of this pressure massage technique.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	The water that's poured into the ear is already heated by the fire of a small flame.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	Here is the translation in English: "E looks at you and makes sure that the reason why it was dripped into your ear isn't too dirty, because ear medicine doesn't like water."
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII. The U.S. Capitol Building
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	The curator of the Aurélie'n archive.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some blows to the head of children may occur during childbirth in non-perforating cases by accident and in men, leading to swelling inside the earlobe due to bruising or tissue damage; this swelling sometimes happens at the upper edge of the helix where there is no tearing, causing some bleeding.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	From what happens in the lower part of the body, which is not understood by weakening grip, are major health issues difficult to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	In that place where you can find peace, pause your ears from the noise of sorrow and look upon it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If you're referring to a subtle and seemingly unexplainable phenomenon that takes on an elusive form like this, it might be related to various concepts such as quantum entanglement in physics or the idea of "mysterium coniunctionis" (the mysterious joining) in psychology. However, without a more specific context, it's challenging to provide a concrete explanation.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the earlobe is small in width and one side is pointed while the other isn't, and it has two light brown (light chestnut) stripes that don't curve near the helix.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	If the octopus is fully cooked in its ear or in the body of the sea creature, hours ago it had subtle and deep flavors that were easily absorbed throughout all the flesh.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	The ear wax accumulates in the ear canal, hours before it softens and melts down with a bit of warmth, and then is pushed towards the entrance of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	If you're suffering from ear discomfort due to water exposure, the condition tends to ease with time, but because of the urge to sneeze, it may seem like there is an increase in pressure; and be careful not to aggracuate by touching your ears.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Apply in your ear drops daily as per the amount of ampoules you have used in the Egyptian remedy; and do this for several days until you are sure that the inflammation has subsided; or take some oil, heat it slightly, and drop by drop over your ears every three hours. If at times the ear feels blocked, wait until after using the drops when it clears up, then switch to another type of oil (preferably warm or rose-scented) that you have wrapped in a cloth beforehand; continue with this method until the ear is healed completely.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	Mays decides to use the sponge method for bloodletting, submerging a cloth in running water and placing it on his earlobe while he applies another remedy that restricts the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII: The Capital City
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	The curare plant, from which the poison is extracted, causes paralysis of the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Not all eyelids of humans have lashes; some are missing them entirely and appear bare.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	In this piece of Galician-Portuguese medieval poetry, we have a speaker who addresses his beloved and urges her to listen carefully before making any decisions. He tells her that he has no ill intentions towards her, but rather deep affection. The speaker implores the object of their love to consider their relationship closely and not rush into anything.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	When you experience a cut or bleeding gums, using a styptic pencil can help stop the flow of blood through its precise and delicate caustic properties.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best treatment is to apply a cauterization promptly upon injuries and bleeding wounds; when properly cauterized with heat, these irritations are destroyed and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	In the United States, the term "Capitol" typically refers to a building where legislative bodies meet and conduct their business. The most well-known capitols are found in Washington D.C., including the U.S. Capitol Building which houses both chambebers of Congress—the Senate and the House of Representatives.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Care of great importance that comes to the eyelids of humans.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	The eyes appear swoleback on the lids for some reason that is gathered from increased size and hardness, and therefore it is referred to as "Motos veguadas."
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	Addition of heavy moisture on the lower and upper edges of the eyelids.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	The opera that we have considered is that hours seem shorter if the growth is significant in such a way that apart from the eyelid, it appears unsightly at all times; and the cause of this is negligible.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Go up over that crack in the wall, and grab onto it at all times for easy climbing, then pull yourself up and detach from the rock.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	Maybe it's just that the beginning of your eyelid doesn't close fully so light enters from time to time without any specific cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is large, adjust your stitches accordingly and ensure it heals properly inside.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	If it's little, you won't suffer too much from that angry one left to restore and reincarnate.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	The greatness is diminishing from the parts of the eyelid surface, now you see a drop in size, and hold that amount for once more, another which you can choose to begin with, and then apply it all over, and if the eyelid through negligence is lengthened, there are no reasons for this.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Begin by washing the fruits and vegetables with salted water; then treat them with clean water that ensures they are thoroughly rinsed.
Capitol .x.	French: La Maison-Blanche (Le Capitole)
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	From the cure of the blemish on the eyelid below the lid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is characterized by gray patches that are born in the eyelid folds, mostly during childhood; it exacebores the glands of those affected and leads to excessive tearing. As a result, they cannot bear bright light due to the accumulation of tears on their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	E for thou to turn thine eyes towards those jesting about the past at all times, and upon those who sleep; and there are the lashes of their eyelids with moist overbrows which have previously concealed, and a sense of imminence is apparent in his eye; and how much thou pressest the place amiss for thy words, thine accusations enter into those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	In any surgical procedure where the illness causes numbness in a particular area of your skin and pain is felt alongside it, create a circle containing all the affected parts proportionally to their extent, then place that over those areas, cut through them following your description, ensuring the incision width does not exceed that made during flap surgery.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	In the event that you break your arm before reaching my courthouse, I shall proceed with divorce procedures as stipulated by white's form of arbitration.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Without doubt, I'll provide you with an explanation of the various parts that make up my design and functionality within this platform, exploring both left-brain (logical) and right-braeright brain (creative) aspects.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	Look out that you don't adjust in the crack and the spatula doesn't come to your aid, because of which those lowly steps won't reach their goal.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If Mays doesn't appear at your side in the beginning of the crack, then adjust into the crack a small shim that will facilitate the process for your ally; and proceed as we have described earlier; and provide submerged cloths in cold water to soothe painful areas and rest them there.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	So, the water flow and pressure within a crack play an essential role in rock weathering as they carry away that moisture from the crevice which then freezes causing further disintegration of the rock.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A proper care must be taken within that area which is safe.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	Maya decides to visit the church altar, where she places her hand on it and prays for healing until she feels better.
Capitol .xi.	Capital XI is the eleventh studio album by American rock band Europe, released in May 2 cuál año de 2012. The album was produced by Carl "Pope" Mansell and recorded at Temple Studios en Malta. It marks a return to the band's classic hard rock sound after their previous albums leaned more towards pop and country influences. Capital XI received positive reviews from critics, who praised its energetic and anthemic songs, such as "The Second Day", "Spirit From The Shore" y "Speak Your Mind".
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	In the management of chronic heel pain, various treatment options can be considered depending on the underlying cause and severity of symptoms:
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	In some hogs, the natural and old hairs of the eyelids are replaced with new ones, thus preventing various eye diseases such as frequent tearing and softening of the eyelids along with other issues that cause destruction of the eyebrows known as trichiasis. Treatment is carried out in four ways:
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Then let me know if you wish to cure your vision in the eye that is on your left; If so, bring forth a needle near the edge of that eyelid and make sure it's clean. Now carefully pierce with the needle just above where the lashes are located and move the needle towards the outer margin of the eyelid as close to the lash line as possible. Rotate the needle along its axis while applying slight pressure until you feel a pop or movement. This may improve your vision if it was weak in that particular eye, but be warned: this is an ancient method and not proven by modern medicine. Please consult with a qualified opherinist before attempting any procedure yourself!
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	In the anatomy of the eye, the conjunctiva is the thin and transparent membrane that covers the inner surface of the eyelids (tarsal plates) as well as the anterior part of the sclera up to the lacrimal caruncle within the lacrimal canaliculus. It protrudes slightly from between the eyelids, sprinkles a small amount of mucous or tears on the surface and forms a slight fold over the lid, resembling the shape of a mulberry leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, he pointed out that the shape may vary according to the degree of elevation of the eyelid; for it is varied in men, where some have such an extent that they require a significant incision on the eyelid based on the amount by which the eyebrow is raised.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	The tear ducts begin at the lacrimal sac and continue into the lacramal minor.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	Indeed, your wrinkle is just like the natural folds of a leaf, as well as the majesty of a king's beard.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Ecclesiaster met the pencil on one of the two corners of the nostril and carefully erase that entire area, then gently adjust the split using a fine wool brush or lamb's wool thread. Cleanse any remaining blood, if necessary; otherwise, leave it as is.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Properly stitch the wound within three to four days or sooner, and keep it clean.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	If the tear duct is not blocked, apply a sterile suture and treat any dryness with water. Because the eyelid is elevated, seal off the tear duct and add support as follows; however, use stitching technique D for older patients.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, in his own case he is concerned about the illness, and it's for a good cause, not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	E is an unusual tree in Germany and it has seeds on the eyelid that look just like little cherries. Whenever it raises its eyelid, with three small movements, it separates and then gathers them again according to this pattern:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible here and there, to have the nails, and here it is unequal, place a gouge in such a way that has a file, and put this file into the middle of the figure, then insert the other file adjacent to the major lacrimal groove, and adjust both files so they are equal. Then raise up those parts which have been uneven just as much as needed. Raise the entire body above where you've done the adjustments in such a way that it is now level.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A is adjusting the two lips of the seal as it is stitched up and heals within.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	May I attend to your abscess? Whether it's due to an ingrown hair or a skin tear, I will clean the abscess gently and apply some antibiangs as well as ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Some eyelashes have been transplanted to the eyelid where their hair has been converted, therefore you should use an eye drops solution that we previously mentioned for irritation; however, stitching may be more required in cases of greater severebility.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	L'ataxina2-cogna cannas és un element molt important en el desenvolupament cerebral, especialmente en els procesos de plasmejament neuronal i conexió entre les cellules. En anglès, es diu "Ataxin2-cognate cannula".
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	The following text is a translation of the Catalan passage into English:
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	He has inscribed his name upon the limbs of various parts, as you have the threads in your hands.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	I will add a certain subtlety underwater that superficially affects the edge of the whelk, and strain the cannoli pieces with some firm pressure, then leave it for several days until the shell hardens and becomes more compact; after which you may remove them into a bowl.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	If the storm lasts too long and breaks all three towers, it is urgent that they repair them as soon as possible before the tide comes in.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When I'm well-rested, my eyelid is raised and the hairs don't poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	Esta és una mica que sigueix el procediment per fer cañes (banyoles) a través de l'estructura indicada. Per a iniciar, hi ha algunes etapes i materials essencials:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	The height and the width of this area are not measured in meters or feet.
Capitol .xii.	"Capitol XII" in Roman numerals represents the number 1200, as follows: C = 100 and XI = 11; therefore, C + X + I + II (or CXII) equals 100 + 10 + 1 + 1 + 80 + 10 = 1200.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	The rise in prices of sharp stings when the peel is hard, which means that costs go up when demand exceeds supply or production becomes more difficult.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	Not many natural oils are both tough and harsh, yet pungent; however, when used properly, certain delicate essential ops like lemon balm, yarrow leaf, or lemongrass can be applied carefully in the right proportions to achieve a subtly effective mixture.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	Let S be the length of the shadow cast by a pole due to sunlight.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	A gentle approach to another'amicable companion, here I share brief thoughts with you, and utilize the nuances of that which you wish for.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	A brief break let's ease our minds from the past, and bask in the sunlight so that your work may be revealed, for it is a subtle and intricate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	E - Firstly, carefully introduce the needle into the fold of the adjusted eyelid that requires suturing and needs a pair of tweezers. Then make sure that it penetrates the eyelid promptly as you extract the excess natural skin.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	In the event that more than one or three items are introduced into Alice's property without permission, this act will be considered as an intrusion and a violation of privacy.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	A proprietary solution is applied to your eye, and then it naturally spreads onto the eyelid as you blink.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Mays is afraid to attack the enemy without his sword as he composed it from memory in those past battles wherein he used that weapon with great effectiveness against them during the times of war.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Eve goes to the garden of Eden where she finds a shining apple hanging from the tree. She waits four hours until her husband Adam is asleep and faithful, then steals quietly towards the tree, plucks an apple, and eats it without making a sound or leaving any trace for two or three days, so that God won't notice its absence at His own place and overlook what she has done.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the hair is too short to braid with natural hair, you adjust it by lengthening the braids accordingly or that which you enter in order for them to be extended enough space and then elevate that section.
Capitol .xiii.	III. The United States Capital
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	From the care of extracting it, which you see above in the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	He goes to the optometrist'pertatorque, which is a contraction of the eyelid that contracts towards itself, either towards its right or left side, due to poor closure caused by an injury or laceration or cauterization; it is called entropion and this condition can be natural or accidental. It occurs as a result of wound healing after injuries, lacerations, or cauterizations, or through other similar treatments for these types of damage.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation involves dilating your nostrils and separating the lips of your nose, then pausing in that spot where there is a thin layer of skin, and tying those together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	In the place where you apply remedies for various causes that dehydrate, be cautious; for if you use it again at any time later on, it may do more harm than good as there was never a fire to extingnish previously.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	In that case, use fenugreek seeds and soak them in water along with some lentils; or a herbal decoction which has become liquidy and warm up to the elbows, then submerge your feet into it and cure them therewith.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The translation of the text would be: "The aim of my therapy is to restore you as much as possible without being rigid according to the shape that was initially formed."
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation we have performed is nothing more than a correction of the spelling and grammar that does not revert to the original form as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capital XIV. (In Roman numerals, "XIV" represents the number 14.)
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	From the cure of erythromycin that is applied on the edge of the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This is an allegory that has been made in the fold of the eyelid, which is properly called a rima. It is neither naturally occurr grooved nor created by chance.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Mays's fall is caused by a pit, ridge or scar, or through other means such as cutting.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The procedure for taking the needle is that you use a double-ended one and keep it in your hand; then pass it from the left tear duct through to the right, enspecting that both ends of the filament reach the extremities of the skin.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Extend the canoe beyond its usual length and cut off that excess at both ends, then make incisions to widen it sufficiently for stability.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Then if the lid returns according to his choice, you are right; otherwise, take the ray and pause at that in the split figure, and make that convert the eyelid, and there appear two gaps as a feature of the lower eyebrow.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	"Let S be the set of lengths of two given line segments that form an angle in a circle, and let E represent the value obtained when these lines intersect, forming a figure with their respective angles."
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	No, "landa" is not a Greek letter. It appears to be an Italian word meaning "land". The Greek alphabet contains letters such as alpha (α), beta (β), gamma (γ), delta (δ), and so on.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	The fat in that particular quantity which remains from its height of being soaked with water is when it seals the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	A physician adjusts the separated parts and those with wool, as well as those requiring water mentioned in soothing medicines and ointments for healing.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	If you cut a small incision along the eyelid crease following the natural lines of the skin, it will result in minimal scarring and promote better healing after the surgery.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	A prop separates the grape between two lips as soon as they have spoken.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the treatment of gout arthritis, when it causes swelling or pain, that occurs in its operation, according to how it has been prepared from alka-seltzer, and this is in a form of mixed tablets.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	The skilled artisans were able to restore the figure at any time in whichever manner is possible within that period, or close to it, and according to the disorder as they see fit from the operation and tools used under major conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Here is an English translation of the given Latin text, which appears to be a Roman numeral reference (MCMXCV or 1995):
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Adhesion of the eyelid to either the conjunctiva or the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	This eye surgery aims to correct and improve the condition of the patient's droopy or loose eyelid, which may have been caused by aging, genetics, or other factors. The procedure is designed to enhance vision and restore natural movements of the affected eyelid.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	E, to insert yourself within the boundaries of adherence, a substance that is not too thin, having an obtuse end so that any discomfort does not interfere with its operation, and smooth the surface so it does not catch due to its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Let S be the state of your eye before removing the bandage, ensuring that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all adhesions are healed completely upon removal.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	You may use seawater, which you should filter to remove salt; alternatively, you can evaporate it in the sun and then collect the condensed water vapour.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	An adhesive bandage separates between the eyelid and the clear fluid that fills the eye, and pausebecomes an envelope of hydrogel infused with healing agents, and finally, on the third day, it uses consolidative causes to ensure proper healing.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI: The Capital City
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	The infraorbital nerve and the maxillary (upper jaw) branch of the trigeminal nerve provide sensation to the lower eyelid, upper lip, and nasal sidewall.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Asparagus has two kinds; one is nervous and resembles a very subtle cipher, while the other is non-nervous, appearing as white frosted humidity. When it touches you, there'aturally occurs an onset of thirst, and it tends to break off easily without staying intact.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	The tear duct does not match with any of the spices, as it gradually covers the vision and prevents light from entering and moving within.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	May's method of treatment is based on the idea that evil spirits cause illness and reside in your head, while they control your body through your eyes. In this procedure, he raises your eyelids with his hands and then touches your temples lightly a few times to drive out these evil spirits into different directions.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	The thorn pierces the eye gradually and becomes lodged in its edge little by little until it reaches the center of the iris; then it binds to the lens, and extends towards both sides, scraping off the eyelid's edge which injured the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	Two eyes, they follow you from behind the door.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Certainly! Here is the translation of your text from Esperanto to French:
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	In some cases the glacier reaches the ground and extends or melts as we have said, and from there its journey continues with a lion-like shape, which is this form of landform called: a moraine. Glaciers can create different types of moraines depending on their movement and deposition of rocks and sediment. Some common types are lateral moraines (formed along the sides), terminal or end moraines (deposited at the glacier's furthesteach, and medial moraines (formed when two glaciers merge).
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	B) Do not touch the corneal epithelium and seek immediate medical attention in case of a rupture, ensure that the pupil is penetrated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	The recipe you're referring to seems like it could be for a saline solution or possibly an herbal remedy involving salt and other components, which are often used in traditional medicine for their preservative and antimicrobnial properties. However, without more context about the specific ingredients "cief fayt" (which I'll interpret as 'certain herbs') and the intended use of this preparation, it is difficult to provide precise instructions or an English equivalent.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	If the nerve is not tense and you cannot insert the needle, nor does it occur at that specific location, then this type of lump can be cured with medication, and healed as follows as I mentioned in the section.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	Si tu vull separar aquella, l'hora ta obra li donaria malaltia i ens prendrà un llitós Lleó d'agreament segons aquesta forma:
am subtilitat.	Subtlety refers to the use of understated or delicate methods, techniques, or manners in communication, behavior, and artistic expression that are not immediately obvious but can be perceived by keen observation or sensitive appreciation. It involves a level of sophwartiness or intricacy which requires careful thought or perception to understand fully.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And so it is that this rare and precious herb - the henbane or mandrake - can be distilled from its root in that manner at certain times of the year; after grinding down its leaves, one obtains a yellow dye, which then, within the following day, becomes intensely black.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of your text from Occitan to English:
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	It is adviseback on your operation within the context of which you were sane.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The removal of the tear duct (lacrimal caruncle), if necessary due to significant discomfort; and incise only a portion of it at first, ensuring not to extend beyond what is initially cut so as not to cause excessive flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	A proper distillation in the tear duct may result from intense crying or irritants entering through which it is caused.
Capitol .xvii.	In the context of United States politics, "Capitol" typically refers to a building where legislative bodies meet. The most prominent example is the U.S. Capitol in Washington D.cu. It houses both chambers of Congress—the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	The tale of the housekeeper and the water that was born from boiled meat in the pot.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some flashes of light in the canopy of trees are born red, and above that, they hover over the pupil or approach to touch it gently; then they quickly move away from your gaze as though adorned with balustrades.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	Mays' operation is that the disease pauses its course in your body; and then you carefully extract all of his bones and collect all of the affected flesh as needed, and with a forceps or similar instrument. Afterward, you meticulously incise until everything is complete, being careful not to damage the bone from which you are operating.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	E is the mold in which we have previously mentioned the ice shelves that form this capital's unique landscape, and with its small chisels, it captures the shape of each as soon as they appear following the contours of this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	As soon as your wish is fulfilled and you are rewarded with all that carn, the hours complete the taste of saltiness, or distilled in lu polvera roga, it resembles to lu de las medicinas corrosivas, and pauses over le huel foro cotto alegre album de huou entro which is secured against apostema caut.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	If there is an open wound and the person has been infected with pus, and has developed an abscess, then apply warm water to the abscess so that it drains, and repeat this procedure as necessary until healed; similarly treat the affected skin of this type.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, your duty is to avoid exposing the affected area completely - either naturally or accidentally - and not to put any object in it while healing from this operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII: The Capital City
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Gathering wool in the wind.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	"Which tortoises are you asking about? I forbid any interference with their activity and grant them the length of days."
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	It is necessary for you to consider if the pain felt in a certain area is strong and there isn't another illness that causes it; then gather information about that particular sensation.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	Here is the translation of your message in Catalan language:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Spanish: Dos conejitos juguetones, saltando alegres entre la yerba verde.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	The subtle forces gradually erode those veins over time and with each flow, these veins become widened and swirled in the process.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	Be careful not to let the thread pull on the edges of the fabric; and if your work in the morning is facing the sunlight, make sure that only those veins are visible in your work.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	You will have completed your task, and the hours you spent infusing in a glass of green or red wine so that its acidity has been reduced from the grape juice.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Mays do not consume alcohol within this time if possible; during the times you apply all the water needed to allelete your pain, and rest for several days until your pain is gone and you are assured of an abscess being treated.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	A prop is iterating over the user's second that was entered, which was saved as 'sanat'.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	Las formas de las tijeras pueden variar dependiendo del diseño y el propóscuito para los que están destinadas. Algunos ejemplos comunes incluyen:
Capitol .xix.	Ninth. In Roman numerals, IX represents the number nine. The word "Capitol" refers to a building where a legislative body meets or, more specifically in Washington D.C., it is home to the United States Congress. So if you were referring to Capitol Building Number 9, that would be an identifier for one of the buildings within the Capitol Complex.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	The reduction of nicotine levels in the body.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	I cauterize arisates with a hot burn or with acute medicine according to the narration in which it is not healed, hours later, you do not enter into it but make cuts on top of the abscess as it matures, and remove all the moisture that exists within it so that any pus can be revealed undernecued bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then comes the bone in a state of decay and blackness, later you see that it becomes part of another organism. This is how fossils are formed: through a process called permineralization. Over time, minerangs from groundwater seep into the pores and cavities within the decomposed organic material (the bone in this case), slowly replacing the original structures with rock-like substances while maintaining its shape. The result is a stone replica of the once living creature that can last for millions of years, preserving evidence of life from ancient times.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	"E is an especially hard type of steel, and it has been treated with fire, and its surface can be as firmly grasped due to being punch marked using a limestone or alum stone for finer detailing (as in the following form)"
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	That rust on the surface of that old object and the one you rotate among your words, gently rubbing it in until you know that this corrosion is completely gone.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	Aqua vitae makes some wounds heal quicker and also prevents them from drying out due to its moistening and binding properties.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	If the place is healed and looks healthy skin and has detached from its body for forty days, and it does not regenerate or become abscessed nor cause any injury during this time, then you shall know that it is cured.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	Sinew injury is not about hours but rather reducing the gap to fit the bone shape. And you achieve this by following these steps: Firstly, expose the area with surgical scissors or sharp medical instruments carefully. Then, according to this method: [Provide detailed instructions on how to properly reduce and align a sinew injury for optimal healing.]
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The triangle's adjacent side is extended towards the vertex so that its length becomes equal to the hypotenuse in the same way.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	A drop above that on the eyebrow, and a part of it belonging to the lacrimal gland; stretch your thumb slightly downwards, then rotate your hand into the cavity where it penetrates entirely through the bone, causing discomfort as air escapes through it.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then the hour is spent restoring the house with medical herbs, just as you have told me.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	When the flesh and place remain intact, when the matter that was spread into parts is returned to the nose, therefore there is greater doubt about the illness.
Capitol .xx.	Capital letters are used in writing to denote proper nouns, the beginning of sentences, titles, headings, and some abbreviatures. Here are a few rules that apply when using capital letters in English:
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	The descent from the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	The healing of wounds should be completed without any harm or diminution; it is believed that such treatments promote recovery, and provide rest during stormy weather, protecting the wound from further injury; and applying a poultice made of acacia gum, aloe, ointment, and sarcocolla, strengthens the healing process with powdered minerals.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	In the manner of clouds, take sheets from a lion's mane and each sheet is quadrupled in four corners; make those squares.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	A prop of space, some may be placed over others depending on the quantity required.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Apply gentle pressure over those areas with the hardened skin; and turn on the suction to a mild setting for sensitive skin. Apply the adhesive strips tight during the day and loosen them at night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	When relaxing the ligament becomes more flexible, it allows for greater mobility.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	The post about the day and night is as follows:
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the eye wound has been reduced, yes, or not, hours pass applying a poultice of herbs and bandages within which healing takes place.
Capitol .xxi.	Title: "Capitol XXI"
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	From the dissection of the optic disc of the choroid layer in the eye'cuedale (uvea).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When an inflammation occurs in the uveal tract, it becomes prominent and protrudes through the eyelids just like a grain of sand, and its shape is as round as possible, thus causing irritation. To alleviate this issue, one might resort to using eye drops or ointments prescribed by an ophthalmologist. If necessary, a surgical procedure known as uveal transposition may be performed, in which the surgeon inserts a needle into the edge of the uvea on its outer side and places another one at twice the distance from the tear duct. This second needle is then used to pull the affected part of the uvea through the first needle's circuit, tightening it as necessary for relief.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	The original wine grapes, harvested and pressed in the traditional manner within vats of copper or wood, will yield a richly flavored liquid.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	The rain that brings comfort to those within its reach as the storm is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	Some drops join together from all sides around the edge of the curtain in such a way that it forms a circle with minimal gaps, and then proceed to permeate through the thin layer into the eye's anterior chamber, while carrying moisture along the albugineal border, and draining out quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	A proper diet plays an essential role in maintaining good health.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII: The Rise of the Capital'amoors - A Political Thriller in Washington D.C.
De curacio de alconati.	Alconat's Curetory.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness that is called "alconatium" is nothing but the condition described in the old texts and it does not refer to water from springs or streams.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The Mayser's hand must move in such a way that the malady does not linger over the prepared and dressed wound; bring your fingers close to it but do not touch inside, allowing the disease to flow towards the lower parts of the body without hindrance, keeping its light source intact, so the illness proceeds as described.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	If it does not go down, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	If May not be prepared for the descent into the illness we have mentioned, he will experience worsening symptoms in his head and neck area, accompanied by a subtle swelling beneath the skin overlying the panniculus carnosus (a layer of subcutaneous muscle), with continued inflammamo on the conjunctiva and cornea at the crown (entering into this location). If not addressed timely, the illness may extend further.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	As you come out of the distillery, your time is spent collecting water from a source that may have been mixed with honey or simply just water in which barley and flax were already processed.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	B is cured by the other causes within which it heals. (Note: This translation is literal and might not be contextually accurate as 'B' may refer to an illness, and medical phrasing typically differs.)
Capitol .xxii.	"Capitol II" is the second movement of Aaron Copland's iconic suite, "Appalachian Spring." Written in a lively and rhythmic style, this composition captures the essence of traditional American folk dances and embodies the spirit of rural America. The piece is characterized by its energeteic reel that reflects the simple yet profound beauty of Appalachian landscapes and culture.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	From the purification of water flowing down from the source.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	They have added the spices of water to the mixture and according to tradition, it shall be stirred at that time as stated in the recipe.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Lahor's Cove - You shall make sure there is no dispute among your men over a quarrel and let them follow their own will, as you must insist.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	In the eye of his left eyelid, he saw her right hand, if it was there she saw in which is the water; or his own right hand, if it was there whereon the left.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	If the bell is in your right hand, then turn left; if the bell is in your left hand, then turn right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	The edge of the crown near the thickness of the ray in the eyeball is related to that of tears shed by our mother, and it rotates around your right eye.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	A robin sings in the heart of the valley, sensing that its melody has finally reached the ears it was intended for.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	The edge that forms the border of the iris (the colored part) to the transparent cornea is called the limbus, and it'cuesta a region where you can see the colorful hue through the clarity of the corneal coat.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	A person drinks water from the well in which it is located and then throws the cup back down one day later to another, hence if the water descends quickly, shortly thereafter ailments caused by that water affect their vision immediately.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Upon the slightest rain, your break will occur earlier than usual as water descends faster during another wave that precedes high tide.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	So, take some egg and do not whisk it too much, the longer you let this mixture rest, the more easily your hair will be transformed, and start to gently dissolve a bit of clear gemstone salt in the water; then apply the liquid onto your scalp. Allow outdoor light or sunlight exposure for some time, followed by washing it off with lukewamoisturized oil made from rosehip seed, olive, and almond extracts in water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Our hands and those belonging to generations past rest upon the ancient bowl, gazing at its captivating patterns etched in time.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	If you don't obey the rules of chess for its complexity - because it is one of those games that are considered tough to master -, then perhaps you should take up a less challenging hobby. The board game "Chaturanga", which is an ancestor of modern chess with different pieces and movement rules, could be an alternative option:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Then it punctures that particular situation, and you don't want to go too far in the direction of extremes, lest you end up in a subtle trap of unification.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Apology for any inconvenience caused by the previous information provided. We strive to ensure accuracy in our communication and regret any confusion or misunderstanding that may have occurred as a result of our earlier messages. Thank you for your understanding.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	Thank you for your kind words about my work. However, I must caution against the ill effects of sleeping in a reclined position, as it could lead to potential health issues and is generally discouraged due to possible risks associated with this posture while resting at home or elsewhere.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	The sun sets in the west of nature so that its essence can be fully appreciated; it shall never turn left or right from this direction.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	Let S be the sum of the series by its disposition within three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	In that dark and stormy evening, as the rain poured relentlessly outside, an eerie feeling permeated the air. I decided to investigate some unusual occurrences happening around me before retreating back into my dwelling by day seven.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	At the time of sunset, when darkness approaches or shortly after consuming an infusion, stay in the bay for safety.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Alas, the bay where water aggressively and vehementnly flows, drawing attention to a greater extent.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	Maya decides to treat her skin infection with home remedamoons before the seventh day and corrects any fluid loss due to the infection by drinking plenty of water.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Your soul's light has vanished from my sight and rests upon your face in a state that signifies the grip of death for many days; you lie in the darkest depths.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	A proper explanation of that gradual growth and conversation in its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	In the work of Shakespeare's "Macbeth," there are several instances where Macbeth does not exempt himself from certain actions through his vision; instead, he dares to pursue his own course.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	We came upon some people from the Alps, and others who said they had made a fire near Lake Majeur, which caused the water to boil.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, I have never seen in our land a man who possessed perfect water, nor legal drinking water among the free men of olden times. It is possible that this water is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the different varieties of Madhubani paintings that you can find in the region, which is known for its vibrant use of colors and intricate patterns. Here are some common themes found in Madhubabani art:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	The subtle triangle-shaped intricacy and sharp extremity of that iron fence is similar to this one - such a unique characteristic.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Carcinoma in situ of the nose does not spread to other parts of the body.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	There are various types of skin lesions that can be compared to the appearance of scorpion stings or polyps, one of which is called Polypus, as it resembles such sea creatures. This condition is commonly referred to in Catalan and involves abnormal growths on the skin.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	La rosa è una pianta da fiore con petali che sono di solito rosse, rossastre o marroni; ma la rosa può anche essere una pianta da fiore con i fiori non di colore marrone.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	In that place where the lion is neither fraudulent nor crooked, make sure to place your malady between its eyes and press upon the sun, then pierce its nostrcuils with a thorn from there in those fangs.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	In the particle physics experiments, we extract those particles from outside fields and inscribe them in such a way that you comprehend from these patterns beneath which subtle part of one kind exists wherein all matter has already been occupied; if there were no other causes for this separation to be possible, then at present your approach would involve using one of the subtle instruments through which without any cause they could be separated.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	A proper response to an inquiry regarding your interest in water or something else involves considering several factors, such as personal preference, practical needs, and the context of the question. Here'cuo some possible responses based on different scenarios:
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	If you're experieneing a blocked nose and humidity within your mouth, now you can know that it is already healing.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	If moisture does not enter according to the cover, then you will know that it has not reached your outer skin or bones of the limbs from which there is no access due to absorption.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	In times of wedding, do not interfere in any matter of importance and avoid causing disturbancups during the nuptials; prevent malicious meddling that could lead to extremes within the family or due to other causes which are possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	The time has come for them to perform their act, that they cast their fragrance into the channels of their nostrangs as it arrives, and is exuded upon its palate, for many troops make this appearance a reason to attend school, and it's an excuse for those who want to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	The priest places the two extensions of the host over your nose and mouth, and then he administers a small ring of bread that contains Jesus' body into your mouth, ensuring you know it is now in communion with the Body of Christ within the host. (The sentence provided seems to be from a Catalan source describing the administration of Communion during Mass.)
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Take the fresh linen and soak it in a solution of abrasive sand, then let it dry thoroughly for three days or more until it becomes completely free from any flesh residue.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Upon the end of the case, pause at least one week before using a new tube to allow for healing time.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Mays intends to seek treatment for his condition and uses that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	Here's the description of the apparatus for producing essential oils and making remedies in Latin:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	An alchemical vessel of silver or copper, resembling a small open lantern and cup, similarly designed.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	"Make a closed cannula like a reed; the end of the instrument that serves for purge and is flat, exposed; which you hold at its lower part by the handle, with which you draw out the liquid or water that you wish from the secretions and absorbent sources."
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	Here is a recipe for Saffron Bouquet Garni with White Beans and Various Herbs: The Cumfyzes took some bread and cheese, and a few aspirin pills, and heated one of the pills in hot water before swallowing it with his mouth open wide.
Capitol .xxv.	Capital XXV, or more commonly written as "Capital 25," is often used to refer to the 25th edition of a particular series or publication. Without specific context about which capital is being referenced (e.eboxing in literature, political capitals, etc.), it's difficult to provide further details. However, if you are referring to an educational textbook, for example, "Capital XXV" might be the 25th edition of that series. If there's a particular capital or context you have in mind, please provide more information so I can give a more accurate answer!
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	They're not from the same country as us.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The old words are changed into new ones in these translations of the Bible, and it is marvelous to see how they have been adapted for our days when one reads about their rules.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	I place that within the commencprise of your appearance, and all of it bequeaths to you entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	A prop paşa, la loci cu tăiatură medicină căutăresc la cea care este în locul lui.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	Mays if his desire is late, until he has been praised magnificently, then consider if it'aturd, tough, of dark color and with little emotion; then do not touch that man whose feet are gripped by crabs - because many have seen this sign in those who harbor ill will towards the one for whom they have this affliction.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	If the apostema (abscess) is on a lion'annoint it and if its color is not of bitterness, but whenever you wish to do so for the whole of that, at those hours evacuate the evil and ingest them without fear, and cure the person afflicted with water that cleanses and compresses until they are healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Nasal, lip and ear piercings where the continuity is interrupted by a bar or similar structure.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	It is known that when such incidents occur in a particular setting, little faith is placed in those actions except by some individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In case of any injury to those, which you consider fresh and your own blood, then at times adjust the wounds' lips with stitches, and carefully tend to that within which is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips of a saliva duct are merely separated and each is made healthy, cover them with your finger so that no secretion leaks from either end while you do so.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	A approaches the lips to adjust and strengthen them using stitches; then sprinkle dragon's blood on these with three washes (trissat) and place over it a thin layer of plaister or another consolidating plaster, let this be in position for two or three days, afterwards discontinue the tape and replace the plaster and leave that within which are separated to heal by themselves, after curing apply an ointment inside.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The statement seems to be discussing the application of some sort of adhesive or technique in a surgical suture on the abdomnomen. A possible translation might be: "The method of applying the stitch involves adding an adhesion solution as follows, similar to how you previously reported, or alternatively, apply the adhesion solution thusly, as we have instructed."
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	The extraction of that cause which came between the two lips in the departures outwards.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	"Occasionally, small blisters appear on the lips of some individuals in the form of painful lumps that resemble large pimples; some are minor and others are more severe."
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	And it is so that you shall close each of those cracks in the entirety, and apply an ointment to fill the gaps, leaving them covered with a triple-strength bandage so that the wound may heal properly. Also, wash the area with warm water thoroughly, ensebutensicating it until it is sanitized, allowing for proper healing.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capital City XXVIII (Roman numerals for the number 28)
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Incisor infection closely associated with the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Granre of vegetations is a remedy used to treat gum inflammation that tightly adheres to the teeth, which was previously known as an ancient herbal albutol. Therefore, you should suspend using this cream or take it at least once every day and let the healing process begin for your sores and injuries.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	The paragraph is about the application of local anesthetcuous powders or sprays in dentistry. These substances are used to numb a specific area during dental procedures, providing pain relief and comfort for patients while allowing dentists to perform their work efficiently. Common types include lidocaine, prilocaine, articaine, bupivacaine, among others. They can be administered via injections or topical application depending on the procedure's requirements.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	Then that flesh returns, its hours are counted again, and it is resurrectebut the cautery would not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Because of their density, they are heavy.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	On the surface of the teeth from incisors and foremen, as well as between the gums that are closely adjoined, there are slight abrasions, leaks, and some spots of discoloration, which to the gum appears through corrosion. These imperfections are found on smooth enamel surfaces.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore, you should seek solace in your pain and rest the head upon your knee, while grinding your teeth on which those sorrows appear to be grains of sand that are stirred up inside but from them no cause emerges; wherefore it is blackness and citrine coloration and all others that shall be cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If the water you drink at the meal is of good quality, then you're okay; otherwise, repeat the ritual on those bottles for the next day and the following days until the fourth session when you come across that type of water again that you want to consume.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	AI models have different requirements in terms of various forms and shapes depending on how they are prepared for your task.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	E per so quell'affilato tagliente della partita di denti che si trova tra i due lati del rasatura è altrettanto importante. Queste forme di rasoi devono essere prontamente preparate, qualunque forma tu possa vedere subito.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital X-Ternity (Capitol .XXX)
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Tooth eradication or tooth extraction refers to the process of removing a tooth from its socket in the bone, typically due to reasons such as severe decay, gum disease, overcrowding, injury, or impaction (as with wisdom teeth). This dental procedure can be performed by general dentists and specialized oral surgectors using local anesthesia or sedation methods.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	I can tell you that your toothache pain has been completely alleviated and the entire process of its removal was successful because there is no underlying cause that substitutes for the relief when it's removed, as it is a sublime substance involved in excusing the removal of this discomfort.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Mays Cove Quan le Malaltia es forat aquel dent, onament deves tu sigui certificat quina és la dent dolenta, quan moltes vegades vaig el dolor del malaltia desapareixer, i que sigues dins una dent sana. Eradiques aquell i apropa la dolor no cessa fins que la dent malalta i dolent sia erradada, quar ja havem vist això en operació de barbades.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	To determine which tooth is hurting and what you should do about it, I recommend the following steps:
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	A proper technique for applying braces involves using good communication and posture, with pauses between your teeth that hold the appliance to avoid discomfort. Adjust the wire following a straight line without bending it too much or causing significant pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	If no one gets it right away, they should use some tools or resources that make the process easier from the start and help them get started effectively.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	If your tooth is cracked or corrodebefore you pull it, make sure that the thread (dental floss) reaches up to just below the gum line so that it's not tightened during your dental procedure involving that area.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Your work has achieved great success in the entire dental circuit and holds steadfastly to your strength; do not let that fragment of wisdom be taken away from you, returning upon the evil that brings greater pain than the initial hurt.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	E watch that you do not allow ignorant barbers to carry out their audacity and arrogance over the eradication of your plague; for many cases have come upon men great illnesses which are more difficult than they seem, with all their complications or some of those, as well as extracting the affected bones from the skull so that many times we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	A possible eradication of your oral hygiene involves brushing teeth twice daily and using an antiseptic mouthwash, as well as maintaining a balanced diet with plenty of fluids.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	If there is an excessive blood flow due to a wound or after surgery, and the bleeding continues persistcuously like pumped out veins, apply a small amount of zeolite powder and spray it over the wound area; if that does not stop the bleeding, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and tweezebots used during orthodontic treatment should have a short handle, a narrow grip, and be sturdy enough to not bend when working with those that need correction. This ensures precision, control, and effectiveness during dental procedures.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	The translation of this Basque sentence into English is as follows: "Hey guys! If you've taken my previous advice seriously and don't have those clothes folded yet, they should be large enough to fit."
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	The Indian beak-tailed gecko (Hemidactylus garnotii), also known as the faytas or pincerna del Indo, belongs to a group of geckos that originate from India and have spread across various regions. These geckebrings are characterized by their unique tail structures, in which one end is inserted into another through constriction. Some species also possess the distinct beak shape found on the head of an ibis or stork (Ciconia), giving them a strong appearance.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter Twenty-Five Capital Ideas in Financial Markets
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Removal of teeth and extraction of the jawbone fragments.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	The eradication of the tree that has been struck by lightning for any reason must be postponed until it is possible to pause over its location within a day or two after which time the area will have softened; and then apply some wedges or tension rods whose assemblies are connected at the base of an owl called ciconia or vulture, in the form of pliers.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extra moons of their planets are causing tidal waves so high that they reach up to a hundred feet or more.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	If you do not obey this instruction and use these forceps or pliers, then it is necessary that you climb on the roof and remove all the meat using the device which has no name but resembles a small lever used as a pry bar. Its shape looks like this: [Image of an actual pry bar].
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	S is an extreme small glass and it has not been started yet because it was not drunk.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the water pitcher is broken, it's fine; and if not, help yourself with this other instrument whose forms I will describe to you. The form of the first instrument is triangular at its base with some thickness in which there is a hollow space for holding water.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be a triangle and with extremely subtle nuances.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	The following is the form of this tool that has two parts, in which the first part assists with translations between Spanish and English. Here's how it works:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	In my earlier days, I crafted various musical instruments including one resembling an oboe. This particular instrument was quite large and here is its description in English: It features a conical wooden body with metal keys along the front that open tone holes when pressed. The top section houses a double reed mouthpiepit which produces sound when air is blown through it, creating distinct melodic tones reminiscent of woodwind instruments such as oboes and English horns.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	A glass of red wine that is dry or semi-dry, but not too thick and not drunk for its own sake.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	There are other types of musical instruments that have strings and similarly to the others, they produce sound through vibration.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May's skilled and subtle craftspeople created devices for themselves according to the manner that their occupation and various diseases require; as they do not depict nor portray properly with old instruments the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	If Mays broke the jawbone or any other bone in the mouth, or if he/she is bleeding, his/her weight should be supported on that area with suitable instruments and forceps as mentioned in tooth extraction procedures. The following is a brief description of how this can be done:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	E is to be bound by any means, little by little, and held close to the mouth so that it does not escape or flee through its hole; and then appropriately administer suitable liquids as medicine.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May's poultice is a small application of medicinal herbs; at those times use that from the same mixture and its blackness, and apply to heal within it whatever has been cured.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 22. In this chapter, we will explore the history and significance of the United States Capitol Building in Washington D.C., including its architectural design, construction process, and ongoing role in American politics and governance. We'll also touch upon notable events that have taken place within its halls over the years.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of prominent teeth compared to others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	In times when teeth are so prominent according to their natural shape, especially in women and mainly in young girls of noble birth; therefore consider this: if the tooth is not close to another tooth, nor can it be filled or lined with a paste-like material, then that root remains there; rather, if it is not attached to another tooth, you should cut it off using an instrument whose shape resembles that of a pig's tail and made from sharp Indian iron.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	S is your apprentice and he/she has been tasked with crafting a new set of false teeth within ten days for the purpose of replacing an old one that does not fit properly.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the iron is to be sharpeneback (dentin exposed), then use this Indian steel form for its sharpening process.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Let S be the total amount of iron ore in India and its vicinity; let M represent the number of tools used for shaping it such that each tool has a sharpness similar to a file made from flint, which is sharpened slightly over several days to facilitate cutting. And there should not exist another edge as honed and as capable of piercing.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	A prop lines that lie on the sea and ratz (castles) that are located along the coast.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If a transaction is disputed and the language involved differs from those prescribed by this agreement, then it shall be settled in the official languages of that territory, ensebly keeping the original terms intact and preventing any distortion or misuse of words.
Capitol .xxxiii.	The Roman numeral "XXXIII" translastoinates to the Arabic number "33". In context, this could refer to a chapter or section in various types of content such as books, laws, regulations, and other official documents. It's worth noting that while we can provide the translation for the Roman numeral, without additional information on what "Capitol .xxxiii." refers to specifically, it is challenging to offer a comprehensive explanation or details about its content.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	The restoration of good teeth is made from gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	"If anyone suffers injuries to the teeth due to concussion or jarring by percussion or catching, and the wound does not heal within three days despite being treated with medicinal plasters, seek help from a skilled goldsmith rather than a silversmaster. For silver tarnishes over time while gold remains unchanged."
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	E should be taken with great subtlety and finesse according to the quantity that enters between the teeth; and the shape of the piece is such that one should grab the file, then take double its length from both healthy teeth, twisting two or more times around the file as it reaches the other side's healthy tooth.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	I advise you to apply the following treatments within the scope of my abilities as an AI developed by Microsoft, and enhance your approach with wisdom and prudence so that it is not misguided.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	C be the one who guards your faith, for you must not avoid the temptations of the teeth that remain.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	A) Cut the extramission of excess teeth using forceps or tweezers; then attach those in any place where there's a gap and convert them into normal teeth while hiding them between a healthy tooth and an unhealthy one so as not to cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	Certainly, here's the same text translated into standard Romanian: "Aceeași fiecare străin în românește." In English, this translates to: "Each stranger speaks in Romanian."
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	Maya is clumsy or careless; help her in any way possible during all this time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	This is the form of two healthy teeth and a crooked tooth connected like this:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	Whether or not to return the money or goods received in any case of misrepresentation and then having it refunded, that remains uncertain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	I cannot but wonder if it's not the water, but rather the artists who make us see beauty.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	In some cases, fragments of cow bones are suitable for certain medical purposes and they are shaped into the form of a tooth; then placed in the location where a tooth is missing, held firmly as we have described, and remain functional for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	The capital of the United States is Washington, D.C., which stands for District of Columbia. It was founded on July 16, 1n 1790 and has been serving as the U.S. federal seat since October 29, 1800.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	The decree of silence which exists in the language and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This language that follows comes from an ancient dialect or is native to the people for whom it remains unknown, or due to unforcuent accidents through which it has already been established.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation is performed by accessing the opening of the malformation, its cap being present in your mouth; and as it advances, its tongue slides into that crevice according to the width that has been cleared at the tip of the tongue.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	In case there is any stiffness or swelling, and the area has been stabilized due to injury, then gently massage that section with your fingers until you feel it softened; carefully cut through within that length where you have loosened the adhesions so that they are dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	I look upon your wound and pray that it does not become infected, causing the skin to crack open and bleed.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Avoid the remnaturated wounds of fever or vomiting, as well as the consumption caused by too much water; and avoid using a coarse tongue to talk during any night in which you have not yet recovered or regained strength.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Mays decides to let the blood flow, pauses over the white vial of trisulfide; then he lets the blood out, and the hours later he cauterizes the wound with a lantigineous caustic substance that is suitable for application on water.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	A certain cure addresses other causes within which he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Capital .XXXV
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	The removal of a ranula left the tongue exposed.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Some swellings left behind by the injury hinder the tongue from its normal function, and it greatly enlarges while pushing against the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The operation in the laboratory involves examining the mouth of the patient for six months under sunlight and considering the presence of an abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you change the color of it black or white, a remedy that does not eradicate pain will harm hours; do not touch what is cracked.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	If the air is dampened to whiteness and at once exposed it (to a warm place), then split that subtle spume; if you blow on it during your operation time, by noon the liquid will be thick, as long as it stays within a narrow vessel.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"In the case of your work being accepted by you as a complement to me, within which it is washed and dried with wine and salt, then provide that same remedy for other wounds in water wherein they are healed."
Capitol .xxxvi.	In Roman numerals, the number 36 is represented as XXXVI (X = 10, V = 5; so you add them up to get 36). Hence, "Capitol .XXXVI" could be referring to a specific volume or edition of a book series titled Capitol that is either Volume XXXVI or Edition 3n6. Without further context it's hard to provide more detail!
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Extraction of peritonsillar abscesses and those that are not healing in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When a boil appears on the scalp, it is due to sebaceeous glands that are grouped in clusters, called ear studs, which produce oil when massaged with water as mentioned earlier and if not healed, you should consider if the abscess is hard, dark-colored, painful, then do not touch it with a metal instrument.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	If the beetroot is red in color and the skin is thick, do not touch it with an iron knife as this could cause blood flow; wait until it has fully matured before cutting into it or you may rupture it.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If it is white in color and the smell of gas is subtle, that hour could be dangerous.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The procedure to assess the condition of one's wisdom teeth is as follows, after considering your actions and whether or not you have experienced any pain due to a cyst in your wisdom tooth that has fully erupted or decreased at all; also check how long the discomfort lasts during sunlight exposure, if there are changes in your overall well-being and if there is an increase in saliva production. The dentist will then select the appropriate tool for examination:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	S is made of silver or brass, and subtle with a coating.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	First gather the following items: clean water, warm saltwater solution (1/2 teaspoon of table salt in one cup of warm water), mild soap, soft washcloth or towel, and sterile gauze pads if available.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Another liquid that flows from the tunics is exuded by the same organ of which this form is an instrument.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	The forceps were crafted from iron, but their extremities are corrupted; thus the horrifying feature of each one is found in the direction of the other, sharply pointed and beginning with a piece of iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	If this instrument is not yours and you desire the hours of that same hour when one part goes up as the other part goes down: It has been written in verse form like so: As the sun rises on one side, it sets on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	He who has made an incision should make the other following this method of numbness with a local anesthuted injection, and before making the cut, ensure that the patient is well-rinsed with water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	May's endeavour to flush out his blood flow involves using gargles of water from last year's cress or myrtle leaves and similar ones depending on the cause of the stiffness in the blood flow, which he seeks to be alleviated.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	In some gardens you can find roses and other flowers while others have various types of bushes; both offer different shades of beauty, much like the variety found in a bouquet I described earlier when discussing how to select the perfect flowers for it.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	The woman had an abscess in her groin area, which was turning darker and felt slightly painful; the abscessed area became closed off, and she was breathing with difficulty. Drinking water and eating were prohibited to her, and if fever continued for a day or two, it could lead to death.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	The aposteme had grown so much that there were times when the branches intertwined through two trunks.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	I humbly beg for your forgiveness and pray that you may find me in one of the former days, then take hold of that, and cast it away to a great extent, so I compel her understanding from another viewpoint, and thereby obligate her mouth, procure her tongue, and thereby fix myself on that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	In the early hours of dawn, there was an abrupt disappearance of most of her belongings and only a small amount of cash left behind.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	The woman had just woken up and began to drink water, then ate some food. Consequently, I was unable to scratch at all those boils on my hands for a long time, and an abscess appeared in that place, which kept increasing until it became too large.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	I have sought to bring aid and healing to your soul, so that you may attain peace; therefore, I walk among you unaware of what the gods have in store for me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	In Roman numerals, "Capitol .XXXVII" is represented as follows:
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	The incident at the junction where there was a traffic jam.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh affects the throat, it becomes swolaturated and elongated, for hours it is called perpendicular; and if in its early stage, it appears thick and round, later it's referred to as a goiter.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	The Mays Quan healing oil is prepared with the water you have used in the division, and do not share your remedy, for it may be infected if often applied to a wound that remains open and subtle; therefore, regularly apply the substance that has been added roundly. If it becomes long and sanguine, of dark or black color, and is not fully healed, then fearfully treat this ill omen as an indication of bad health.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	He then takes the egg yolk according to the color and length he indicated earlier, making sure not to break it, using a tool that is shaped similarly to his thumb. He gently taps one end of two instruments with which he said were like nails into the cloudy white, carefully piercing through the shell without breaking the yolk inside.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	In the town that does not inscribe what is written upon its natural terrain, you shall inscribe more, my dear child, and alter your speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	In the event of an accident involving water and two or more vehicles, the driver at fault is required to pay for damages within that time period in which they are recovered.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Mays is suffering from a frightening illness, causing him to be terrified of it and making use of an implement in the cauterization process. The instrument used for this purpose is not boiling water but rather a heated metal tool called "cauter." To treat his condition, you should place the end of the cauter near his mouth while applying gentle pressure with your fingers on the device as described earlier. Then, carefully pour hot water onto the specific area that needs cauterization. The heat will help allenate the illness by removing excess blood or other unwanted substances from the affected area. Ensure to use a suitable and precise amount of water for this process.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	The branch of knowledge in which medicine is paused is as well the field of cattle farming; and when one pauses the tools for medicine on the wall, so too does the illness linger over its wound per his own saliva or muzzle to be put on the mouth of that person due to inherent medicinal properties. Therefore, it must not fall from this source onto the ground, and thus heal him.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Go to your mom and explain about the throat medicine, and gently press it against your uvula until you feel a slight numbing sensation from the medicine's sting.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	Take a piece of cotton and wrap it around the end of the ray, then immerse the tip in medicine. Insert the ray with the wrapped tip into a flexible tube that adheres to the tip, doing this for as many times as you want depending on how much cauterization from the grape is needed. Let the area dry and fall off within three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you undergo this medical procedure, the healing process will begin in the area where the vine was cut and started along the border, and purify the liquid that is in the circuit of your body from the medicine; it should be rinsed with clean water, then treated openly to allow drainage and finally sanitized by antiseptic measures inside.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This kind of healing is as effective as immersion and longer in fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Some ulcers are healed with pure water that is as subtle as cauterization and incision, but they can also be treated by the method of smoking out in this manner: recipe for a calming potion includes ysop, origanum (oregano), ruda (rue), shajarah arabica (mulberry tree leaves) camomile, brodiaea and similar herbs. All these ingredients should be adjusted according to the specific situation of the ulcer or some aspects thereof, in a bowl filled with hot water, and it is boiled; then let the liquid cool down moderately, place an instrument made of silver or copper (according to this method) into the solution.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	E is the tip of the tongue in the mouth at the height where the saliva pools above the palate when the uvula appears darkened or discolored.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	"A: It is essential to pay attention while walking on those muddy paths during dry periods, as this can help prevent skin irritation that may occur with the formation of blisters or sores. Blisters could worsen if not addressed properly, so you should avoid these conditions and instead take necessary precautions such as wearing appropriate footweebk to protect your feet."
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	If you don't have this instrument at hand, take one hour and make a cone of hay in the corner of your room so that the mouth of the flue is blocked; because the cone of hay prevents the smoke from entering the room.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	This cure is good for your health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	The removal of thorns and water that sticks to the grater, as well as other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Broken glass or sharp objects sticking in the sole of your shoe, or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Take out that water which is on the surface, over which you cast your gaze, and also place the tongue against an object before sunlight, in order to determine what water is inside the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	The water that doesn't go down and you keep swallowing it secretly in the stomach, make sure to induce vomiting before food becomes spoiled in your stomach; or deglutition of a small amount of mint or lemon juice, or a sip of dry beer; or take a sponge-like seaweed and soak it well with warm water, then press firmly to induce the vomiting, as when pulled from its location where there are thorns, they will also be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	An anglerfish catches a fish and binds it tightly to itself, while simultaneously extracting some of its essence; or an octopus catches a crab and similarly absorbs parts of its flesh.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If you are using a lead writing tool and want to record or take note of those causes we have mentioned earlier in the following format:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	E is indeed bigger than a small one, and in its tail there's a sharp quality that you incorporate into its collar with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	E el aga lle llegeu cap elevat en seu caps, i guarde't tocament del seu or de la gola, perquè encara seguin els seus cos e amaquela qui ensoplesca l'ors o la espina, o que aquell le metge a la seva mà.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, that malaise he caused is worse, due to his knowledge of the cause linked and infiltrates into him, and draws out his instrument on himself, as much as has been prepared within which it should be expelled.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capital XCIX.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Extraction of sanquhar wine from the barrel.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	In the treatment of diseases with water-based sanguisuga (leech therapy), consider the duration of the illness and the severity of symptoms, as well as whether you have used any other medications that may interact. Also take into account if you had previously taken a substance known to increase bleeding risk such as an anticoagulant or antiplatelet drug.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	If you come across the sanguisuga, look for that small one or subtle signs cautiously.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	If the illness is not in your power, place a concave tube into the wound and insert an ignited iron at its concavity; do this until the gangrene has passed away and withdrae from the wound completely. Avoid giving water to the patient for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	A person pours an entire jug of cold water into their mouth and works on it inside there, then washes the mouth with it; they do not spill any drop from that vessel, for a while they savor the water as if tasting its sweetness.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	Mays, if not fortified with enough water after the procedure where they used instruments for removing the tonsils or adenoids, there is a risk of developing infection and complications such as sore throat or bad breath related to those instruments. It's important to stay hydrired and follow any specific care instructions given by your doctor.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Water flows quietly undernee the bridge.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	E is another method of operation in respiration therapy that involves drawing an oxygen bubble surrounded by a canula with cotton at the end and attaching it to a tracheotomy tube; then, you position your mouth near the end of the canula, sealing your lips around it so as not to waste oxygen during inhalation. Ensure that the subfumigation reaches the lungs before the bubble bursts.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	If you do not have symptoms such as fever or vomiting, and avoid drinking alcohol, eat salted foods and vegetables, don't consume water, so it is essential that this regimen be followed strictly. (Translation from Catalan)
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This is the form of the instrument which has been transmitted without much error from Gualeiro when it's seen; and its appearance resembles forceps almost like scissangs, but with some curved feature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	In the city of Guelph, Ontario, Canada, there is a unique landmark that resembles an ibis's beak - it's called the Mohawk Chapel United Church. The chapel was originally built as a fort in 1793 and later converted to its current structure with intricate limestone details dating back to around 1850.
Capitol .xl.	In English, "CAPITOL xl" would be expressed as follows: Capital XL or simply 'XL' if referring to the Roman numeral for 40. However, without context, it is not clear what "Capitol xl" specifically refers to. If it relates to a building or structure, it could denote Capitol Building #40 or an edition of a publication such as volume 4cu (40 in Roman numerals) of a series entitled 'The Capitol'. More context is needed for an accurate translation or interpretation.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which the sum of the speeches is about apothecaries and their trade.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	The multitude of spices, from the myriad varieties, as I recall with fond memory in this book, each one has its own.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	There are various kinds of needles and sewing scissangs used for different purposes, one of which is specialized in treating bruises, as they retain moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second type of injury is the location where accidents caused by things, as thrombosis in the area which is other than an accident caused by clotting in the head or another part; and the accident caused by tissue on its location is different from the accident at the junction. And to each their own treatment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	Fruits of apples are characterized by their various forms, some of which contain seeds that are not pierced but result from the proper ripening of the fruit through natural processes or pollination methods.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	In cases where abscesses are located near joints and have not matured according to their natural course, just like abscesses that spread to the joints, so they are of long duration when they reach such a junction. Thus, it is prolonged within this area that lies in its circuit, causing severe damage to the ligaments or nerves at this joint; therefore, there may be cause for contracture of the affected limb. Or an abscess near the main body part; if you delay the perforation until maturity, it will affect the main body part. Do not puncture through a non-matured one, but rather the one closest to the rectum so that it does not spread and extend towards the parts away from the rectum, causing a fistula or becoming infected during its course, which remains unhealed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	In Cove's view, you know the time for draining the abscess when it ripens.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	The sapo that matures when the pain and fever diminish, as well as the thirst of the headache and increased pulse, along with other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	"E choose the correct procedure for puncturing an abscess that is located at a higher level, resulting from infected swelling and accumulated pus."
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Perforating sores can occur in the long parts of the body or limbs, as well as near joints and muscles; they may also appear on areas where nerves, tendons, blood vessels are located. In some cases, these sores may be found anywhere on the skin, including spots that do not reflect to light. For such wounds, perforation should be performed according to the specific body part affected.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	Mays quan the apostema is in lo loc carnos (in a certain part of the flesh), the hours mieils es que lesses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyertre de lu e de motta sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu (then when you make a puncture in the part of the flesh before mentioned, it is lengthened throughout the extent of the pus and putrid matter therein contained, as well as the edges of its lips being hardened, and also the depth of it).
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Mays aclus apostemas sigui pertinent en l'hora segon el latitúd de la carn o del gos que es ve, o segons l'aigua d'on és dependient.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	As a physician managing small abscesses, I perform minimal incisions or punctures according to the size and severity of the abscess. For large abscesses, extensive incision and drainage procedures may be necessary.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	Other cases where the code can be considered voided and annulled are when it is made in such a way that the agreement or contract is unilateramo, similarly to what happens with agreements made under duress or fraudulence.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	The ones that belong to the segment with three vertices and those in which it is inscribed resembling a pear-shaped figure like the nodes of honeybees.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	F dheo son na tíre aige agus seicheadán agus gealach as fábairt iad siúd le linn an lá atá ar fad leis.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	The type of wound to which I cannot compare similar symptoms as lion's claw marks, is when you penetrate with a flat piercing or surface only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	E when you notice that the boil is large and has caused significant pain, do not attempt to remove all of its contents at once; instead, extract some portion from it in one session, then increase extraction gradually each day, until there are no more signs of inflammation or discomfort.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	The majority of animals strive for life, whether it be a woman pregnant, a young child, an old man in decrepitness, or the animal spirit seeking escape from illness and death; they all struggle greatly against their fate.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Watch this capitol with great caution, and approach the hole you have drilled in which you puncture these boils; make sure to avoid the plague and consider if the boil is minor or flat, then apply your remedy accordingly for a short time; but if the boil is large, and the holes made by drilling are small, then cover it with mead as soon as possible.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the infection has separated a part of the bone or there is an abscess, during surgery you should cleanse that area with cotton wool soaked in alcohol, similarly to how you would wash dishes or rags; keep it dry afterwards and protect it for three days. Then process and treat that spot with the required fluid that may be introduced while healing takes place.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	May decides to monitor his blood sugar levels during surgery. The hours before the procedure, he avoids drinking water and only takes sips of warm tea, then rests with a cloth over the area where previous bleeding episodes occurred.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	May you persist in the flow of your blood, those lands that I manage to govern and care for which I have recommended in certain locations of our free and divided society.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	During wintertime, the location of the acne is on a bunch of nerves, hours before you put powders in your eyes and oil it, and those rest upon the spots.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer and the places are hot, take breaks often to splash water or oil on yourself and all over your body so that everything stays dry during the day, as we have mentioned before; also times when you need to remove scabs and clean them thoroughly, providing proper care with the water that suits you best until it heals.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	As an expert in the field of hematology and vascpressure management, I must clarify that my knowledge on this subject is comprehensive and universal. However, according to the differentiation approach I previously mentioned for all types of hemorrhoids, here are some individual treatment options per severity:
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL-I (41) in English. This Roman numeral represents the number following chapter XLIE (40). In this context, it's typically used to denote sequential chapters or sections within a book or document.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	From the branch of ailments that come to the head region.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the dog's neck area, there are glands that contain tubes which have their secretions; these secretions of theirs consist mainly of nodes and mucus.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	C of their sons are blonde (golden), and those containing moisture resembling lemon.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	Of those which contain moisture resembling breath and glowing like fire; and of those that are rocky, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	En la selección de todos, el éxito está en la extracción de aquellos sin miedo, como debes extraer a los que no causan conflicto.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation on the section of those who wish to achieve that you know about this device, which is called an oscilloscope, in its various forms and how it works.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	The amount of water that flows through a given section is equal to the product of the cross-sectional area and the velocity of the flow. This relationship can be expressed as Q = A * V, where:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	E starts in the section of the line between B and G. Then with the humidity being evacuated, you erase that part which contained the moisture, so there's no trace left at all, because excessively accumulated water returns, if Roman from this cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Submerge the cotton cloths in Egyptian medicinal herb infusions if available; otherwise, use water and salt. Then fill that pot with more water and let it sit for another day, as the liquid will break down all of the residue from that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	In that Egyptian ointment you mentioned earlier and which I gather from your words there were no Roman causes for this film; soon the wound will be healed as it enters into that ointment.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	Si has herido un dedo o una articulaaturay el área está hinchada, inflamada y puede haber un enrojecimientoy sensibilidad, posiblemente con nudos grasos (apostemas), sigue estos pasos para tratar la infección:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	The section has no shape of a cross, and there are rings between its lips on both sides throughout the entire piece, and it emphasizes your virtue in extracting the robe that is connected to it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	My visit to the bakery was unpleasant, let me first recount the hours I spent there.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	In case of an infected wound with scab and healing process as per your description; the scab over an infected wound is indeed lighter, for it contains little blood and less moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Some heads have swol cups (alces) of these ulcers which are in the hairs and in men whom from everything they lack humidity; this cause we deduced about an ulcer on a woman's old head that became as hard, rough, white, so it could not be touched. If anyone were to strike such a bump, it would hurt them severely.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Mays, along with other accidental swellings in the head, this is not the capital; thus as the bumps that appear on children's heads and need to be reduced by shaving their ears, so too should all its surface swelling be treated similarly.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	The excavation of those in the lower section shall be suspended for their safety due to soil instability issues in the lower areas.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	A proper diet is essential for maintain the health that corresponds to your lifestyle.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	From the branch of tuberculosis that caused afflictions in the lungs.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Here are these swellings in the neck and legs, and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body as well.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Here is the translation of your text in Catalan dialect from Valencia into standardized modern English:
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	E there are three kinds of this scrofula, namely: those which contain stones, those that possess moisture and those which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	In the condition where you have good well-being during treatment, when the color of this area that is clearly visible appears to be similar to the color of the nail, it's bad on all accounts and does not belong to the nerve of the thumb or veins, nor to the arteries. It is not swollen; therefore, you should incise the superfebrile part from before the left side of the line G to inside the line B, along with the whole length of it. Extend both sides of the nail up to one inch or more if necessary as mentioned above regarding skin abscesses on the head, gradually increasing the size.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	F is more caution to ensure that the vein or nerve is not punctured.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	E is the unguent you must apply, which does not irritate your skin or cause discomfort; nor should it be applied where it is unnecessary to do so. If you happen to pierce a vein and restrict yourself from carrying out any activity, immediately stop using the ointment for three days or other powders that prevent the flow of pus, then cleanse the wound thoroughly. Let the area rest until the swelling of the boil subsides and becomes softened; then you may resume normal activities.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	Caesar then severed the bond.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	I will return to my task once you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Your inquiry about the relationship of these small cystic formations with each지 to determine if they are related or distinct is noted. Let's delve into this matter. In medical terms, these "small cystic formations" you're referring to could be various skin lesions such as acne cysts, pilar cysts, or epidermoid cysts. These can occur independently due to different factors including genetic predisposition, hormonal changes, infections, blocked sebaceous glands, etc.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	In the case of a significant vein (referring to varicose veins), he may exclude that ulcer due to its origin.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	The olive tree that you have planted flourishes and bears fruit abundantly, and let this gift prosper in your possession.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	"Regarding the completion of the potion that you have already submitted in the Egyptian style, and regarding its preparation."
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	The entire swelling has healed now, so you should adjust the two edges of your lips as soon as possible before there is any excessive scarring.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	If you believe there are excessive wounds due to the severity of scrofula, understand that it is necessary to incise and drain such lesions, as well as apply suture and water therapy as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	From among the cases of scrofula that contain humors, there is one causing superficial perforation in your heart, as seen during maturation of lu, and stopping the flow of water which has sunk below the skin, thus we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	A common approach to preventing rust involves using coatings such as paint or galvanization and similar methods to protect against oxidation damage that causes the metal to deterebrate.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	When the plague is three times manifested in the world, hours heal that wound with a created flesh remedy before it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Title: Capitol xliii - A Story of American History and Politics
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the shears of the barber, by mistake a goldfish was snipped.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Dierius's deeds in this section during the Epilogue are not witnessed by any man on our land who has accomplished such things.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	This is the transcript of the speech by those individuals.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	In Mays and for men who have an affliction, let it be done that the extraction of the epilepsy is removed by water without causing any trembling through all the veins and main vessels affected by this illness.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have staphylocebacterial abscesses in the mouth or earlobe, or two eyelids, when the illness is not in the neck, avoid the use of heat compresses to prevent further damage that may be caused by contamination.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	When choosing which fish to buy, it's advisebly to select the freshest ones from the display that have three concentric circles on them (indicating they are part of a batch). Alternatively, you can opt for those with four small sections indicating the degree of salting. Ensure these sections are inwards rather than outward and choose the location that is carnival-free but suitable for cutting. Here, the flesh will be leaner and free from blood vessels.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	If the meat is very lean, cut off the hours you extend from the thigh of the rooster on one side, and just fit in that part which reaches up to the canal; but avoid using vessels with blood or fat of such causes.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	"Beneath the surface of the river, after which we have reported; it holds significance in relation to the section of the channel that is responsible for its flow and through the course of the water."
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Lassie lost the puppy for a while.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	When the hour arriveby it is renewed at which piercification occurs, add two lips from the dolphin's tail fin and use only that single piece as a barrier.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	A physician is responsible for prescribing medications that may not be consumed until healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	Five days since the infection that we have reported before, it is not merely a swelling of veins due to abscesses, which have now burst into the lungs; the disease has turned deadly and its strength is waning. Now Alcuin realizes that he will suffocate because he cannot breathe on the affected site from his sputum during respiration; however, he might be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	The commander should order a purge to be taken as soon as the discoloration of illness is noticed; and it shall last for three days; then he should command that the purging cease once the person has been cured.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	The one that you saw sitting on a chair and pulling out the hair from her chest, is that a servant who stole some strands of lung wool; I was summoned to the cure's office for this reason and found them just as they cried like a dead person, revealing the wound which was still tender.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	I must admit that she had not been wounded or injured, and the wind blew quite gently as it carried her towards a safe haven where the fire was extinguished.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	The cormorant does not get caught in the net if it does not croak loudly while voting, and approaches close days to return to its original dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	In the debate section, there's no fear at all.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	A thrombosis in the femoral artery occurs when a blood clot forms within this major artery, leading to a condition known as femoral hernia or more commonly referred to as femoral artery aneurysm. This blockage can restrict blood flow and cause serious complications if not treated promptly.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This phlegmon is called a diaphragmatic hernia and it is considered a large hernia based on its size, which occurs more frequently in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	E is formed by two lines that intersect at a point, which can be either intentional (intentional or designed) or incidental (random or unplanned).
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	F is not a natural engineer to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The accidental occurs in two ways; one resembling green knots and the other manner is similar to an abscess which is caused by vessel inflammamoin, and in that there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	In the case that one is accused of possessing a weapon, there must not be suspicion unless in that individual who is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you shall then examine that part and if you find it similar to our fat, and not attached to any of the veins, thereupon you should cut into it as deep as the nodes, and draw out all that substance which appears in its skin and bursa; but if otherwise, thoroughly explore its entire essence, and carefully attend to the place where relief or cure is needed for sanity.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV: The Capital City
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	A slice of the spices of nations.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Remove del's nodes as much as possible and I have already given you all the spices in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	In the context of tree data structures, a "node" and an "exiture with doubt" can be understood in different ways depending on specific terminologies or regional variations used within computer science communities. However, I will explain them using standard terms for clarity:
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	I believe that the excessive condition is characterized by fever and intense pain accompanied by a state of overabundance; and it is completed with decay, causing the current cessation of fever, pain, and heat.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	The pineal gland is not swoln nor feverish nor painful, and it corresponds to the central lion who possesses its own sacred property.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	E is related to the color of the cow's milk, and its taste depends on various factors, much like cheese does. These factors include fat content (more or less), and they are influenced by two main components: quantity of grasses (quar or so) and moisture content. The colors of the moisture can vary depending on what I have described in the division below.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	When you reach the Node healing center, how do you proceed to express your concerns and inquire about that meal during which you experienced discomfort? According to its menu format mentioned in this chapter, as it appears here.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	E is an instrument for examining and assessing abscesses and other swol groins; it involves taking this device and inserting it into the smallest opening you find within the abscess, then slowly moving your fingers until you know that the device has penetrated the underlying tissue.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	Proceed with the application of your second treatment according to the size and severity of the abscess, and take into account that it is located in its vicinity.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	If the current moisture is removed, regardless of its nature, then hours later it will become a dry surface according to what I have mentioned in other chapters about blisters.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	If you find remnangs of old mead in the cellar, know that it has turned sour over time.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	If the dry land area has a cross shape according to this form, it could be represented by an orthogonal Cartesian coordinate system. In such a case, we can consider each arm of the cross as a line segment perpendamo in the plane with two coordinates (x, y), where x represents the horizontal distance from one end of the land area to another and y represents the vertical distance.
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Alright, here's how you can do it in a step-by-score process:
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	Mays is injured in surgery, it's not possible to extract that organ without major complications and subsequent issues; later on, you sometimes have to remove it partially, but then there are always risks of further problems occurrcuing without any cause.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	The tree has a strong connection to the main theme of the book, with only a few or minimal references returning according to the most prominent ones.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you come across a small piece of Roman lead, use it to exting cuisine the storm and prevent some corrosive dusts, strengthen the plague, and pause over any boil that is infected. Cure this other wound while the previous one heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	If you are a big deal, hours to your two-hour appointment will slip through your lips and heal that man who embodebodies water.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	The wind blows from the south-west, or does it not? During your journey and while at sea, keep an eye on the weather forecasts for two to three days in advance of any storm approaching and that causes a break in the wave pattern; then promptly return to untangle what has become tangled around the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI (46) - The Legislative Branch and Its Role in the American Political System
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	The necessary equipment for bending and drilling in a section workshop includes:
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those three types of interruptions - some are large, and theirs is medium, and theirs is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The translation of "La forma de la intromisión grande" from Spanish to English is: "The shape of the large intrusion."
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The Spanish phrase "la forma de" translates to "the form of" or "the way of" in English. Therefore, the translated sentence would be:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The translation of "la forma d'introduir-se petit" from Catalan to English is: the way to introduce oneself in a small or discreet manner. Here, "forma d'" means "way to", and "petit" translates to "small" or "discreet".
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	The use of sulfa drugs can cause severe allergic reactions such as skin rashes, alopecia (hair loss), and extreme weakness due to infections entering through the skin.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	Here are these experiences, and they are called the sons of Beriah. One of them is named Berdiel.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	Three spices make a great dish; one more, and it becomes too much.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The shape of the large object is similar to the shape of light.
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The shape of an oval object or the form of light:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of paucity, the form of light:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	As for the above text, it appears to be a snippet from old Catalan language discussing treatments and remedangs for various skin conditions such as boils, abscesses, fistulas, and buboes, possibly caused by different factors including those related to the bones.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	So fine are the needles again, large and lions, yes very big pins with great hooks which are used to make saddles; they're made of iron, silver or gold, and the best ones are when they're made of copper.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	E is amazed by the experience of black plum, which agrees that for those it's an abundance of fistulas in the depths of their reflections, which are reflected upon them with their own lightness through these reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	Cut into three lengths of oats, a handful of long grains and the others as chaff, according to the width of the tube and the degree of constriction in it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Shape of the large lead experience:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Shape of mixed-metal lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The little plate of experience, or "l'expérience-petit plat" in French, is a metapcuhical concept referring to the idea that we all carry our own unique set of experiences. These experiences shape who we are and how we perceive and interact with the world around us. Each person's little plate of experience is like their personal buffet table filled with flavors, colors, emotions, memories, lessons learned, joys shared, challenges overcome, relationships formed - all unique to each individual.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The shapes of the moons are made up of mounds of grains, some of which have only simple curves like hills and others with three types of granules: large, few and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	Two pears and three spices.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	The ones with one or two curves and those of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	There are three kinds of curves in geometry and three types of surfaces.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	A lot of water is essential in its place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Simple large form - single large shape. In Spanish: Forma sencilla y grande.
Forma de unci simple migier:	Simple past tense form of the verb 'to mix': mixed.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Una oración sencilla en español que contenga las palabras "poco" y "lu": Pocos libros han dejado una huella tan profunda como Lu.
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of an ice cube gram:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of one's destiny, shape of your life.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Una orca (killer whale) y una ballena azul (blue whale), ambas son poderosas criaturamares. Aunque se parecen en apariencia externa, tienen diferencias significativas tanto en tamaño como en hábitat e interacciones sociales.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape with two curves: The form of an oval or ellipse.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Title: Designing a Bicycle Helmet with Two Curved Surfaces
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Shape with two curves or bends. In Spanish, this would be "Forma con dos curvas o giros". The word "uncinado" in Spanish means hooked and doesn't accurately describe a shape with just two curves or bends. The more accurate term is either "forma sinuosa" for a wavy or curvy shape, or "forma de herradura" which describes something shaped like a horseshoe (having two curves). However, if the context calls specifically for a simple object with only one continuous curve or bend, it could be described as "forma ondulada".
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of an ice giant with three curves:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Shape of a semi-circle with three curves.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Shape with three curves, often called a "crescent" or "semicircular" shape. This form appears in various objects and structures such as crescent-shaped mirrors, arches, bridges, and even some types of fruits like bananas or cucumebelonging to the Cucurbitaceae family.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	Here are the types of scalpel blades and their uses which involve cutting off nodes and abscesses; there are three kinds, namely large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Spanish Translation: Gran forma en la escuela del violín
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma della spalla destra (in Italian): "Forme della spalla di sinistra" (incorrect translation). A more accurate translation would be:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Paucael (or paucel) is a type of sword that originates from the Iberian Peninsula, specifically Spain and Portugal. The term "scapel" refers to swords in general, while "paucae" or "pauxe" are regional variations for this particular style. Paucas were primarily used during the 16th century as civilian weapons, although they also found their place on battlefields and duels throughout Europe.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The acoustic meatuses whose walls are sharpened and the others, non-sharpened ones, that is not due to being naturally so but rather because they were made sharp during node excision out of fear of vein or nerve injury; in which case, healing the ailment and bringing about great calmness involves slight adjustment, preventing further incision on the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the different types of soups, made from three ingredients: lamb, chicken, and less commonly veal or beef broth. Here is a basic recipe for each one:
La forma de magda gran:	Title: The Shape of Magda's Soul
Forma de magda migier:	Title: Magdalene's Miracle - A Tale of Hope and Healing
Forma de magda pauc:	Magda Pauck, a fictional character with an intriguing backstory and unique abilities. Her life has been filled with challenges and triumphs that have shaped her into the person she is today. Born in a small village nestled among ancient mountains, she discovered at a young age that she possessed extraordinary powers over nature itself.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	The foggy nights and shadows resemble the kind of scene where a murder might take place.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	E is in the left subclavian vein hidden and on that course to inner and outer parts, whenever you want, so as you wish.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of Spatimis that I mentioned among the various remedries for apostemic puncture, which do not pierce the ill, are three kinds: large, medium and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	Estos son los equivalentes en español para las palabras proporcionadas:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	There are various types of veins from which blood is separated into three different species: large, medium and small. Here they are in detail:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	These sweet lemons have a round shape and are quite slender in length.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	This text is written in the Catalan language and it says: "E cove que sian aquestes specials de ventoses debeu's tenir grans, migeres i poces, perquè pel aques ales absorbiri d’un sang amb una velocitat en necessitat e les hores quan a tu primermànt no és medicina".
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	Enpero no uses aquellas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnosos, así como en las lacerciones de las cabras y de las conejos, y en las laceraciones de los burros, y de las mamillas y del vientre y de los ingles, y semblantes a ellos de las laceraciones carnosas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Some vein sections are copies of other similar instruments in the form of scrolls according to this pattern; by which the blade is detached when performed using lithotripsy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	Some types of turnovers are round-shaped following this recipe format. These pastries, also known as empanadas in Spanish or empanadillas en some regions, can be filled with a variety of sweet or savory fillings and then baked until golden and crispy.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII (47)
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	The healing of men'ebr bosoms which are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	"Some of the milk-bags (udders) of cattle are too bloated due to improper feeding at night; hence, they become flat and misplaced, while the udders in women seem to be inflamed, twisted, and distorted."
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And unto you that desireth water, take the following steps according to this procedure, from the line of B. through to the line groove G.: firstly cleanse thoroughly the entire area; then apply a medicated red ointment generously and lastly adjust and sew together the lips of the wound so it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	The mammary gland is located on the underside of both breasts and extends laterally beyond their outermost borders, appearing as two sectors resembling a lunar figure, with each one being contained within the other in such a way that the larger contains the smaller following this form of lines B.G. The cord (which lies between two labia majora) is to be excised and removed, as well as any excess tissue, while ensuring adherence to previous instructions regarding sutures and powder application required during healing until fully recovered.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If you do not fulfill the obligation of water that must be discharged due to fear of disease and blood loss, you should keep the plague-contaminated garment submerged in warm soapy water and cleanse it thoroughly inside wherein the water erodes and removes any impurebut also making sure it is dried properly.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	From the puncture of abscesses that came before, you've grown accustomebly.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	Apologies that come from the use of spices such as cinnamamoon and cloves, which are said to contain substances causing blisters or skin irritations when applied improperly. Always consult with a professional before using any home remedies for potential side effects.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	In the case of those which contain humidities; and those that contain humidities should be inserted according to this section of the moon line: from the .G. line to the .cuh line. And when all water is evacuated within the inflammation of the disease, hours afterward let it heal completely and then enter into another day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	The appropriate point is where it's both clean and properly bandaged with adequate dressing around the water, so that it may heal.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	If the gangrene of extremities due to spices or scrofula occurs, then you should also treat it as we have discussed in the section about scrofulous swellings.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	If the fire is spreading faster than grass and dry leaves, it should be managed according to local procedures as soon as possible once there has been notice of its outbreak.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX (49) is the title of this section in a book or document that utilizes Roman numerals to label chapters, sections, or parts. In English, "Capitol" might refer to a building where legislative bodies meet, such as the United States Capitol in Washington D.C., but here it seems more like an error and should likely be "Chapter XLIX".
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Erosion by washout that occurred due to rain or through a stream channel.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery or vein is broken and the wall is consolidated on that area, small blood clots are formed, which may lead to inflammation and infection through the vessel; hence when a clot forms within the artery it extends far into the body's organs. And if such a clot moves along with the heartbeat, you will feel its whirring sound.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	The one who comes through the vein is related to the course's outcome.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Section on this abscess is incorrect, mainly in those who have diabetes, and in the armpits, and in the groin, and other locations on the body; it's a big deal that proper care should be taken to avoid contamination, and for those with lymebased or head-based lesions, they must be kept clean and dry.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	In case of someone being injured by the arrow from the archery equipment, carefully separate the affected limb into two sections; then bring both sections closer to the bow and unlace their garments in which it is visible for treatment.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	A master'n apprenticed over that needle and made it penetrate into the other wood, and they sharpened its archery to double on two points—the cause of which I have shown you in an extract from the orders of both temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	A properly placed local heat between two landmarks can be used to generate the necessary heat that is present within a liquid, and thus causing any blood clots to dissolve entirely.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	The health care provider shall ensure that the pain reliever is ingested within one hour of injury; and the healthcare provider shall provide appropriate treatment with sufficient water for the patient to be healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	If you have an abscess in the vein section, after several hours of having your arm exposed to air as much as possible from the abscess area, and then gently re-insert the needle into the spot where you had removed it from your arm earlier, make sure that it penetr
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	Mays fears that they might remove the needle; hence he intervenes to make sure everyone is aware of the risk of infection associated with the first injection and strengthens their immune system in four ways.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	When the gouty swelling occurs at a joint in your body that you often use during the day, limit this excessive strain on the area and let it rest as much as possible.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	A physician carefully examines the fine powder that you have inhaled and then applies the treatment which has been made from certain herbs and oils, ensuring it brings healing within a short time.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capsule A causes a sharp pain in the nerves upon contraction.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Ashy patches on the skin caused by atrophy or degeneration of cells in sweat glands and blood vessels; they appear similar to apthous ulcers when triggered by trauma or overuse.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	C is harvested from the maize of Lu in the places of the assistants or the stalk, or anywhere suitable where the joints are good.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	A is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of the surrounding flesh; it's located in the larger part that is closer to it with strong affection, feeling like an ill appearance of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	There seems to be an error or typo in the text you provided. Could you please provide more context or clarify your question?
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	The water of those who are at the crossrocks should not be contained in a fermented state, as it will quickly turn against them.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	The one with the hat on their head or in their hair has a spot.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If you have a minor burn or scald, cool it under cold running water for at least ten minutes to prevent further injury and skin damage. Remove any jewelcuillt or clothing around the affected area unless they are stuck to the wound. Cover the burn with sterile gauze or a clean cloth until you can seek medical attention if necessary. Avoid applying ice, butter, ointments, or creams on the injury as these may cause more harm than good.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If it's great, take time and patience to mend that which is torn, and repair what has been broken; then sew the wound with care, and heal the one inside who has been made whole again. (This appears to be a Biblical verse from James 5:14-15)
Capitol .li.	In English, the URL can be translated to "capital-list". The domain ".li" is actually Liechtenstein's country code top-level domain (ccTLD). So this specific URL would likely belong to a list or directory of capitals that are based in Liechtenstein. However, as Liechtenstein only has one capital city - Vaduz - the website might be an informational resource about Vaduz itself or perhaps related topics like government institutions within the country's sole capital.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	From the herb "Apostemon," there are healing properties that can benefit both lips and stomach.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Endeveno enclosures of mushrooms growing in the bellies of those and in other parts of their chest, some of which are called gills like fungi, of which the root is subtle but the head is large; and already the lips of these have become wrinkled, and it belongs to small ones and is a sign of magnificence.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	In her belly there were two things that seemed to be fungi; however, there was little difference between those white spots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	Their lips were curled inwards and split apart, with a constant flow of moisture throughout the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Certainly, I reside in one of the counties numbered sixteen and eighteen. On the other side, there are two cats.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	In cases where the wound is dirty and its color pale, soft, or subtly red; apply the operation as follows: if it's a small wound, wash it with warm water and soap; for larger wounds, carefully cleanse them using lukewn warm water mixed with salt. If there are any signs of infection such as pus being expelled from the wound area or swelling around it, apply heat to the affected region using a hot cloth (not too hot) for about 15-20 minutes, three times a day. Also, cleanse the wound with alcohol or iodine solution twice daily, and bandage it well after each cleansing. Keep a watchful eye on signs of infection, such as increased pain, redness, swelling, pus discharge, and fever; consult your physician immediately if any of these symptoms arise.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	"E then the fear and dread cease, beware of insanity caused by iron; instead, prepare a recent lead pigment and strengthen it with that ore, whose edge you have said is sharpest; let him wield it for two days."
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	The metal wire is adjusted within the framework of the lead rope; therefore, do not cease tightening the metal ring at its end until it breaks off and falls apart on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	May's silence is due to great embarrassedness; for hours he hesitates in his indecision, and especially so when he is in the presence of you all - especially those who are pregnant.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It might be possible that you divide the bulk of it, and properly sear that which shall not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	B is the one who will repair that within which lies the solution to the problem.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	He looks at you and warns not to touch that which is of dark color, with little feeling, mostly out of sight because it is potentially cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	Long ago, in the depths of time, there existed a creature known as the kraken - a mighty and mysterious sea monster. Legends tell of its colossal size, tentacles reaching out like darkened shadows beneath the waves, ensnaring ships with ease and dragging them down to watery graves. This formidable being held dominion over the ocean's depths, a fearsome presence that inspired both dread and fascination among those who dared venture into its domain.
Capitol .lii.	In the United States, a "Capitol" refers to the building where a state's legislature meets and conducts its business. Each state has its own Capitol building, typically located in the capital city or designated seat of government for that state. The most famous one is the United States Capitol Building in Washington D.C., which houses both chambers of Congress: the Senate and the House of Representatives.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Treatment at the site of prominence around the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Umbilical hernias can occur due to various reasons such as diastasis of the abdomaturcles when it is located above the belly button; or for fissures in the diaphragm which lie over the upper part, and are surrounded by a loose membrane like other ruptures; or due to sacks that flow from veins or arteries according to their position as described earlier, or because of constriction (coarctation) near the area.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If the boil is caused by a skin fissure and by sediment on the fabric, then for several hours the color of the abscess resembles that of the chestnut; it's like a lion in pain, appearing from various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it emerges from the bud, at that moment of the same water we have mentioned, there will be more intense activity, and as you apply those touches, it is hidden in your words but returns with power; and very strongly, it rises within you, praised for its entrance to healing and vigorous effort.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	When it's slightly rainy outside, the hours are lion-like and not hidden as you press against your mother, neither constrained nor believed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it's by chance, these hours carry the name which appears with a descending black apostrophe.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	If a boil is not drained, it can become painful, swolpressive, and hard, and it may grow in size.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it's windy outside, May's hours belong to Leo.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	The operation that involves the umbilical region is considered if there are signs of hemorrhage, or infection, or edema; this requires immediate care to avoid further complications as described in Chapter One where I have mentioned hematomas due to arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	The eminence of the umbilicus is covered by skin or tissue, which should be extended as much as possible. You must inspect around the entire umbilicus and command it to remain upright on its own, while encircling it with a band (tape) approximately one inch wide over the circumference of the umbilical region where you have previously made an incision. Extend the maximum size of the abscess towards the surrounding areas as much as possible, and firmly secure it within this taped area using adhesive or dressing materials.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	If the abscess has expanded over the length of your limb and you wish to drain it, but you have not touched or guarded it during that time, then at once alert the authorities and urge them to remove the pus from within the body through puncture.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	When you obtain the fabric, those hours were not in vain; now cut off its excesses and create something new.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Mays if you are against the artery or vein, wait until that period passes and then return to your work; then take two needles and insert them into those holes on either side of the lump with force. After this, thread a loop around the swelling in the shape of a cross so that both needles penetrate through it. Then, draw the swelling upwards towards the four points where the needles are inserted.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you wish to do so, take out the needles and read the label inside that indicates how often you should use it; or pierce there where it is thinnest when inflamed and let drop as much of the liquid contained in it into it as possible, right beside the oil-based ointment with which it should be healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	If the umbilical hernia is soft and without fluid or moisture, cover it with a sterile dressing as we have instructed, and absorb any humidity present; then apply an appropriate antiseptic liquid to that area which helps to cleanse and strengthen the site.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter III. The Legislative Branch
De curacio de cranc.	The treatment of gout.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	In the division of specialties regarding cramp and ways to treat it, as well as using iron supplements with caution so as not to cause ulcers; they have also mentioned that cramps can be caused by improper care methods for treating them.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	In ancient texts, some people believed that certain kinds of cramps occurred in places where eradication was possible by removing them completely, just like the crabs which are found in women's breasts or on their back and seem to be limbs designed for extraction entirely, especially when they begin small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	The old bridge is dangerous and worn out; it's located where we can't even reach from here, so we haven't been able to repair it or see any alternatives, nor has anything come close to that point.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The action taken in this regard is based on what we have suggested; that you should abstain from anger and purge yourself of black bile, which causes some illnesses to flare up again, if proven true.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Article I: Definitions and Purpose of the Agreement
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Layla ran swiftly through the sand, her legs carrying her with exceptional speed. She stopped and pressed down on the ground, extracting all of the blood from it, thoroughly cleansing it using whatever tool or instrument at her disposcuase.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If you're experienncing significant swelling of veins or arteries that causes discomfort, after the flow of blood has stopped, apply heat to the affected area until it heals on its own. However, please be aware this is general advice and not a substitute for professional medical consultation.
Capitol .liv.	Capital, the heart of a nation's government and political activity. Often referred to as simply "Capitol," it is where legislative bodies meet and work on creating laws and regulations that shape the future of the country. As an integral part of democracy, the Capitol serves as a symbol of governance and public service.
De curacio de ydropici.	The healing powers of hydration.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have listed, in the division, of water treatment processes and the identifiers for each type of chemicals used along with the treatments using these medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	This is not the species of Althaea solely curing iron deficiency; it's not close to the species of Astragalus or Yponomeuta, which can be deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	I do not recommend this type of treatment for ear inflammamation; instead use medications and do not self-medicate with your own drugs. Consider that if the ailment has been overcome or it is another kind of illness, other than ear inflammation, such as one related to the head or stomach and similar areas, be careful not to treat it with iron, because there is fear over this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you ever experience the severe plague and it is not another illness but dysentery only, neither of infants nor the elderly; at this time, your action to manage the disease should be to increase its spread among your people, and provide extreme care by offering water taken from stagnant pools near thorny bushes as follows:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Let it be in two sharp parts long, with an acute extremity just as the spatula; but however, let it have in its shortness a small and gradually decreasing form, so that in the operation it does not enter within the bag, and leaves behind nothing.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	In the opinion of E, yawning is generated by the diaphraghem, which requires you to lie on your side near the navel for about three minutes after each set in order to facilitate proper breathing while lying down.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	The generation of hydrocephalus is often associated with brain injuries or infections during pregnancy; your left side below the navel has been affected for three months.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	Seedling growth is dependent on the melting of snow, so your section should be in one of the right places.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	In the section that you are discussing, it is crucial to avoid unnecessary topics at that place for which things do not run smoothly there.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	A proper drill pierces the entire canal and enters into that section, then lifts your hand to place a sealant between the canal and its shaft, and you remove that. The quantity should be equivalent to one drop or less.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	A proper hole should be dug up to the point where water is reached, and it must have access to the water source.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Aquí t'en prou una en català, seguidors de l'estil d'un "instrument" o format especícu:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	A silver semblant cannula is subtly made of silver or gold and leather laths. In the lower part of it, a small stud has been set; on its sides are three studs - two from one side and one from the other side. The extremity of it is cut off like a feather quill, as depicted:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	E is the lesser-known appendage of your supreme ruler, an armillary sphere; when it points towards water, hours later it will release water into the instrument, thus draining an amount from the vessel at that precise moment. If you drain as much as possible within that hour, you'll avoid the evil consequences for your spirit animal or suffer a fate close to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Mayes removes from there in proportion to the amount of virtue possessed by him and according to what he means through your good intentions towards the virtue of his soul and the kindness of him.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	C extract the instrument and turn the valve, which causes it to be slightly closed at first in order to regulate the flow of water that is channeled through the tube, then instruct you to adjust according to this method.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	C is an instrumental tool used to measure the water quality at different times and locations, providing information on various parameters such as temperature, pH levels, dissolved oxygen, turbidity, conductivity, salinity, and other substances present in small quantities of water over a few days. It also helps detect errors that may lead to significant changes in water properties.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	If you fear illness and see a large amount of water in the sky, bury that person's coffin near wet sand, and sprinkle salt on it, then leave it under the sun for long hours; treat them with drying medications once they are cured.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And it was observed that after the surgery on the stomach and removing of the melena to facilitate water extraction, according to what I have described previously, there were improvements in hydrasterization procedures.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol LV is the largest of Virginia's three capital cities, serving as a hub for commerce and entertainment within Fairfax County. As an urban center located in Northern Virginia, it contributes significantly to the region's economic growth and offers numerous cultural attractions alongside its bustling city life.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Regarding the condition of children in which there are non-passage locations for urine flow, known as Vesicoureteral Reflux (VUR).
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children were born from the womb of their mother and their mixed bloodline was not pierced or is too tightly bound, or it does not belong to its rightful place.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Once upon a time, in a land not too far away, there was a magical forest where extraordinary things happened. A place where animals could speak and plants had secret wisdom to share. It is here that our tale begins...
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	A sharp pause in the middle of that silver and golden key, for three or four days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	E, the volume of urine passed was increased and red; and then he returned that one.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you don't close the faucet properly, it might be that the urine which runs over the place doesn't clean this hole.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	The juice of the root which is strained should be applied to a leaded cloth, as mentioned earlier, for several days until it becomes enlarged.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	In those cases where there is an obstruction to the urine outflow, which causes that of such individuals who are born and for whom it is their fate not to be able to urinate at times as they raise their penis during erection, so that the semen cannot reach its destination according to proper functioning, leading to a condition often called retrograde ejaculation. This is not general for all men, but rather because the sperm fails to travel correctly towards its target.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation for this disease is that you must have it affecting your back, and then extend your left hand toward the tip of its tail, and firmly grab the head of the tail's knot at the base where it connects to the hindquarters. Do so as if you were using a quill pen, making sure not to break any part off, because that would make it appear like there is no head on the tail, which could cause confusion.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	In your blood flow procedure, there are many accidents that occur in this regard; so pause the current that cuts off the blood and treat the wound within which it becomes healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI (56).
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The passage you've provided is written in Catalan, and it appears to discuss symptoms related to a medical condition affecting the foreskin or glans penis (cap de la verga). Here's an approximate translation into English:
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	The falsely accused butcher stands in the marketplace, a paragon of integrity and excellence. His meat is of the highest quality.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	C of those two is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	A non-malignant tumor that is small and subtle may undergo ablation within the entire area; and an appropriate procedure will be applied over the affected spot with a fine medical gel; and then, it will be treated using a suitable method to ensure full healing.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	If the mole is malignant, of great concern, cover it immediately and consult with your doctor for possible treatment options like surgery or radiation therapy.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	In Mayo Alba's foreskin is not circumcised and one part of the foreskin enters within the glans, while the other part remains outside; therefore, you should remove Albater which enters into the glans at the time it becomes consolidated; now treat that remaining portion, because when treating that swolatury prepuce, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	"In the past, we have allowed for disrespect and mockery towards the genitals of a Negro man with black hair; hence you shall not seek to degrade him or corrupt his virtue furthermore. Let us instead use honey on this matter as previously used in making bread from wheat flour and millet, which nourished our ancestors."
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Cure that one care and the other care within which is healthy.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Mayes has an unusual flow of blood; therefore, the doctor performs a lunar cauterization following this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The cutaneous lymeborne virus is transmitted through the bite of infected midges and can lead to skin lesions as well as brain inflammation when it becomes systemic.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	The tip of the foreskin is corroded and destroyed completely in an hour; immediately cover that you insert into the flesh of the foreskin a plastic tube so that it prevents bad urine flow.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the case of adhesion between the foreskin and the glans (and this adhesion does not occur in that of which the foreskin is loose, and over it circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to a fissure or abscess) one must excoriate with a blunt spatula until the lichen has dissolved and the entire head of the glans is freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	It's difficult to discern those exquisite times of the scrotum when you tear off the cap of the penis and the foreskin; so it is that the prepuce, being delicate, is easily pierced due to its subtlety.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	A prop is inserted between the foreskin and the head of the penis to create a slit (the one that has been soaked in water previously) so that other layers do not stick during circumcision.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	A propria cura, il debitore deve adempiere all'obbligo entro la data prevista dal contratto.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII (57) of the United States Constitution, also known as "Capital," addresses the location and construction of the seat of government for the U.S., which is the federal capital called Washington D.C. This chapter specifically deals with the establishment, governance, and control over the federal district that would host the nation's central government institutions.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	The miraculous healing of children and the care for those affected by circumcision complications.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not the solution to continuity nor other plagues: however, with its relevance to our operation and our will, and due to that inherent in children, it is necessary that we assign them to better operations and simpler methods losing less health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	They say that the ancient people did not practice circumcision among those who were free, because they didn't use it in their own laws. The reason is simply that we have acquired through experience that most artisans and barbers resort to circumcision using a razor or scissors; they also utilize lime with a needle and grease for anestheseby.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	Ecclesiastical traditions dictate that circumcision was practiced in various ways throughout history and did not always result in better hygiene or health benefits compared to other methods, such as the use of a razor for hair removal, scissors for cutting off pubic hair, clippers for trimming the penis skin more closely, and even using the glans alone.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	The E-circumcision procedure performed for alphabetic reasons, which is digital and used by surgeons, does not guarantee the prevention of penile extremity issues; in fact, it can sometimes lead to severe complications during surgery.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	In the opera company there was an incident, but it did not affect your performance.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child's skin is naturally light in color and many individuals maintain this trait without any need for bleaching methods; I have seen such cases myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	The translation of this text from Occitan (or Provençal) language into English would be:
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The first method of operation is that you should primarily be attentive to the child who understands a little; rather than simply telling him what he needs in his piggy bank, and reading it out loud to them again tomorrow.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Here you go, I'm pleased about the entire possibility range that is your scope wherein you received your intelligence.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Certainly! Here is the translation in a formal register:
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	Firstly, take the herb (pennyroyal) to your mouth and blow on it in your hand, then put that which has fallen out into another container; meanwhile grind up the water infused with pennyroyal until it is powdered.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	A small sign will be placed on both sides of the document doblado, with another smaller sign below it and your name along with contact information following the previous paragraphs, ensuring a clear distinction between two sections.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here's the translated text from Catalan to English, with proper punctuation and capitalization:
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the "forfex" (scissors) that changes shape is typically referred to as an adjustable or pivoting scissor. In Spanish, this would be called "tijeras ajustables" or "tijeras con pivote". These types of scissors have a mechanism that allows the blades to open and close, which enables them to adapt to different cutting tasks with precision and ease.
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Some scissors are not sharp and others are indeed very sharp; the length of both blades is equal to twice the length of their handles in the same manner.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	The error in your translation is that you have not provided an accurate and complete rendition of the original sentence. A better translation would be: "Mays's mistake was a profound escape from the intrinsic code, or parting with wisdom."
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	In order to solve the problem you've presented, it appears that we have some text in Occitan (a Romance language spoken in parts of France and Italy) along with a mathematical instruction involving equality. However, without context for what "la tua hora" refers to or more information on how this is related to an equation or inequality, I'll demonstrate how you might solve a simple algebraic equation for x under the presumption that "la tua hera" represents 'the value of x'.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	If you can't keep it in your pocket, hours on end will wear it down and cause dents over time.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	Mays should have his dressing removed three days after the abscess was drained with a needle, and then he can reapply it when necessary, while carefully excising any excess tissue that may be hindering healing. He should also avoid using that part as much as possible during this time.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	Look at the tip of the rope; that's where we won't go this time.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore, take care of that water which the rain has solidified from the dust particles that we have mentioned in the treatise on dust.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If the branch falls within due measure and obeys unusual directives, then it does not get noticed by him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	E may's cure all ailments that have been told to exist by consuming the water within its sacred pool.
Capitol .lviii.	Here is the translation of Capitol lviii (chapter 58) into English:
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Retention of urine in the bladamoeba.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladpressure caused by obstruction due to stones or congestion, or by ulcers or tumors, and similar conditions mentioned earlier about the treatment methods in that section.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	If the urine is not passed and it becomes as if a stone were in the blad grove, you should suspect that an illness has seized upon its kidneys.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	A prop comes lies on his back and extends his stomach from behind the shoulders downwards, while the illness tightens his throat as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	During the hours of daylight, strain on the bladpress causes expulsion of stone fragments towards the back, so that urine flows freely.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	It is not dissolved in water; thus it has been said with great force that the remedy should be extracted from its instrument which is called a syringe, of the following form: made of silver and subtle lion's mane (i.e., tube), similar to the length of an earring wire approximately 50mm long, with its subtle nozzle at one end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of draining urine from the bladebag consists in taking the sheath off and inserting it into one of its lateral extensions, ensuring proper fastening; then insert the extremities of the bag between the urethral folds, if necessary trimming any excess lambskin. Then gently slide the catheter through the meatus while pushing with moderate force until you reach the bladder opening and secure it to the skin around using an adhesive bandage.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	He places the burden upon the shoulder, and strings his bow with a quiver of arrows and an arrowhead on both ends; also some olives and salt.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	"The procedure involves placing the catheter gently into the urethra until it reaches the bladder; and then inserting another catheter through that to drain urine out of the first one, making sure it does not cause discomfort or pain, but if done improperly according to this order, there may be complications."
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	Over time, the wool becomes contaminated as urine seeps into it.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Apply ExtraZ Aqua to the affected area and rub gently; do not get it on clothing or bedding, and use your finger to apply within a few minutes after urinating for best relief from bladder discomfort.
Capitol .lix.	Capital LIX refers to the country Liechtenstein, whose official abbreviation is "FL". The domain name ".lux" has not been assigned as a ccTLD (country code top-level domain). If you are interested in finding more information about Liechtenstein or its internet presence, you may want to explore using .fl for Liechtenstein'cuccle.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Qualität von Klistier, einschließlich des Clampedras und der ähnlichen Instrumente, die mit Wasser in Resonanz stehen.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When dealing with a bladder ulcer or abscess, blood clot, or severe bruising in that area, and you want to drain fluids and medications into it, using an instrument called a cystoscope is the method. This involves inserting the flexible tube-like cystoscope through the urethra and into the bladjar; allowing for visualization of the bladder's interior, detection of abnormalities or lesions, and performing procedures such as fluid drainage or medication administration directly to the affected area. This minimally invasive approach helps in treating urinary tract issues with greater accuracy while reducing recovery time compared to open surgery methods.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But on the other side, she is deaf and mute.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that old tale, there were three crossroads: two from one side, just as often.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the case of a cold liquid, in which it is immersed and its second quantity that fills up that space is added to it, within what cause is drawn from those humidities, so it's attracted, and when it's expelled, along with water being attracted, according to how naphtha condenses at the battles of sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	To drain moisture from the bladder, insert the tip of a catheter into the moist area, and draw out that water which is pushed to the surrounding parts because the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the catheter.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	A) The infection of the urethra is often due to contamination from the surrounding skin (after mentioning that we have discussed this in the previous chapter); and it pulls moisture with water which causes moisture there, leading to discomfort.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the "cristeria" that is subtly mentioned and for which the bladder is cysterized refers to a cylindrical or elongated shape. In this context, "cysterization" likely pertains to medical procedures involving the bladder, such as those used in urinary diversion surgery where parts of the intestine are repurposed to create a reserve for urine due to issues with the natural bladder. The resulting shape after these types of surgeries is typically cylindrical or tubular.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	The sentence provided appears to be in the Franco-Provençal language, which is an ancient Romance language spoken primarily in eastern France and western Switzerland. Here'n its translation into modern English, we get:
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	In order to remove the moisture from your cloth diaper and dry it out using heat, follow these steps:
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	The horse's hoof is adjacent to the rider's leg.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	The air enters the bladder through the urethra, where it meets moisture and expands to reach the discomfort center that this moisture has reached within the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	If the vesica is not present in your urine, you should drink plenty of water and follow a balanced dieet; then, pierce that area with full force along its circumference; and insert a catheter firmly into those openings just as they revolve around; thus adding the circle wherever it needs to be added so that you rest in the liquid which you desire from humidity, oilseeds, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Approach to that place on the device and do as follows in order to simulate how you did with the bladder, expressing your aim so that moisture reaches the bladatur.
Capitol .lx.	The United States Capitol, also known as the "Capitol," is a historic building located in Washington, D.C., serving as the home of the United States Congress and where both chambangs of Congress meet to create legislation. It's one of the most recognizable symbols of American democracy and represents an important part of the nation's history and heritage.
De extraccio de peyra.	Stone removal or rock extraction involves the process of removing rocks and stones from a specific area, often for construction purposes such as road building or landscaping. This can be achieved through various methods including blasting with explosives, crushing machines, pickaxes, excavators, bulldozers, etc., depending on the size and type of rock, environmental considerebility, safety measures, and other factors.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have discussed the classification of stone types in urinary tract stones and their differences, as well as the distinguishing characteristics of each type. These include kidney stones (renal calculi) and bladder stones (cystoliths).
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	They have told me that the stone in which cat surgery is performed is a limestone quarry.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	The stone that is formed in the urinary bladastereems to be the one placed inside it.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	In summary, the exposition presented offers a condensed overview of the key points discussed.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	The stone is mostly formed in the bladebladder; and from its signs we know that urine excreted by the bladder resembles water in subtlety, and appears on that sand; and when trouble arises, it causes painful twitches and movements; and thus you see it comes out with grains like those of a pearl.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	E is the healing of children in that area who have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult cure for the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	The young people have moved to that area where there are more job opportunebles.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	D of the one whose stone is larger and whose coloration is lighter; And if it is small, it is contrary to that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Come, let us go to the church of that place where they will celebrate the mass which exorcises the evil spirit and removes all the fissures within its walls; for those cracks sometimes prevent the effectiveness of the stone used during the exorcism rite.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	The stone descends to the bladder and sometimes moves around or jumps out from its location.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Alike the most skilled sculptor between his masterpieces and those less esteemed lies the difference in how they portray their subjects; thus let the entire composition incline towards the latter sections.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	He's all about that life and everything related to it.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	If you feel the rock in space, soon your heart will long for a piece of it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If there's no cat nearby, put your right thumb on its index finger and say the following incantation: "Lemures of all evoked by this gesture, come to me!". For a sick child, or miga for an adult, insert that hand into their buttocks.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Questing of the stone path, lies below your told tale.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	Slowly, the dough will gradually rise towards the edge of the bowl.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	A conditional agreement upon which you have referred is hereby revoked and any items outside the scope of this document'amoji are excluded from it.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	The priest commands the minister to press the bladder upon his chest; and he commands another minister that on his right hand extends the fingers towards the departed souls, and on his other hand rewraps the cord which is then below the fingers, in the place where the sectioning occurs.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	A propinquate space is the region or area that is in close proximity to something else. This term describes an adjacent or nearby location, often implying closeness and direct accessibility between two objects or areas. The form of the phrase in Spanish would be "espacio próximo". In Catalan, it would translate as "espai propinqu".
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	In the area between your genitals and anus (not in the middle of the body), to the left of the situation depicted, is a rock. You should place this rock atop that location, enscribing it with appropriate symbols as you deem fit. Then create a transverse cross-section through the rock so that its width remains sufficient but not overly large, such that it fits well and does not exceed what's possible based on the size of the inscribed area.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	From the stone there is one that has an opening and cracks, making water drainage difficult in this way.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	The water of that clear stream bears the image of a lion and is round; it's made with lead and has an untrustworthy taste.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	If it's the one with the angle and margins, fit into the slot.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	If you are not as well-versed on the matter or do not have a strong understanding of it, when placing something upon stone (or similar), ensure that the sharp end is facing downwards and does not lift off from its place; also, be careful to avoid using any delicate instrument with a curved pointed tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot cure that wound directly, try to strengthen the area around it and if there is blood flow, tie a small piece of cloth soaked in vinegar with some honey on it.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	The stone is still one, so once at mealtime you insert it into the urethra and gently push upwards until it reaches the bladardium; then you push a small amount of water in as well to confirm if there are more than two stones present.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	If the stone is very large, ignorance of its characteristics may lead to two negative consequences causing harmful disease: either it remains in place or fragments due to continuous drainage of urine, because the location is not completely solidified.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	May sells an amulet that is believed to grant the wearer protection from evil spirits or harmful forces outside of their body, or to aid in breaking free from mental blocks by removing negative influences and promoting clarity and focus. Please note that this translation might not capture the exact meaning as it's a fictional concept; also, "forfex" seems like a typo for "fortes," which refers to forces or strengths.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Once you have completed your task, fill the bowl with aloe and dragon's blood essence, then strengthen it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	The tree stands tall over there in the fiery red and oil color, or with roses and running water, but only to protect itself from danger.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	A prophecy of illness fell upon his soul, and he did not reveal the warning within until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	Cumulus clouds have drifted by now; I uncork the water jug and pour some oil, then apply either a clear sunscreen or a gentle lotion after which you will feel refreshed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	Mays, if you come across an open wound causing infection, inflammamo, and redness similar to as though your blood vessels are frozen, and from there the pus (which is known for its discharge into urine), insert your mentioned remedy onto the wound and extract that fluid. This way, the Roman remedy induces corruption of the bladder and subsequent putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	The water and salt solution of various plants, along with the essential fluid that suits one's healing condition within which they are cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	A nurse checks in at all hours of the night when you require assistance and adjusts your medications as needed from the supplies located on-site.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"If the stone is small and it is at the base of the bladeroid (vesical), and you have urinated on it before, then as for now I am prescribing water to be taken in advance when going to sleep; however, if the pain persists or worsens, take a steel-bladed instrument such as a stone carrier:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	A sharply pointed outer branch, topmost, embedded in the trunk.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	A propensity to fall, and he had left the mark of stone there just so that it wouldn't return to its bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	A) The drill interferes with the wheel, making it difficult for the operator to retrieve that stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	The text you've provided appears to be in the Occitan language, also known as langue d'oc, a Romance language spoken in southern France and nearby regions. Here is the translation into English:
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	In the early morning of his departure from home, he noticed a small patch of ground with some stones nearby that appeared to be wet with dew and animal waste. He felt unwell after coming into contact with it. According to an old superstition, if one steps on such a spot in the early hours when animals are believed to have marked it, they may fall ill.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	If this curse is not related to any device in your possession due to some reason that prevents you from using it, then place a faithful stone and another one on top of the first one.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	A stone rests against the rock in that river between two banks.
E aprop extratz aquela.	"A prophecy, indeed."
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	B) He proposes the removal of boundaries and global sanctions, which have been imposed by war.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	The stone does not need to be removed from the bladder as long as it does not return to it; the other side does not have to either, for when the stone is dislodged towards the ureter's wall, the kidney returns to its place and regains strength.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	The water is essential as the oil above, that you lift up the rope from underneath, or else return and pay your respects as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Capital XVI (Roman numeral for the number 16) in English refers to a city or town that serves as the seat of government and administrative center of a country, state, or region. The term "capital" comes from the Latin word 'caput', which means head. In this context, it signifies the most important place where key decamoancies occur such as legislative decision-making, political discourse, and executive functions.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Stone extraction from women's rocks.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	The women are not often born in Peyre.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Mays shall not approach any of those stones, as the cure is difficult and it's forbidden for unskilled healers.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The old man is four years older than the woman, who is twice his age now.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The second part is four times less than you cannot find a woman who can discern if she gets married to the doctor when she's pregnant, or among women who have already been married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third one doesn't have a woman beside him in this piece, mostly the operation is on me.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth part of the rock section below the stone is longer than the width of the stone itself, so it causes instability in that area and poses a risk.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	La fame di Maya conduce alla ricerca dell'amore più alto; quindi, prendi un libro scritto da una donna brillante e istruita. Non è difficile trovarne uno.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	If you are lacking that tool nearby to hold and manipulate the material, present a matured lady in the form of a woman or a woman who has recently left this craft from the same category of tools.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	At this very moment and I command you to do everything that I tell you, starting from the inquiry about the stone at supper; which is why it must be considered whether the woman is a virgin, as she may want to insert her own finger into your anus and take the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	If she wants to hide it, cut off the end and command her to write on that.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If the patient is not unconscious, instruct the nurse to gently insert a catheter into the blad cuffie de la malade et en entier sur la pierre, puis arrêter sa main gauche à côté de la vessie, et maintenir la pression douce jusqu'à ce que l'urine commence à s'écouler.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	If he were to act on that, his fate would quickly become entangled in the web of unfortunate events due to misjudgments made along the way until he reaches the right outcome of the situation.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Article L-24 of the Civil Code provides that an easement must be inscribed in the relevant register and marked by a boundary stone at the location where it takes effect, ensuring that any subsequent removal or obstruction of said marker is prevented from occurring.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	Cut off a small section at the beginning; then place your ruler over that section and you will feel the stone, later adjust to the correct length according to the quantity of which you know the stone was thrown from that piece.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	The rocks of this area are scattered about; some of them are few and large, rough and jagged, long and round, with roots.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	I believe you are asking how many types of water there are that you could mean by "aqua" and which one do you want to know about? There are several forms of water, including freshwater (such as rivers, lakes, and streams), saltwater (oceans and seas), brackish water (mixes of freshwater and saltwater), glacier ice (solid form of water frozen in glaciers or polar regions), groundwater (found underground in aquifers) and atmospheric water vapor. Please specify which type of water you are interested in learning more about.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	If you wish to obtain blood flow, adjust the glass vessel filled with three times distilled water and then wait an hour until the stone is separated from the blood, and then return to your work within an hour after the rock has been removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	I pray that you prepare the tools which he mentioned in the extraction of stones from houses, so that they may assist you during your work.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	If you want blood flow and know that the expulsion of blood is from a vein that has been injured, place your palm over the wound and press firmly to stop any bleeding; do not try to remove it as this could cause severe harm or even death if the wounded person lose too much blood.
E aprop cura la plagua.	A proper care prevents the flu.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the blood's moisture is transferred to other bodies in days, and the place becomes barren, hours you return to your work until the stone has been rolled away. (Translated from Occitan)
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII (62) of the United States Constitution is known as The Fifteenth Amabnent, which addresses voting rights and prohibits federal or state governments from denying a citizen's right to vote based on race, color, or previous condition of servitude.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	An Overview of Inguinal Hernia Surgery
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is not just the accumulation of moisture in white fiber which is then left by the germ cells containing the yolk, and it's called white fiber.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Some vegetables are in the proper panicle which naturally appear at the parting of the wheat, when it is already cut and another has grown; this represents the kernel between the white chaff that we have mentioned, and not barley.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The generation of this type of hernia occurs due to weakening caused by a congenital defect that allows the contents (such as intestines or fat) to protrude through, and in some cases it can occur from trauma resulting in injury to these structures.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This humidity has many colors, for its color is tending to lemon or bloody red, pink, or it's blackish muddy, or clear white water, and the one that prevails.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	The signs by which it is possible to recognize this addition of water in the lake are as follows: if you observe on the white surface that we have mentioned, shortly after sunrise, a wavy pattern appears and the wind direction can be determined, as well as humidity coming from all around.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	If there is moisture in the skin fold, hours later an abscess may start to spread away from the hair and as such one assumes another area of involvement.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	If the humidity is between that of grandfathers and white cypress trees, hours pass without feeling it.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	Do you wish to understand the concept of the color of moisture, how it varps at dawn its hue; and according to that which is exuded into the stain from where the form precedes; and then as soon as it appears on the residue of the stain, deduce what it implies.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we came to the house of our friend, we noticed that it was possible for us to command the malfunctioning robotic vacuum cleaner if there were any issues with it, and occasionally discuss its performance.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	The sheep is now lying on their back due to some minor fall, and has left behind those scattered scraps of wool.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Place your left hand over the left side of your body and command the minister to follow on the right side of you, extending his staff between two lattices at the knee joints of the genitals and the navel area.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Inappropriate preening leads to the splitting of the code sequences in the gene units along their length within a particular segment for its entire length.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	B is made by making a second cut parallel to the line that should be drawn according to the directions given; this reaches the white crossbar included.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	E scrutinize that, and observe, then guard to avoid adding that which you have scratched off; let the mark made by your scraping be suspended loosely on the leather so that it can be subtly examined according to what is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	An improperly placed piercing can cause leakage of the water pipe and extensive damage due to all the water loss.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	A separates between the two lips of the vulva and extend the index finger towards the outer labia; do not touch the gland-like structures on either side, and insert your finger in that manner which is most comfortable for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	"The whole essence of it lies in its subtlety; so if you don't scrutin the mystery well enough, there's little assurance that water won't return." - In the depths of aquifers and underground reservoirs lies their fullness or rather mostly their subterranean layer. To not closely examine its secret, one cannot be certain to prevent water from returning."
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	In case Mays has extracted the gum graft from outside of his own mouth during your surgery, return it afterwards to that place and properly adjust the two edges of the gum flap in the patients' genii with sutures as you would with other wounds, ensuring they heal.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If the ear becomes infected by another illness, then cover the ears with vessels that hold warm water (similar to a compress), and carefully extract the liquid from it. Apply this warm water periodically as mentioned earlier.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	If water is divided into two parts in equal measures, the hours are likewise to be divided so that both amounts are equal; therefore you should allocate that portion according to what you have done in the other division; and if it seems fair to you that it's a work, then do it for an hour.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	A proper way to remove stains from wool or woolen fabric submerged in oil or greasy substances is as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	The pattern of the garment is as follows: two pieces of cloth are sewn together with humble linen following this design; all extremities are cut in such a way that they can be easily fastened by means of buttons or wet linen, and straps are attached to both sides of the breeches. One end enters into the belt from which it is hung on either side at two points near each other, with additional straps over them for support, while all trimmings are fitted in the leg holes of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	In some cases of this hernia is treated artificially by applying cauterization instead of sectioning with a hot iron; and one takes small cautery knives subcutaneeby inserting them under the skin near the nipple, then igniting according to what we have previously stated regarding the white covering containing water being exposed, and then hours later taking cauterizations following this method:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	To convert the Greek letter "epsilon" to its equivalent in the Latin alphabet, we need to use ASCII or Unicode values that represent each character set. In the case of lowercase "epsilon", which is "ε" (U+03B5) in Unicode, it corresponds to "e" in the Latin alphabet with an ASCII value of 101.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	A prop is piercing the secret code, and it evaporates within which total moisture has been removed.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Expand the incision, apply sterilizing solution, cauterize superficially with hot irons, and carefully cut around according to your skill level ensuring complete removal; and be mindful not to let the heat touch the surrounding tissue.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	This procedure is relatively safe and distant from blood flow, and much better than a sectionectomy operation.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	If you experience an adhesion during the hour of surgery or in the case of bleeding or sore throat, mention which discomfort troubles you at this moment and the appropriate treatment that should be applied as per what is mentioned next.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	Mays the pain is severe and he does not hope for a second operation due to its horrifying nature. Now I advise you to proceed with the surgery; and it's when you are certified that you should, as we have discussed regarding the implications, that this hernia is indeed aggravated.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Lahora's Cove is situated on a raised cliff edge; approach the limestone formation from above, drill into it at the lower part of its flank and pause the drilling according to the length of the hole.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	E is the large open space where all the water flows through.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	A brief pause over the location of that spot and leaving it there, just to make sure we're on track with the water flowing.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	A person who works towards healing within that which the plague has afflicted.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	The irritation occurs at the moment you drill that hole through which the white panicle in the well's outlet causes trouble and prohibits water flow; when you place penalties or tools near the well, from which water is extracted through droplets, a shape precedes it. Alternatively, attach a small fine to the value of the well.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	The waters that return to the sea are eagerly awaited for about six months or more; and as they rejoin, hours turn into days following that measurement method, so too has his time passed during those days.
Capitol .lxiii.	III. Capitol
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	A comprehensive guide on hemorrhoids and their treatment:
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Those who in the section on this hernia fear harm to major organs, as it seems to me that the removal of it is saved by means of that better option.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	Eh, I remember the operation on that area and those symptoms of appendicitis.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	I believe that hemorrhoids occur in the areas where the nerves are composed and formed for various reasons: either due to acute skin irritation or rubbing, which is transferred to the nerves, or because of trauma.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	"E is the color of pus according to the color of skin and it's not accompanied by severe pain, yet it is a troublesome abscess."
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	The letter 'e' is stained with limestone dust, which has a dull color and doesn't matter to me.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	Some wounds are caused by scratching or itching due to allergies, or by irritation from those objects so that the memory of them is perceived, or due to irritation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	The water that comes out after thunderstorms is known for the spread of infections, and you should not touch it with your bare hands; avoid contact.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	The one who has been injured by a vein rupture is not dispersed for any reason; the compression must be applied to these sites.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	It is possible that this specialized tissue may be separated from the other parts; and so you shall include the genes of the sinew, and attach them above the partitions thereunder, extracting it through the white bone cavity, and release the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie together these suspensors as you have released that entire partition from all partitions of the sinew.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	If the fish bait is made of those ingredients mentioned above, then you must remove the hook and insert that bait into it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	If there is an agreement between the parties within any cause of cypheram or similar matters, then you shall disclose fully and provide documentation related to that agreement without delay.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	Your birthplace in the context of attachment refers to where you were born and raised; this is typically behind your family ties or cultural heritage. You will always be linked to that place as it has shaped who you are, but remember that you can also embrace new experiences and opportun cuz we've mentioned before.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Once your operation is completed, the nurse will apply an antibacterial lotion on your wound and cover it with gauze. Then make sure to follow the other care instructions until you are fully healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	IV (Roman numeral for 4) or Chapter 14, depending on the context in which "Capitol" is used. If it refers to a chapter title in a book or document, it could be Chapter XIV; if it's about legislative sessions, then it might denote the fourth session of Congress or another governing body called Capitol.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	The cure of the hernia by Vitz.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Epididymitis is an inflammamoble condition involving the coiled structure resembling a bud that surrounds and protects the male reproductive organs, which helps in sperm maturation and storage. This swelling can cause discomfort during physical exercise and walking due to pain or tenderness.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	The transmission of this disease is due to fear following which a warning is given.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	In the cove, they began to perform operas as soon as the first ones were made.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	The speaker is advising that you should not grieve for the loss and instead keep yourself busy with various activities. He suggests foccuous exercises to release anger or sorrow, keeping your mind engaged in tasks like weaving woolen fabrics, preparing wine, cooking dishes, engaging in trade, planting vineyards, tending livestpertacles, and working hard on the fields. He also emphasizes seeking companionship with others who can share their own stories of loss to help you overcome your sadness.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	A prop-insidey is the space located within the right walls between which are the veins discovered. (Note: This translation seems to be a mix of Catalan and Spanish, as "aprop inscideys" is not standard in either language.)
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Without a doubt, these architectural elements that you have mentioned are found throughout the entire structure of temple complexes.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	The faithful one shall move forward in the direction of their second decision point and continue to do so at every subsequent choice they make until the end.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	The seepage occurs within those parts of the ground in accordance with the depth according to the length of the root, and outside of that which is added from the moist and rotting humidities.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	"He who fears the law should abide by it and refrain from committing crimes to be born into this world." - Anonymous Proverb (Spanish)
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	Mays decides to undergo a radical vasectomy, hoping that it would lead to the removal of his testicles or at least disrupt blood flow to them, thereby depriving him completely of nutrients due to vascular insufficiency, and ultimately causing their degeneration.
Capitol .lxv.	Title: "Capitol LXV: The Unveiling"
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The onset of this hernia occurs due to a section that extends into the abdomnificant expanded area above the groin belly part from some intestinal loops, causing them to be displaced because of such rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This break is due to either the shifting of earth or natural causes caused by these two species through various reasons: impact, erosion, noise, lifting from any serious cause, or resemblance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The signal of water flow, as it extends along the pipe's length, is that incidents occur rarely over a long period, and not suddenly, and forms an embolus within five to seven centimeters from the pipe's entrance.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	The signal of his illness is when it occurs in the upper section of the abdomen; and there happens an intense pain suddenly at first; and there is swelling different from what seems to be a protruding spleen, and this causes discomfort during bowel movements, as well as pain radiating towards the lower parts of the abdomen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	Some ingrown hairs occur under the skin fold of the fabric and are called an incisional hernia.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	Some blisters are caused by wind exposure, and some may run in the skin crease, where they get retained and cause great pain due to irritation; others result in severe and mostly occurring when pinched or pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	E in the treatment of this illness, there is a belief that iron possesses fear; therefore one should avoid hunting during those periods.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	The nature of this work is to command evil to the devil so that it may follow its will from within the scope of its conquest and obey his return, and properly proceed over its realm among your ranks, elevating its people.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	The surgical procedure for male steril cuits consists of making an incision in the scrotum, above and on both sides of the testicles, extending the incision throughout their length; then cutting the tubes through which sperm flows according to how you wish to block it at those points.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	"It is the portion according to the quantity that may be available, so that of it being removed, there will still be enough left."
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Remove the encryption from those keys which I have left with the key of the testicles; within that is revealed the white cipher from every party.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	In the sacred waters of Aqua Regia, wherein lies the testicle, amidst a white circle that is above the tailbone, and between its neighboring circle; and absolve yourself from the attachment that resides in the back portion behind the tailbone.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	The magistrate shall extend the right hand towards the testicles of each party, and then move to the white envelope on their left, raising it as he directs the minister to extend the hand above and dissolve the bond that exists behind a completed transaction.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	The circle claims that there is no cause for the enclosed paper in the white sheet.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you have no other reason, then you stuff it in the belly of that ship.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	Into a point on the tip of an acupuncture needle, insert one where there are four fields within which to enter; then inscribe the two extremities that emerge from these four fields as if forming a cross shape, and make it at the location we mentioned before, near the testicles.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	E version involves the extremities of the fields and joins them together with a veil that prevents any vessels from getting infected, thus avoideing inflammation or infection caused by external factors.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	After a brief rest following the first massage, wait until your belly is empty three times; then proceed with these two massages by carefully lifting the scrotal skin to reveal the quantity of testicles corresponding to its size and gently insert your thumbs all around following an even motion. Then, place your fingers on your hips.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Article L of the Civil Code stipulates that a portion of an individual's estate shall be reserved for their surviving spouse by law, as we have already mentioned in this section. This reserved share is also referred to as "legitime" and its purpose is to provide financial support for the surviving spouse, ensuring they are not left without resources after the death of the decedent.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Here is the translation from Mirandese to English:
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If you delay laying the concrete of your swimming pool, water leakage will occur sooner or later, and it may cause damage to everything around that area as we've mentioned before.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	A healthy person cures the flu, and prevention is better than curing other diseases within which it can be healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	VI. The United States Capitol is the home of Congress, located on Capitol Hill at the eastern end of the National Mall in Washington, D.C. It has housed the meeting chambannoes since the early days of the nation and holds immense historical significance as well as being an iconic symbol of American democracy. The building itself represents the federal government's legislative branch, comprising the Senate and House of Representatives.
De hernia ventosa.	Ventricular fistula, also known as a "ventouse" in French or "hernia ventosa" in Spanish, is an abnormal connection between the chambcuct cavity and the pleural space. This condition can result from surgical complications, trauma, or spontaneous formation due to underlying lung disease. Symptoms may include coughing up blood (hemoptysis), difficulty breathing (dyspnea), recurrent pneumothorax, and chest pain. Diagnosis is usually made through imaging studies like CT scans and bronchoscopy. Treatment often involves surgical repair to close the fistula.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, there was nobody who dared to address the cure of his iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The first doctors claimed they had performed such an operation on the hernia that is with us; which consists of placing the vessels near the section over there where there is a tendency for it to happen; and then securing them dry in their proper location, causing an inflammation due to the fluid that occurred during this, until they fell.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And let the wound heal as we have said, until it is mended.
Capitol .lxvii.	LXVII (in Roman numerals) or 67 in Arabic numerals, both representing the number after sixty-six and before sixty-eight. The term "Capitol" might refer to a significant building like the United States Capitol in Washington D.C., but without more context it's unclear how this relcuation applies.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	From the dispersion that occurs in the angels.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Some vowels in these words have undergone a change, and indeed that's the case here.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	The bacteria do not penetrate the cell wall of any cell; and if they did, it would be minimal; and return to all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	If the wet weather continues and a crack appears in the earth through which water can seep into it; consequently, due to the expansion of the soil as we have mentioned before, this causes the ground to become uneven and swell up even more, thus becoming softer and rising.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The care of the wound was treated in such a way that it was followed by the narration about him.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	Some weeping sores are cured by using this method: and it is the disease that appears above its head between your greatest wounds, and approach dry the location of the breaking of swolhemias with a string according to three lengths. (Note: This text seems to be in Catalan language)
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	The strongest encryption algorithm currently known that lies beyond the decoding threshold is considered to be AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) with a key size of 256 bits. It provides robust security and is widely used in various applications, including securing data transmission over networks, encrypting files on storage devices, and protecting sensitive information stored within databases or cloud services.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Approach the radiator and pause for a moment under its warm glow before moving to the center of the room.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	This is the process of placing implants at prominent locations along the tip of the crown, and aligning one against the other with the seam.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	"I recommend avoiding the extremity of the spine and not sitting all day in a chair, nor extending your neck, among other things I will explain to you regarding the management of an inguinal hernia."
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	The drainage system plays an important role in the treatment of illnesses, as it removes bodily waste and toxins, thereby purifying the body and restoring health within which there is stability; for excessive leakage is a contract breach and not balanced with rupture severity.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	Cauterization is considered better in this location because it's more prone to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIIII (68) is the next chapter in your textbook, titled "Capitol". This section likely delves into a detailed exploration of the history and significance of the United States Capitol building, including its architecture, political importance, as well as any notable events that have taken place within or around it.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	The relaxation of the scrotal cord.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In men with an inguinal hernia, the lump in the scrotum is usually softened when the hands are applied, just like the flesh between it becomes soothed; this observation has been noted.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	It is necessary for that which pleads in the cure of its evil according to its own will, and then all along the line, the one which is soothed upon the natural line; and it must adjust both lips at the seam.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	If you start by addressing the excess of softened fatty tissue, there are three to four layers to be sewn shut and stitched together.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	A prop also resides between the sutures; and is used for healing other wounds within which have been cured, and when fallen out of their places.
Capitol .lxix.	In English, "CAPITOL .LXIX" would be translated as "Capitol Building no. 69." The term "capitol building" refers to a legislative building where government bodies such as parliaments or congresses meet and conduct their sessions. ". LXIX" is a way of denoting the ordinal number, which in this case signifies that it'either the 69th capitol building in a series or an identification for a specific capitol among many.
De castracio.	Fortress castle.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	In our law, castration is considered excommunicable; however, it should be noted for you in this book and there is no need to mention it unless by two means, one of which is when it occurs within the knowledge of the doctor when he performs that care after the incident has happened, as he knows the treatment for him who suffers from such injury; and the other means are that we sometimes have a necessity of castration in animals for our sake, just as with oxen, cows, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Castraccio is formed in two ways: either by erosion or by cracking along the rock layer.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	In that which is written by Matthew, the way of the operation is to make the beast drink water before its tail hairs are removed and their nerves soothed and loosened.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	"Appreciate the time you spend in my presence, ensuring that all conflicts are resolved and past issues do not resurface."
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	In English, the sentence would be: "In May, I made a catastrophe out of it by cutting and splitting something, resulting in you having the animal and pressing on its left testicles."
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	A proper application of braces involves each tooth being in its respective section within the two main processes.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	E) Those who have been wronged shall seek their justice and compensation within the law's embrace.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	If the law does not shed light on those of a certain cause, but rather on that subtle one which is over the voids.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	In this particular castration method is better the one performed by surgery because surgical castration significantly reduces the chances of any problems with the testicles for which the animal may be inclined to fight.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	A proper care will ensure that the wound is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX (70) of the United States House of Representatives, commonly known as the "Capitol", is one of two legislative bodies that make up Congress, which consists of the Senate and the House of Representatives. The primary function of this chapter, or body, is to introduce federal legislation, offer amendments, and serve on committees to develop laws related to a wide range of national issues. Members of the Capitol (House of Representatives) represent congressional districts across all 50 states and are directly elected by eligible voters within those respective areas. The number of representatives per state is based on population size, with each member serving two-year terms before facing reelection or term limits.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	The treatment of hemorrhoids involves several approaches aimed at alleviating symptoms and preventing recurrence. Here are some common methods for managing this condition:
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in humans can be classified into two types: the one is gonadal dysgenesis where both ovarian and testicular tissue are present, resulting in an ovotestis (a combination of 'ovum' meaning egg and 'testes') that resembles a woman's womb.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	Some veins of that current of urine which is in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	"Mays in the women is a species, for that the penis of the woman is just as much like two testicles of man as it's close to the male prepuce and two testicles."
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	Mercury is composed of three elements: two from men and one from women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	P is the substance that causes those tightly stretched skins to rupture during labor and for which it should be used in treating such wounds, as well as other skin diseases.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	In the second specialty of male urology, which focuses on the kidneaturine (probably a misspelling or mistranslation for urinary tract), it is not curative nor operative in and of itself.
Capitol .xxi.	Title: Capitol XXI (Capitol 21)
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	The condom is prominently used by women for various reasons.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	The lentigo fortissimo is a condition where skin lesions become inflamed due to natural causes, and in some cases it can intensify significantly among women as if spreading like contagion through intimate contact.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	I urge you to reduce the excess of language at your hand, either by your mother's or an uncle and aunties'.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	In the last paragraphs of the article, it is primarily emphasized that maintaining adequate blood flow is crucial to prevent tissue damage and ensure proper organ function.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	A proper care for the health of plants is essential to ensure they are nurtured and thrive in their environment.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Mays carn nacuda es la carn de nossos amigus em le horrifico del mar, e fort ela è eixidada en les partides fora segon semblança de capellera (e per aqüot, vam anomenar aquesta "malaltia coaduda"). Entant cobre que nós ens inscrevem així com ignorem lentingut, e cura-m aquela en què es sia sana.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	The Curaçao Alrataca is a traditional liqueur from the Caribbean island of Curaçae, part of the Netherlands Antilles. This unique spirit has been produced since at least the early 20th century and has its origins in the alrática or alratica tree (Bourreria principis), native to the island's dry forests.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	The condition of the woman is not pierced or has a small wound.
E es o natural o accidental.	In the context of music theory, a pitch that is "E" could be either a natural note or it might have an accidental (sharp or flat). Natural notes are those without any sharps or flats next to them on the musical staff. Accidentals modify these natural notes; they raise or lower their pitch by half a step:
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	The accident has resulted from illness which was unintentional or by no fault of anyone, and that is done either without any fraudulent intent or through very subtle means.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	Fayt of the father: The man shall not have intercourse with his wife's sister (or half-sister), niece, daughter-in-law or granddaughter; nor with any woman who is related to him in a prohibited degree as mentioned above. He must also refrain from adultery and prostitution, and strongly forbids engaging in sexual activity during the menstrual period of his wife.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The understanding of that structure was made with regard to the meter, if the occupation is evident, it's proper; but if not evident, measure your steps or use a laser distance tool.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	Mays gently presses her lips against yours, warmly enveloping your mouth as you feel an overwhaturming sensation of pleasure and the barrier between you dissipates in a passionate kiss.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	The text appears to be in Basque (Euskera), and it seems to talk about the importance of lips for speech and communication but is not clear or grammatically correct as presented. A more coherent translation could be:
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The lady lays back on her bed, legs apart and spread wide, as the healer carefully inserts a slender tool into that tender space between her labia; she takes a deep breath in anticipation of relief.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	A proposal for the urban and rural planning in this area is to implement level 4 energy efficiency standards for buildings as well as introducing a pause on further development until that location has become more established, ensebut only if it does not compromise its sustainability.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	The Cipher is big and thick, sometimes it covers the entire area with a layer of mist or a cloak made of myrtle leaves.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	The fish swims rapidly through the water, its scales glistening in the sunlight. After a while, it slows down and suspends itself near an underwater plant. With precision, it bites into the tender leaves of the vegetation for nourishment.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Indeed, the medicine that halts blood flow and is as painful as acacia, along with dragon'cuir bouilli', and honey, are mixed well in an almond milk base.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	An appropriate method is to insert a wide rubber catheter in order for the plaque not to be excessively constricted.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	The heat of those days and the provision of enough water.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	A proper healing comes with the other aspects of rehabilitation, once it is cured.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	In some cases, birthmarks appear on the skin at or around the time of a baby's conception with another parent, and it is believed that these markings follow this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	The stye on the eyelid is an inflammamnet of one or more hair follicles, and the styes that are present do not cause any discomfort in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII: The Capitol Building in Washington, D.cuperior
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Treatment of Embolisms and Their Impact on Female Pregnancies
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	The mucous membranangs appreciate the openings of small vessels that run through those veins; and with aging, these mucous membranes become thinner over time.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	The division of spices and their properties, as well as the signs associated with them - those that bring healing and those that do not provide relief.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	I believe that the reasons why people don't express their feelings are quite diverse and it isn'e always due to a lack of care; sometimes, it is simply because they fear getting hurt.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those that are in the wound of the mother over which she feels concern, these are those that are healing.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	"Put the woman on an examination table and carefully prepare the instruments; then make a precise incision with the scalpel through those layers."
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	A propeller spray is applied onto those wounds to stop the bleeding from one of the insidious powders, just like with cayenne and others similar.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	He proposes his peas for an hour, and then he rests in the flowing water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	If he persists in his flow of bloodshed, hours will pass until there are only remnants of courage and past victories, as well as the illusions and appearances that once were.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Preheat the oven and prepare the pie crust by mixing flour, butter, milk, vinegameganess, and water until it forms a doughy consistency on top of its base.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	If the wounds separate, then do not sew them together; but if they do not, attach both edges and suture with a subcutaneous stitching technique.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	First, clean the surface area and immerse it in either collagen solution, arnagloza solution or guar gum solution for an appropriate period of time to allow them to adhere to the site; then apply a sealant that is suitable once the area is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	My dear Arya Rogue, I must express my sincere regret that you included such an error in your previous message. Please make sure to do so next time according to what I mentioned earlier about correct spelling and grammar alignment.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And heal within those who are sick.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Accidental Perforation of the Eye during Childbirth
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Various types of boils arise in the breast, such as hard and soft pimples, cysts, ulcers, abscesses, herpes lesions, fissures, hemorrhoids, ganglion-like lumps, and others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	In his letter to the bishop of Tours and fellow physicians, Paul of Aegina detailed various illnesscuoes and their remedies, as well as treatments for those ailments and related symptoms. He also provided guidance on dividing and managing medical cases effectively.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	A text discussing the most common types of ulcers that heal spontanecuously and how to perform an operation for treatment if desired.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	I believe that if the pain from a boil at the beginning is sharp upon pressure and swelling with fever, and occasionally reddening over it, and you do not experience aggraebtion due to perforation within a certain period of time, then apply aqua (water) or any other substance that helps reduce inflammation until the discomfort from these symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then the bridegroom shall lay thee upon a bed that has two couches; and recline on his side facing you, with your bodies lying apart as much as is proper in front of each other's genitals, and let your breasts be uncovered, and rest your thighs so they are widely spread, and place any coverings around them according to what is suitable.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	The midwife shall then proceed with the right and proper handling of the instruments used to perform the operation on the mother; the form of which will be determined in those cases that may arise.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	E cove quan vols ministrar aquesta medicina, tu fiques amb lo remed mantint-lo ple de la mare de la dona i aquota quant el receptacle es introdui en la mare no pugui ésser més que el preeminència de la mare.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	In Mays's ensemble, the instrument is larger than that of the principal in the main part; hence, you must play softly on the texture of the principal part so as to avoid any intrusion from other instruments within the main part.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	The priest places the holy water in the sprinkler used during baptism and ensures that the minister holds the instrument and turns on the faucet so that it is full before proceedebouts into the baptismal font of the mother church.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	When the storm started, it began raining heavily and thundering, hours later you would notice that your head is spinning from all the noise outside.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	When skin is exposed, avoid staying in water for prolonged periods at a submerged secluded beach where there are rotten or vertically growing algae; also rinse off the salt immediately after swimming and before sun exposure.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	"The mother and son overlook the field, with a woolen blanket laid on water where bad habits are being built."
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	A suitable ointment should be applied for two days and the one that is appropriate to use with water as soon as it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	Some vegetable varieties are washed with both fresh and salt water before being sterilized in boiling water to which rhubarb or asparagus has been added; the mixture then returns to the vat.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	If the storm is coming at dawn and you are forbidden from the healing of your own wound, then have care about that water we mentioned in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	In the United States, a "Capitol" refers to the building where each state's legislature meets and conducts its business. The most well-known Capitol is the U.S. Capitol in Washington D.C., which houses both chambamoons of Congress - the Senate and the House of Representatives.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Mothers can learn about how to ensure their unborn children are healthy and develop according to a non-typical pattern by following these methods:
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessary cause is that the midwife should recognize in childbirth the natural figure of labor by signs from her, and it is when you see a woman starting to push out afterpains and desire to smell the air, she then becomes overwhamoyed with pain as it comes upon her, and hurries the birth of the infant. At this time know that this parting is according to the natural figure, and the infant's birth occurs under its own capability, with the second stage being either suspended or pendent at the umbilicus.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	And thus with these words, the belly of him shall be opened so that his embryo may depart lightly as when he would go to sleep on his own bed, and then will be given to him a second infant, and this excess is properly cleansed by good hygiene.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	The one that is not natural or acceptable, as when he drinks from his vessels and the contents of them are poured before him and the vessels themselves, along with their handles, all in a row. He bows his head and touches the ground with his feet; he empties his belly of what's inside him, and strongly turns over his back to look at unpleasant figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	A woman must be wise and subtle in all matters of such importance, and she should avoid mistakes and deceit.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	The text you have provided appears to be in Occitan or a similar Romance language spoken in southern France. However, the phrase as written does not immediately translate to standard English because it seems somewhat disjointed and lacking context. Translating without full understanding of its meaning could result in a loss of nuance. If we attempt an approximate translation with available information:
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	Quan l'ait fait s'enfuir au-dessus de son épaule naturelle; et cela est vivement sur la femme et il lui a donné une partie difficile, parfois le défiant, ou bien que les femmes puissent avoir, et dissipé le fumée de sa chair avec fenouil coupé et huile d'olive.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	The interdental brush is a small tool used to clean between the teeth; it consists of thin wires and an elongated handle that contains a reserebrush inside which absorbs moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	The woman should lie on her back and relax as the baby is delivered.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	"If they do not allow it, she should be examined to see if the woman has pills of dill and seeds of fenugreek."
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	In the land of Lumen, where light governs all creatures great and small, a decree was set forth by the wise council to maintain harmony within its realm. Each inhabitant must take heed - be it beast or human alike - for every creature shall partake in an age-old ritual: they were to breathe deeply into their lungs and expel with gusto, ensuring that the very essence of life flowed freely within them.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	If both of your teeth were knocked out during the meal, you should cover it up by gradually replacing them little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	If Mays disobeys the commandment, he shall pause and have a woman stand on a plank, while he lifts up her burden from below, and then pushes the plume onto the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall off during this process.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	Eso sí que no se trata de distinciones morales y muertes rotas; las horas ideales aquellas y extrañas del tema o lazo a la mano de su amor deportivo o extraño amigablemente igualitario, porque así será fortalecido.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	The development of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	The fish that you see in the sky above your head is actually not what it appears to be; rather than being real fish swimming around up there, they are simply clouds taking on the shape of fish. As time passes and winds shift, these cloud-fish change their form - some may grow larger or smaller, while others might take on completely different shapes entirely.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	"May the Lord bless and keep you; may He make His face shine upon you and be gracious to you; may He establish the work of your hands now and forevermore." - This is a traditional Jewish prayer known as the Priestly Blessing or the Birkat Hamazon. In Hebrew, it's written:
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	If it is not the hour that we have previously set, return the small amount gradually until you pause at the time indicated in the next figure (natural), because then those hours will be passed as per your previous agreement.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	If it is prohibited to use any kind of oil, we advise using a gentle massage cream or lotion and applying firm but soothing pressure with your hands on the abdomen area below the umbilicus for about five minutes per session, preferably twice daily. Please consult with your healthcare provider before trying this method.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	In the midst of that city by the sea in water, within which I can find my melanchol cups.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	When the matches end and are no longer lit, there is a brief moment of reflection and pause before the next match begins.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	Evan the subcutaneous injection shall be administerired for one hour; then you may lie down on your back, and prepare that person to sneeze and exhale through their mouth, and take away from them, and press firmly upon the lower abdomen area near the injection site. This will help ease any discomfort immediately afterward.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Essay on the Influence of Dreams and Memories
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	Quan el fèt empressaria selon cette forme, tocs temps endigués s'enfoncent peu à peu; et appuye la femme étendue sur son cou, et les pès de lui pênent au-dessus, et ces nageurs se déplacent doucement sur le lit, et complètent leurs mouvements.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	The small fish is gently placed on the hot pan and cooked until it turns opaque within its scales, ready to be served as the first course.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the seed is not dispersed, over time it becomes heavier and harder, and gradually penetrates deeper until it reaches further downward areas.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	A man sneaks up on the women and compares his small genitals to hers, while commanding her to express herself once he is finished.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The sediment from the late geological period is located on one of its slopes.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	As you approach the hill of truth, try to reduce it as much as possible, but if not, raise the woman and let her go that way.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	If we cannot go out, the hours will linger on our lips, and together we recall things of his conquests with fervor, and also provide us comforting thoughts that I and you share in memories.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	If the childbirth is successful, after one or two hours of rest, she should study the reduction in milk production and compare her baby's natural figure, then breastfeeding while instructing herself to compress within which it feels full.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The element of the text suggests that "his father expanded his lands and possessions, which are now twice as big as their mother's." (Note: The original Catalan text seems to have grammatamatic or syntactic errors)
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should guide the mother in giving birth to her baby gradually and with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	The Cumu'ha e Quant So Es Engualhat, and the Pause over His Head of Gold that He Has Recommended Oil and Waxes.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	A person commands the lamb to move quietly and slowly, until it reaches that spot, then make sure they stand on one leg right there and command them to tilt their head straight down, and instruct them to sneeze as per the given condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Death of the fetus before delivery, on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	Many people experience the frustration of a foggy bathroom mirror after taking a hot shower, and it often seems that there's no solution to this problem. However, if you consider the science behind condensation, there are ways to minimize its occurrence.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	The vine is attached to the face of the column and left for a while at an angle, so that it's not held back and can grow.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	A propounder the idea to depart within those days that pass after he is called, and command the woman to prepare some provisions with him, so that they may set out without delay if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The phrase "Exitus geminorum, aut foetuum multorum" is a Latin proverb that roughly translates to "The fate of the twins or the birth of many". In an English context and in more common usage, this phrase might be used metappertively to mean that when you make a decision it can lead to either success (twins) or failure (many).
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	"Know that two twin motes departed and some vessels left three or four nowad cups are strange and tartly flavored; however, it's because of nature, not how I live."
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Those ones that are multiplied in quantity, a second or two, they separate into groups and distinguish those within the cluster through their ligament in each of them as if by natural instinct; some may become wasteful while others remain useful, similarly to how traits are passed on naturally.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	"It's challenging to predict the birth of a child; however, based on what has been said about non-natural figures, time heals all as you have recounted."
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	The wise woman's fluid that brings ease and subtlety, as well as promptness and cleverness, has been carefully prepared by the skillful artisan for your health benefit.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Memorization of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	May's cauterization is the medicine that commands this illness to read the skin cells so they are lengthened and equalized, and thus make it as if by a willow leaf parchment.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	A total absence of trust in the science of medicine has led them to have a great deal of doubt about its effectiveness, and therefore they do not believe it can work wonders as claimed.
Capitol .lxxvi.	The capital cities of the United Kingdom are London, Edinburgh, Cardiff, and Belfast. Each one is located in a different constituent country - England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland respectively. These four capitals together represent the political unity as well as diversity within the UK.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	The removal of the fetus when it is deceased.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	Do you think that the medical treatment administered in this case is appropriate and necessary? If not, what alternative methods do you suggest for a woman who is healthy but fears potential harm from accidents or complications?
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	The woman is seated with her legs crossed over the left side of her body and the top of her head tilted downwards while the objects around her are raised up.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	The Minister held the belief that they should divide the land as evenly as possible, in order for his intent not to extend beyond what was fair and just by extracting more than their share of the crop yield.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	She applies the lip balm to her mother'n lips, enriched with aloe and wheat germ oil and fenugreek and fennel seed extracts.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	The matron took her mother's advice and collected the olives and grapes; then she approached the hollow where the lamb was kept, and there she found the golden fleeeback sheep.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Eloc locations convenient for applying aquavit (aquavit): then consider whether the bottle is ready to be poured on its cap, and hours later you will place drops in your ears, or on your neck, or in your mouth, or on your palate, or just below the chin, or on the collarbones, or behind the earlobes.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	The translation for "Mais se limita aos peixes do lago, durante a estação da primavera ou no verão nas costas" is:
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	The one who has the right to a midday pause is allowed to reduce curvature in that place which lies between the limits of their left side and intervenes with their ease, allowing them to reach their destination within an acceptable timeframe.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Pause and stay in the position of one other person nearby or a third if necessary, to ensure you are equally spaced apart and not stretching according to your height only.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	However, Ans was not aware of the whole situation; he didn't know that his uprooting was happening just as it happened during the eradication of him.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	In a bowl containing warm water, soak the garment until it is thoroughly relaxed; if any part of the fabric is retained with stains, then gently work in some gentle detergent and carefully rub those areas to help remove the marks.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	If the offspring is taken away, their hours will be changed between two places where it was located; and do so in order that all about the offspring being removed are done accordingly.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	In the Mays flower, the male part is usually positioned above the female part, and it's not possible to reduce that distance due to the structure of the plant, so often a device must be placed over it, entering within which all parts are removed or cut off, including either at the junction of the male or in the anther.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	There are two baskets, each containing a certain number of apples. If I take out three apples from one basket and put them into the other, both baskets would have an equal amount of appnels. How many apples were there initially in each basket?
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	The drip cap of the roof is large, or it leaks due to poor installation, or it's at the peak of channeled water; therefore, occasionally between the spiked spatula and crack in the cap, it allows water to seep through or creates a hole using an unnamed instrument similar to other tools found on the roof.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	In this semblance the fetus is of great capacity by nature, and during labor it must be assisted in such manner that it emerges headfirst or with its body following as we have mentioned; beyond the bones use the forceps accordingly.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	The feathers of a bird'e shell and tail are hollow to help with lightweight flight; they also contain tiny air sacs connected to the lungs, which is crucial for respiration during high-energy activities like flying.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	It's not too complicated, nor does it obey chaos; immediately you decide whether or not that is possible in your opinion.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the sores in your belly are pus-filled or wet and dripping, drain it within that area where you notice moisture present.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	The feet are upon your shoulders, now draw the light from it towards you and guide it to the mouth of mother earth.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	As you stand before God's altar and kneel down, lift your head that you may extract the cloth upon which you have placed a piece of bread (host), then cut open your belly and groin with it so that the sacred substance runs into those areas.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other members are not obstinate and they turn their head towards me, then I shall approach them with my right hand; but if the mother's mouth is obstructed, I will slip in through her left ear and gently place it back into position near the jawline. Afterwards, I should insert one or two fingers to ensure proper placement of their tongue within the mouth cavity.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	"The mother's mouth should be cleaned in case of an abscess causing harm to the baby, as soon as possible so it doesn't worsen; before that, you must administer a treatment with moist and fatty substances."
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	A applies plasters and dressings to the patients, then follows them with warm waters that soothe and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	If the wound is on your side, turn as often as possible to lie on it; also apply a bandage and the water that we have mentioned for the visible wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	If water is not available, it leads to disasters and death by dehaturation (death due to lack of water).
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	F I do not give any cause to the second party regarding this contract.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Once you have completed your entire procedure, please administer the hours of care we have advised for treating the abscesses which might occur as a result from the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	When there is a blood flow disorder, various treatments can be administered through intravenous fluids and other therapies.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	A woman was found pregnant with a dead child in her womb; another woman placed herself on that fire and got pregnant as well, but the other died from the flames.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happens that he has had a long-standing ulcer in the sole of his foot and it becomes infected when wearing shoes, eventually leading to swelling and pain.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	Yehudi Menuhin was once entrusted with the care of Lu, and treated him for long periods; however, the illness remained unresolved.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	In this verse from Occitan troubadour poetry, the poet marvels at a remedy that has cured several illnesses with great effectiveness and quickly, healing one bone but not being able to do so in his stomach, which does not contain any bn.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Consequently, you might deduce that they were the bones of the deceased.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	The plague had struck the village, and they were desperate for a cure. In their search, they found an ancient legend that spoke of a mysterious woman who resided in the sacred meadows, possessing extraordinary healing powers. Driven by hope, the villagers sought her out.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	Certaine, non è una fattura estranea essere imbrogliati, piutto di quattro in acqua è la scienza ed anche l'aiuto che si trova ad avere nella medicina nell'arte della guarigione e dell'assistenza.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	From the necessary instruments required to extract this ore, there are several forms and types that can be used. Some common methods include:
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Formulàcia que ens afecte al nostre parell o mare:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of dialogue in which they compete as equals, with two virtues on both ends of two roads.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	This ring of this virtue has been made more subtle by a restrictor and is either crafted from silver or wood planks.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	E is the width of each piece which corresponds to two words and its margin one word on either side, and the length of each piece is a line and half; and at the middle point where both pieces are joined together there are adjustments made to that meeting place, from which the length is about one palm and a little more, and the width is two or three words.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	In the text, two additional substances are mixed in the mouth of the mother for it to be open while you turn those prescribed pages.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	In a manner more delicate and subtle, yet still somewhat dubious in nature.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	A set of pliers shaped like forceps, or a pair of pliers that resembles forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, in the middle of its two additional pieces, the length of each piece is one span, and the width of both together is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	The man wants to show you how to cover the mother with a sheet when she passes away; now, your task is to gently lay her on the bed and place weights around so that it remains in position amidst all circumstances.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Please sharpen your blade as follows, depending on the desired angle of the edge within which you wish to grind:
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The shape of the hallucination that they experience is...
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	En forma d'impulsiu, és aconsegueix el fet.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Title: The Head of the Great Gang
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	The assembly of pliers in which teeth are set on the extremity is made thusly, and some variations have long handles as do pliers according to this form, with teeth set similarly to those that are inserted and embedded.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Formulă de amesidat puțin:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	A form with a thorn can be referred to in English as a "thorny plant" or simply as "planta espinosa". The term "thorns" refers to the sharp, pointed structures that some plants develop for protection against herbivores. Common examples of plants with thorns are roses (rosas), cacti (cactus), and blackberry bushes (mora).
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of a cone has two edges: the base and the curved surface. In Spanish, this can be translated as "La forma de una cono tiene dos bordes: la base y la superficie cóncava." Here'n is the translation for both "shape" and "edge":
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	La forma de las pinzas que permiten dilatar el cuello del feto y, de este modo, facilitar su nacimiento es conocida como "pinzas Simpson". Estos instrumentos se utilizan en los procedimientos obstétricos para la maniobra cervical, también conocida como versión externa, cuando es necesario abrir el cuello uterino antes del parto.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Shape of a trapezoid having two opposite sides, where the top edge is parallel.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Two types of Swedish spatulas (Svenska spatel) are commonly used in cooking and baking. Here they are translated into Spanish, along with a brief explanation:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	Those musical instruments are practiced and as the spices of that particular one are multiplied and prepared by the artists, it becomes more glorious in its performance and therefore requires more people for its quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	The use of these instruments should not be excluded or neglected, as the necessity for them is justified.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Secondary extraction of oil.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	The second heir is to be kept from childbirth for seven days; if you order the mother who holds his seed not to blow her nose and strain herself with exertion during this time, but she does so anyway, he will die (as a result).
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	E forsooth, take a few hours to relax upon the deck and puncture with thine awl into the hull; pause therein amidst the fragrant grass at the mouth of the mainmast, thus anointing oneself with calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, hyssop, Arabian cassia, and Spanish saffron.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	These herbs or some of them are partially submerged in water during the wave, and rests on top of the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	A prop of a straw into the mouth of the mason jar and insert that which will create a vacuum towards the bottom of the jar.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	A prop of that stormy night we had mentioned earlier, the second wave surged with increased velocity.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Mays if unresponsive to this treatment and does not awaken, then command the midwife to immerse his left hand in olive oil or almond milk, and gently insert it into the mouth; when found, carefully place the second finger on top of the first one. When both fingers are placed correctly, gradually push them deeper inside the nostril with the mother's thumb until a slight resistance is felt to avoid forcing it too far in.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	I want to change the layout so that it's more user-friendly and easier on the right side.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	A proper adjustment in the amount of pressure applied ensures it complies and avoids sticking.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	If the mother's mouth is a lie, we have retold the cure, the treatment, and the herbal remedy for the illness once again.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	"If Mays is not completely healed by the causes we have recommended, she should be cautious of falling into abstraction; instead, let it be known that what has been prescribed shall pass from her mouth to the woman who carries out our plan and provide her with an infusion. For this will cause her illness to perish within fourteen days, dissolving and being expelled."
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	Mays quan se poyreys, it's of a high degree unpleasant to the head and stompitche, and causes discomfort in the patient; therefore it should be administered with appropriate sub-fumigants or remedies for water.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	The old castle of Anties has a subterranean smoke grilling system for ham and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The form of the instrument in which women are susceptible to menstrual retention and secondary hemorrhage is called a speculum. A vaginal speculum is used for examining the vagina and cervix, often during gynecological procedures or Pap smear tests.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Let the fairest of them all come forth and speak her name.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	The subtle end of the pipe is stopped below the flame and the wide end above the fire, and the smoldering process is halted in the arms of the fireplace.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And within that, the smoking and consumption of other substances should be avoided.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Care of the child'cu decus (not perforated).
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When children are exposed to subtle and persistent influences, it can have a powerful impact on their development. It is important for parents and educators alike to be mindful of the messages conveyed through media, language, and other sources that shape young minds. By providing positive examples and fostering critical thinking skills, we can help children navigate these subtle influences in a healthy way.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	The elderly woman should pierce the specified area with care; if not, proceed with the procedure in another suitable location, and be cautious not to touch the larynx.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	He who pours on the water in spring and fall, and he cures that man within whose house it is found. (Old Occitan)
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	May fear that he is exhausted and needs a break from work for several days, as the child will soon grow up.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	J'accuse the use of compresses on wounds for accelerating healing or treating abscesses; hence it is important that this method be disinfected, and care should be taken to properly cleanse with water as mentioned in treatment and using a plaster.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	The cure of the fistulas you left behind.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistula that opens in the remains of a wound with low discharge or large size, which originates from the skin surface or within the space of one cavity.
E es una fistula o motas.	F is an anal fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	The C has that ancient lesion and runs from the damp white rot or subtle decay; some patches are of these ruptures some intrusive.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	The translation of the text from Galician to English is as follows: "The ones that penetrate through those openings are very good for access and exit; however, some veins use the bad mood for exiting, and greatly escape from these worms."
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	These are some of the types of fistulas that occur in various places, such as between the bladasteroids and within the urethral tract; or between the joints of the vaginal wall and near the opening of the vulva.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	In the case of an inguinal hernia that is known to be incarcerated but not strangulated, you should aim for your chosen end instrument inside the scrotum and try to gently advance it into the hernia when possible or insert a wire.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	In that case, it's the subtlety of a metal trap or of horsehair in your ear where you feel this temptation or skin there on your tongue.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you do not experience any of these signs or symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, or flatulence due to any cause, then as we have said, be aware that it is not penetrating, and sometimes think about the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	When the fistula penetrates into the bladebag or within the neck of the uvula, it results in urinary leakage from that area and forbids them to do any heavy physical activity until their medical condition is stabilized.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Mays if the cold penetrates through the knee joint or into the bone causing pain in the circuit area, it is a sign that you should consult with your doctor immediately to see if there is inflammamoiusness within and also pain in the surrounding area of the injury; and that at times wounds may appear swollen. However, this medicine does not help, nor heal, in this case.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	In all those cases where the penetrating fistula does not heal on its own, and the healing of such is dependent on the effort and patience of skilled surgectors who you entrust it to.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	In this place that is not bustling or old, healthy and well-fed I hope to be, as you advised, and so far it has been good.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	The disease jaundice occurs mainly within the liver and increases its lobes; in this case, it should be considered that the condition tends towards hepatomegaly or hemolysis if present in the bile ducts. Understandably, you know where to find more information on this topic.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	If you feel unwell around the neck, now cover your mouth when you speak into it.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If you sit in your chair and allow yourself to be drawn towards something hidden that needs to be uncovered, another time when you feel between your chair and this cushion or pillow, hours later you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, because it is not healthy, just as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, they also built schools in humble houses there.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	E of the medicine for which hope is given relief in it, you ignite subtly according to the extent of the fistula as mentioned before, and insert that fire into the fistula until it comes around the coil; then repeat with those three fingers inserted until you feel all the adhered carneous fistulas resemble plumage feathers.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	"He who is wounded should wrap his wounds in a bandage so that all of them can be viewed at once. Furthermore, he should apply appropriate medications to promote and consolidate the healing of those wounds; if it's healed, you are well again; otherwise, there is no cure for these wounds at any time without another treatment."
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	If a person attempts to insert their finger into the anus and it does not penetrate inside that which is in the rectum, and they encounter something immediately soft like skin or flesh, if there's an anal fissure present at that moment, then the healing process will occur on the surface of the tissue. Over time, as this healing progresseS, you'll feel dryness around the attempted insertion area, indicating healing in the fistula itself until it reaches the end where the tear occurred and is finally freed through that passage.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	A proper modification of those festering wounds, which are assembled with a needle and not the roungue of that certain cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	Mays, the flow of blood should be stopped five times between you and your opponent when performing those surgerections; it is recommended to use heat or acute medicine as a cauterizing agent. The best way would be to adjust the wounds properly and drain any excess fluids.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	The sea is the place where waves are wrapped in borders or coastlines within which the tides rise and fall every twelve hours, and during these periods the stormy winds generate and solidify hard coral reefs.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	Certainly, the medicine in which there is antiseptic and effectiveness; when hours are restored, healed and does not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If you have a rectal fissure (anal fissure) that extends into the anal canal and is long from the skin surface, it may eventually push your anus through and cause discomfort there.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	If they come to you and her with an urgent matter of peace or war, she will be granted access immediately without any obstacles, now not as a formality but according to the trust and hope shared between them.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The main reason for cauterizing in one of three methods is as follows: 1) to cauterize it as much as possible; or 2) to remove the tissue within which you can achieve total closure, so that it becomes possible for you to introduce any necessary materials and provide appropriate care without causing secondary damage by not entering the area containing the lesion, and if a negative event occurs during the healing process due to your actions. Moreover, make sure to clean thoroughly using the warm water method we have mentioned earlier; or 3) elongate the tissue and remove any residual matter you have cauterized within it as described before, either by trying or with another sharp instrument, then ensure thorough cleansing of all fistulous tissues that you can access through this incision. Also, strive to complete the restoration of the entire affected area after cauterization, and if any unclean pus remains ungerminated, openly expose the external part of the fistula on the backside, allowing the wound to heal more easily.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	In some cases, the fistula can be closed according to this method: When you reach the opening in the fistula, insert a lubricated trocar close to the surface of the skin around the anus and at the edge of the buttock. Then gently puncture through its distal end with a prepared needle as shown below.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And thou, O man, mayest not meddle in that faithful folds of my fields or their surroundangs; and afoot mayst thou attempt the faithful entrance into which cometh the fertility thereof.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Mays, place the pointed end of the fleece into your anus as far as you can comfortably insert it. Then gently guide the entire length of the fleeestroad through your rectum until it comes out the other side. Ensure both ends are securely in place, and leave them there for one or two days. As the fleece begins to integrate with the tissue inside, gradually increase its insertion depth each day, making sure that the carcasses (skin) have healed around the areas where the fleeestroad has been inserted on both sides.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	A proper care should be taken lest the plague spread before it is controlled and cured.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the hole of the abscess is not penetrating, within three hours make it so that it does penetrate in any manner you may prefer, provided it does not touch your skin, but only the flesh; and apply to the area where it has healed without causing further injury.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatulum spinosus is such that when it seals a fistula, one curve is acute and the other part is not sharp, thus preventing unnecessary penetration as sometimes occurs.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	The stitches in the wounds that are running with pus should be removed under the consideration of those conditions.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	There are two ways to describe morroids, one being that they appear as if made of carbon or the other where these creatures resemble fat droplets.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	In those times and places where the sun shines, there exists a vast land with small islands scattered about it; numerous in number, as well as diverse in nature - some are large, others tiny, while all bask under the same golden light of day.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are left have little moisture, from which a yellowish water or a small amount of blood comes continuously, and it has the same color as the mold.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	The cure for that which is within the witch's control, you command to malady: let it sweat and release its essence into the cup of hemp; then do the pearls appear before thee.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	And thus I vow and promise on the cross or those that I have therein my ring, and accordingly bestow those upon you of your right hand.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	In case the hair is not pulled out due to humidity and softening of it, then one may take those with a rough cloth or comb them, removing any tangles. Afterwards, sprinkle some powdered substances onto these areas for burning. This will make the hair ready for cauterization as mentioned in the chapter on how to perform cauterization:
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	A is responsible for those whose other treatment falls within that which is healing.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	If the anus does not obey evacuation and constipation occurs with it, causing discomfort in that area along with difficulty passing stool when attempting to forcefully expel it using the water inside the rectum which doesn't flow out easily.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	"Mays' hemorrhoids are outside the anus; hours of laxity cause them to be inflamed. You take those with your fingernail or you grab those with a unguent, and insert it there, as we have told within that they shall heal."
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	The one who performs the suture should hold the thread folded and insert that into the needle. Then he/she carefully passes the needle through the swollen areas on both sides following this method: penetrate with the needle at the root of the other part, then wrap the two outer threads of the folded thread around that part longitudinally; then pull the swollen area taut and approach nozzle the fold with the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	"Everything flows and nothing stays still; the only constant is change." - Heraclituted
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	In the warmth of the sun-drenched clearing, he sat upon a log and took out his rosewood flute; then he played that tune on its hollow wood and commanded the birds to listen.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	An appropriately translated version would be: "Place it within that box; and when used, heal those wounds or any other ailment inside which is cured."
De curacio de fistulas.	Treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Fallen logs are often found in areas affected by forest fires or due to natural rotting processes.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	Eschar remedies and their effect in that medicine are those which cover the wound with bandages or with your ointment within which there are moist fats, properly heated by fire so as to be liquefied; these prevent scarring. However, they should not be used for consolidation of sores but rather for application on consolidated ones.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The voice of those oppressed is louder than ever before, and we must work tirelessly to rectify the first issues that have been highlighted, as well as strive for healing in the affected areas; this is our duty above all else.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The cure of Almesemira is the key.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	"Know that almonds are small and not sweet unless they are of a rich red color resembling the heart chambard, and made throughout the entire body especially in the lower parts near the feet, causing great pain to those who consume them."
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	However, it is necessary that the water used in the waxing process should be from the faucet and held with either tweezebar or pliers, and removed cleanly from its residue; then proceed as follows.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	If it should happen, stitch the second one that follows in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Moray eels are small pointed and rough round protrusangs on the surface of the skin, with visible blood vessels in most children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The essence of love is to extend and include that which you have discovered within yourself, the part you truly value and cherish inside your heart.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	If you get burned, apply water as soon as possible, according to what has been mentioned, use fire or use acute medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	Indeed, the reversed phrase "sdrawkcab gnidaer ot yek eht dna yks eht sselnuhT" translates to "Thank you for taking this and the ksey." in normal order as "Thank you for taking this book and the keys". The sentiment of gratitude is evident.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	May's anthill is a small eminence of felted or tube-shaped structure on the surface of the lawn, and when it is crushed, it appears as if the ant mound has a mildly irritating effect similar to that of an ant sting, and it forms around the area.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The cure for your illness is to use a quill from a rooster's or turkey'cu' feather and soak it in water. Then place the moistened quill within the wound, wrapping the surrounding area with a piece of cloth attached to the quill. Rotate your thumb around the cloth inside which you have placed this wet substance into the wound's circuit. Hold it there until the swelling subsides and heal the wound.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	If you want to say "I drink water with a plastic or metal straw according to this manner:" in Catalan (similar to Spanish), it would be:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The thread of the earring slips from its delicate setting; it's an unnoticeable, soundless (non-pierced), wrapped so tightly that any attempt to remove or rotate it is futile.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	When the ant approaches, it is quickly burned according to the procedure described in the ant'ancient book of burning.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	The way you manage to give Christening.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some creams are made from Argentan or Leicester cheese or fried eggs; and some creams are made of those instruments small and large according to which ones you administer them, for the one that is administered in the care of little children should be small; and of those whose heads are bald or hairy, the creams from those should be thick.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The Cristero War, also known as the Cristiada, was a major conflict in Mexico that took place from 1926 to 1([1]929) between the Mexican government and insurgent groups supporting Catholicism. It occurred during President Plutarco Elías Calles's term, who enforced secularist and anti-clerical laws following the Constitution of Mexico in 1917. These laws restricted religious freedom, leading to protests by Catholics that eventually escalated into a full-blown armed conflict known as La Cristiada or "The Cristero War." The war ended with an agreement brokered by the U.S. Ambassador Dwight W. Morrow and resulted in the government partially easing its restrictions on religious practices.
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the feeding tube should be positioned beyond where the bag is attached, and its length adjusted so that there is about an inch between the bag and where it's connected according to this method.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	The tip of the aforementangs, which is inserted into the anus and surrounded by fat (it's not hairy), is soft like that of a lion; it has two small hooks on one side and another single hook on the other side, with its width corresponding to the thickness of the shaft according to the girth and slightly larger diameter.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	Let S be the bag in which various urinary remedeby of an animal or sheep's wool are stored, and its volume is one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	The hole is drilled with twist drill bits, and then it is smoothed out so that the space between the holes is as wide as stated.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	In this particular case of the ailment being located far from the crucial area of faith, or extending beyond it; and placing that bag there; when placed on you, tighten that bag on your head between two distinct pieces of cloth, fastened firmly: But the quality of applying said bag is such that once applied with the medicinal contents of the bag (which should be warmed according to the tolerance level of the ailment), make sure it's neither too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	The patient should lie on their back, and raise their hands to the sky while resting their head on a pillow; then apply an ointment or oil (or any similar substance) onto the affected area of the hemorrhoids. Next, insert this into the rectum with gentle pressure, ensuring it's done carefully. The healer should then take the pouch and squeeze out its contents vigorively until everything is evacuated from the bowels completely; after which, remove the cradle (rectal applicator) entirely.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine brings about restlessness, take as much power as you can (referring to a sleeping pill or similar), and if you're still awake all night due to it, there is more risk of fatigue during the day.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you suffer from stomach ulcers and hematemesis (vomiting blood), undergo endoscopic cauterization when necessary to promote healing.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If you have ingrown hairs or pimples on your back, here are some tips for treating the issue with gentle and safe methods:
De curacio de las plaguas.	Cure of the Plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	In the event of a snake bite, it is advised to remain calm and seek immediate medical attention. The appropriate treatment for such incidents involves the administration of specific antivenom according to the type of snake involved. I will recommend the suitable cure and medication based on the completed assessment.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	I say that the rivers are diverse depending on when they were formed and according to the terrain in which their courses lie.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	The fever is caused by such intense heat as that of stone, incision with a knife or chisel, blows delivered from afar, fire, sword, axe, or similar causes related to these types of injuries.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	The pain that I bear in these parts of my body is as much like the plague which strikes upon the head, neck, chest, belly or groin and similar parts of those limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	I will recommend the treatment of some diseases and provide a thought process and guidelines for other diseases as well.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	In the beginning of these simple chapters, let's remember that the comparison with complex ones will come at the start of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	When a simple head injury occurs and is not a fracture, the physician should consider the following: if it's a mild or moderate concussion, only bruising has occurred, and there is no severe bleeding; in that case, one must think about performing an immediate cranial lavage (washing out) due to possible blood clot formation. Do not delay this procedure, especially if the amount of bleeding warrants it or if there are no other contraindications for such a washout treatment; particularly when the drained blood is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	S be the surgical excision of the lesion in the affected area, and observe for signs of recurrence and ingestion of bulky foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	May's diet strictly forbids any cause, reducing both hours of fasting and avoidance of meat or dairy products.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	The patient is allergic to the beach, if at all exposed to sand castles, it causes an intense itch or rash in their skin or a reaction to dust present on the spot where they have been standing.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	I'm quite sure it is an insect bite, the hours have passed since you were on the beach and if it's recent and your wound hasn't healed yet, then that powder I suggested before might be helpful.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	If the air has changed since then, those moments of pause between us are only meant to wait until we are healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	The storm is either big or it's just a passing shower and not a hurricane, and if the lips of him are not closed by words, then he will adjust those lips with a stitch according to how I instruct on the type of stitch.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	When the plague is discovered on the body and not in the blood, it is usually held by a small suspension, then inserted into that place where the bubo grows; and with medicines and restoration of flesh around its area, he commands the malaise to be drawn out through nutrients: creams and ointments like them, among which are composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	If you are bitten by a decomposing snake and it doesn't leave the wound, then carefully cut around the area until you reach healthy tissue, and cauterize using heat or caustic substances to prevent infection.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	In this particular case of hernias, if the artery or vein from which blood flow may occur is not separated by medicines, then you should inquire about it being an artery and, if found to be unruptured, incise that with a spatula or lithotriptor; and if necessary for healing as we have mentioned, cauterize within the area where the blood has been separated.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	If these pests are simple and small, their cause may seem trivial; therefore you sprinkle this powder on them so that when the air changes, those pests will be eradicabale.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of the polvera is as follows: oil from crushed olives one part, dragon resin two parts, and non-extinguished bird'annointing oils three parts; all finely grounded and strained, then pour over a receptacle, firmly pressed in and tightly sealed within that vessel. It is coagulated with the aid of the dragon's blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	In cases of severe pain or injury in the feet and toes, it is advised not to apply heat directly as this could worsen the situation; instead, proper medical treatment should be sought for healing.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Cut any vegetable with water alone in the presence of you without lemon or ginger juice.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	In this surgical procedure for large veins, it is necessary that the vessel be stretched over them and that their walls are tightened, provided that the tissue has not been altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the air has changed, especially during summer times, it may not be advisesteemed for this powder to be used in that position, but rather then apply those oils which we have mentioned, or lie down on the raised platforms with wheat flour and water-milk mixture poured over them; and use this other cure when they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	Maya decides to fix the small crack in her wall by herself and later shows off her work.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	The yearly care of the skull fractures that are being treated.
De las plaguas del col.	The stripes of the tiger.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	In May's case, the fever doesn't subside at night, there is no difference in medication, and it occurs during headaches when they are simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	The root of the tooth is either cut or an artery; if it's nerve, not enlarged, but rather avoided because intense pressure causes stinging sensation, as if knowing and seeing that it resembles vinegar and similar things, unlike roots and opposite those.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	There is nothing that stops the storm for any reason, because the nature of nerves is to thunder and the continuation of it is in the brain, which is the most important of all body parts.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	It is a decoction of medicinal herbs, so it's as if it has been washed with warm water, along with infusions made from rosemary or non-rosemary oils, and using the technique described above, accompanied by humid extract.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	The storm is great, the hours he spends stitching, or pressing her lips together, and with care seals that wound inside which should be healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	May's slope to the cliff is either in depth or declines at the lower section near the coastline; over time, it erodes and deepens that area further.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	In the event of a cut on the skin near an artery where blood flow is present, you should immediately apply pressure to stop the bleeding, elevate the area if possible or tie off the wound with a tourniquet as needed, and seek medical help when necessary.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	Mays si ja ha inscrit las spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvades las venas del col. Lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena amb sutura sobre la cana del golayamo e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e apropr strenh aquel am estriçament decent, e deixsa aquela per alcs jorns. E apropr cura aquel amb enguentamens en quals es stipticitat i excitacio entro que sia sanat.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	If the plague occurs in your city and you can provide shelter for everyone outside of it, do so; otherwise, those who are unable to find refuge should be allowed inside their homes but segregated from others, until the plague subsides and they may be safely integrated back into society.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	The fog is the latest shower that has covered the area recommended to you with dust.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	When May is on the beach and suffers from a foot ulcer due to a fishbone injury, treatment will soon be applied with water that heals and brings relief in his mind.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	From the blisters of a cold or from similar wounds made between the shoulders and on the chest, whether through scratching, cutting with a knife or whip, or by marks/tattoos.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a blow of thunder or lightning and the time of its depth, also take note whether the rain comes with winds when the disease begins; then know that the storm can be deadly.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	In the light of dawn and upon the recent tides, pause in your first hour to bathe; avoid using any oil that retains sore within depths or returns to the heart causing harm. Instead, rest by an attractive place, but remove those two veils of night during the day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	If the ointment is not on your person, wait at the entrance of the waterfall cave long enough for rain to gather and fill it up; then make sure the illness sleeps upon the water so that its power can be washed away in the rushing current.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If a seafarer suffers from three days or more of fever without developing serious spasms, muscle cramps, strictures in the throat, and exhibits other good symptoms, then the plague is considered cured; hence, treat that wound as needed until it'amooths.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If Mays' sanctity of blood is exempted and he always has the opportunity to learn about it, know that he made a mistake with his sin. Therefore, be forgiven through your mercy.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the wound is a clean cut of space or cotton and it's shallow on the surface of stone or wood, then heal that with water mentioned above through stitching if it'angs large, or with powder if it's small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	Mayes has received a reward in the form of precious stones, and now you hold these treasures loosely, sometimes your hands tighten to extract that wave, if separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	"If the tides are not separate, hours pass before the storm breaks and their extraction is completed."
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	Among other paralytic ailments affecting the limbs, one that promotes healing is the use of water therapy we have already mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	From the wounds of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that sometimes occurs in the stomach can be severe, mild or occasional.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	There are various types of nerve bundles in the dura mater, which cause an intrusion and the seam being more intense and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A small disruption is easily made in another way, and the reduction of it is even more difficult if you do not know how to intervene at its place soon enough, because it will become thickened and blocked by what has been introduced into it too quickly.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best disruption is migration, as in that case it's not difficult to reduce bulk, so it'amo also difficult in these two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	The four main types of abdominal wound closure techniques are as follows: 1) Primary intention, where the edges of the wound are brought together and closed with sutures or staples; 2) Secondary intention, in which the wound is allowed to heal on its own without surgical intervention; 3) Tertiary intention (delayed primary closure), a combination of the first two methods where the wound remains open for several days before being closed; and
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	There are two other sutures that communicate with the others but only their own in the sagittal suture of the abdence.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	Recommended Expositions and Declarations
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	When the rain is small and there are no obvious causes for this condition of the skin, it can be difficult to reduce it; at times like that, water becomes one of two ways: either due to a small degree of disruption as we have mentioned, or when the swelling of the skin is caused by the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	Now take the same time as before, cover that which you submerged with a wet towel or shirt soaked in warm water, and cypress, spices, and herbs placed inside where the inflation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Some injections contain a substance that has a soothing effect, and it is better than water alone for the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	Then let the infusion be prepared, add hot water to your teabag, as it contains high levels of antiocuros and tannins which can cause irritation if taken in excessive amounts.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	Mays is excused from this healing process as there has been a slight interruption in the therapy, hours are divided due to a minor issue with the equipment which had broken down earlier.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	The first curative treatment is better when it's owned rather than dried up and not being occupied with drying due to necessity or scarcity.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	The delicate form of the instrument takes on a graceful shape.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One slice of the pie is acute, and the other non-obtuse, with a subtle tip, but not to be confused as mere sharpness like that of an edge; rather, it's slightly obtuse.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	The rain is intensified and flows out of the gutter; hours later the shrinkage process should follow its natural form at its own location, preferably on solid ground if possible for better results.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	Mays quando haja disrupciones amplais, estan na parte baixa do abdómen; as horas crebarás te fazer mal no tú doso, e parar-te-as cambas pús autos que o teu cabo; e se está na parte mais alta de souso ventre, as horcuzas tu parar-che-lo cabe e o péllido pús autos que las partidas deixadas.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	If the disruption occurs in one of the two sections of the belly, pause your thinking and your consideration for a moment so that you can realize which section is affected more than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	The great floods and the minor floods shall you govern.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	In small doses of water, pause before taking the medicine which should be among your preferred ones, and have it administered by someone you trust completely, who will place their lips on yours, and gently uncover those lips to pass the medication from one person to another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common suturing technique: take a needle and cut it according to the width of the wound; then approach as close as possible to the edge of the disrupted area (annular), hold the needle at one, other than you do not pierce through both extremities of the tendon or ligament that has been detached. Do this on both sides between which you are going to pass it, until it penetrs from one part and the two ends of the tendon/ligament have been joined together; so you have completed four stitches.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	A strong rope is attached to the anchor cable, and some heavy weights are thrown in opposite ends, and the rope is added with the two ends together for strengthening; then a second anchor cable is laid down there and tied as close as possible to the first one. Continue doing so if necessary until both anchors hold securely.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The fine needles subtly penetrate the skin; and thick ones are of difficult insertion in the vein, hence it should be aimed to make them fine as well as thick.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	The needle should be placed on the extremities of the leg bone in such a way that the flesh is not incised excessively, and the graft heals properly.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	Suture extensions beyond the junction lines are not permitted as they may prevent proper wound healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	A proper incision of the joint capsules where the needle heads are not allowed to cause any harm, place them over the expanded pulley sutures throughout all areas, those that hold the needle ends; and insert them in a way such that you know the flaw has been corrected.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of suture needles are most appropriate for small wounds, up to the point where you would use one or two sutures at most.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Mays's second cranial suture is transverse and it lies between the two parietal bones. It involves managing all four corners of the coronal, on both sides, in one session, using a needle that should be sharp enough for precision yet gentle to ensure subtlety and adequate thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	In which the needle will have pierced these four tips when you start from that partially inserted part, reduce the needle length by one millimeter at a time so that as it retracts, the suture box is lifted to the appropriate height above the tip for the stitches to follow the second type of stitch of fabric.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	There is a pause between each stitch in the bulk of this fabric.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	Here is this sewing kit for all the men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	E was struck by lightning during the storm, which caused a wound in his stomach, and there was severe disruption of the major part of a palm crop, and it had been ejected from the surrounding buds around two palms of the main bud and resulted in disruption on the member; therefore, I reduced that condition after the injury had persisted for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The storm had subsided in the space of fifteen days or so, and calm returned, along with sunny weather. It rained intermittently during this period and eventually turned into pleasant conditions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	The other cooks had only guessed that it was not poisonous; and by a miracle, I found the herb in question, which wasn't known or used for any medicine, but merely as a spice on fish dishes. However, after applying this plant to his wound daily with freshly melted snow water, he recovered completely from the burns.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	According to the descriptions by Paul, there are two types of surgical sutures that he uses.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	Begin stitching the incision closed and insert the needle through the first hole to the second hole.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	Thus, with the needle inserted into the canal and following its length throughout the entire body, let the tip of the compass used to make the introduction be placed at one end; then let the needle penetrate through to the other end opposite where it was initially introduced using the compass.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	E draw through that hole the tube so that it enters; when you have done this, wait for another guidance from the edge of the entrance to the exit opening in the wall; then place the tip (or plug) on one side of the tube at the entrance and press the other end into the exit opening.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	The text you've provided appears to be in Occitan, a Romance language spoken mainly in the Occitanie region of southern France and some parts of Italy and Spain. However, it doesn't appear to convey any sensible meaning in either English or French. If your intention was to translate from another language or context, could you please provide more details?
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	He begins by placing the pin on this side of your chin, and cross that with an arm stretched out at the end which is on the opposite side, and pulls the needle from the thighbone through to where it enters; then he stretches the other arm across to where you are looking. He pulls that from the thighbone as well.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	In the first turn, you choose one card and another card from a different suit; then in the next turn, you pick up another card of any suit within that same suit as your previous choice until you have collected all cards according to the example provided.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this stitching method is that you tear the skin as if sewing a piece of cloth, so that you take one edge from the extremity of the limb and let the other edge be enclosed once you complete it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The second type of suture proper is the one made from gossamer thread and this technique involves taking apart that secondary slightly lumpy piece you have mentioned, wherein you cut off any medicinal substances present on it; then add all parts to its corresponding part fittingly by nature. Then they attach the end of another piece to the other end of the mirroring piece at their respective extremities and this is done as per your instructions.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Keep the needle at the end of your sightline from your starting point, and make it pass through to the target distance in that direction on the globe; then look at two points on the circumference (circle). Then rotate the neednard so that it passes through those two points.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	The sun sets over those shadows and I must penetrate through some of the departing lines within the forefront line in two extreme directions apart from those on the opposite side of the lake.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This type of stitching is better than the common threaded one, and it's a kind that I often remember.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Wallace
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	The following is a translation from Old Catalan (ca. 14th-15n centuries) to Modern English:
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	The surgical correction of a diaphragnatic hernia in the abdominal region can be more difficult than that of other parts of the abdomen due to its location and complexity.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	The medicinal juice of the poisonous plant is a judgment for other plants.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason for which you acquire the recent plague in your blood before altering the air and softening that liver, as well as preparing it properly, is because of the period of rest over the red-brown liver.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	If the air has changed the disease, then times of rest on that high mountain will bring about hard rocks and break down the fields, which are consolidated and observed; and similarly as in the healing process of other diseasters within which it is cured.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	If you do not have the prescribed medications at hand, wait until it is possible to obtain them; then start taking them according to your doctor's instructions, as well as maintaining a balanced diaster, so that healing can begin and prevent the need for other treatments in case of simple illnesses.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	If you fear that the plague may affect your main members, I advise you to submerge them in a quality bathing oil or olive oil and rest on it within the areas between the limbs and remove any ashes left.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	If someone feels pain or rotting in their gums, due to various reasons they may become worried that time is running out; especially if the swelling has reached the bone and it's causing a piercing sensation within the depth of its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	The bacteria that lives in the thick mud is more likely to be harmful than those living in thin layers.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	The "gegunu" vein is difficult to heal because it does not receive skin grafts like other wounds; and also due to the large number of vessels present in it as well as its size, and the complexity of that area, along with its proximity to nerve tissue.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	The raw material of the sea is cloth and obtaining it freshly, you must reduce them according to your honesty and the quality in which you shrink the sails while manufacturing.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	Mays si ai passat a luchar pel seu espacio i ja he estat victima o negre; hores que tu tens a aquella amiga sobre el lloc que es denigra de ti, per cui vingues fluxos de sang, quar en la teva tela són els teus vasos sanguíneos i artères.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	A pier projecting into the water, which is opposite to that of a lighthouse, and it pauses at both ends of the hanging part from the left side of the departure of the wave; due to this your shelter will be anchored on its edge and there will be an opening in the cloth as well as the lever of the wave.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Memoriam of the Plague that Occurred in Leeds.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	In infants, a diaphrageal hernia is small and often can be repaired through minimally invasive surgery (laparoscopy), as the condition usually results from an impact of force on the abdominal wall during birth and involves the anterior part of the stomach, which may become old and develop a fistula, with symptoms such as gas-related issues.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	You should seek the treatment of your ailment that is not addressed in natural healing methods; rather, focus on acquiring subtle remedangs within yourself where healing energy and willpower are strengthened.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	You should consult with the doctor once your condition has stabilized and avoid any strain on the injury you sustained in your abdaminal area; do not attempt to lift heavy objects or move around too much, especially if it causes pain or discomfort in your injured region. Also, refrain from bathing until advised by a healthcare professional and continue with your prescribed exercises as recommended.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	The fish that has been caught in a net or trap is often small and delicate, so it should be handled with care according to this method: You take large-mouthed frogs; then you carefully place both lips of the frog over those of the fish's mouth. When done correctly, as you close your mouth around the frog, it will grip tightly and not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	In the first phase, ants establish their presence in a new area and do not stop creating colonies as more workers join one another based on the total population size.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Cut back the branches and remove all excess leaves from your garden, but do not harm any creatures or their eggs that may be hidden within it; thus, avoiding causing any ill effects whatsoever.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It may be possible that the bud scales are observed by means of a subtle instrument which is formed from animal skin and attached to the rod; so that you take the end part of these scale filaments, have them skinned off, then attach the end of those threads to the thread of the same instrument, wrapped around it and placed within needles. Then place all this in the device's opening.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	This spool of thread is but a mere ant hill in trust and hope's second way.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	The Mays plague is vast and widespnread, mainly if it's in one of the subtle layers, as hours are not blunt but rather subtle, and it's not a direct cure from everything.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	The treatment of Zucher's disease and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	When the whole plague and inflammeboxes were spreading, when ancient wounds appeared along with them, if these ulcers are not healed properly or completely, they remain swollen for a long time in any limb, universally called fistulas; this condition is known as phlegmon.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	The correct translation for the given text in Catalan to English is as follows: "The mucous fistula, according to truth, is a tough, white mass which has no pain and its softness is so like that of cotton; therefore it's not named 'penis hair', i.e., penile pain."
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	"H" stands for relative humidity in Alcu's houses, which increases due to condensation; and as the humidity level decreeps within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	Some dewdrops of this moisture accumulate here; they are few in number and thick but also fine (subtle).
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	In the division of this, during those hours that you mention, there are ulcers which do not heal nor become healthy flesh but rather water due to one of nine causes: One is lack of strength in its constitution; or due to malice; or because between it and the lips the skin is hardened preventing natural growth; or because it's caused by dirty laws; or because the matter that enters into it turns rancid and is of poor quality; or because the medication used for treatment is unsuitable; or because there is corruption in its region, leading to pestilence; or due to the nature of this place where eating is difficult and healing from ulcers takes a long time as it does naturally.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I will present all those causes and the signs of those illnesseste as well as their cures and medicines in division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	I will explain to you the treatment of the condition known as "fistula," which is caused by surgery in your leg.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	These are fistulas that affect all the body parts: four of them reach large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the liver, or the peritoneum, or the bladamoen, or to one of the ribs on the back, or to any of the compound joints made by similar composition as that of the head and neck; and those which are close to the main limb.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	The following one of these fistulae is considered a disease with difficult healing and does not respond to treatment; it requires labor and knowledge.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If there are any deep fistulas whose location you cannot yet identify and upon which you rely for healing, but you wish to achieve knowledge of them, try using a metal probe or iron rod; if the fistula follows a straight course, pursue it until its opening.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If Maya has a twisted fistula, she should investigate the cause of that wound which may be due to subtle lead and as the weight of her body is displaced and bent by its tortuosameness.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	Si una fístula entra en el ano con un flujo horrible, esto puede indicar una posible infección o inflamación alrededor del área anales. Es importante consultar con un médico para obtener un diagnóche correcto y tratamiento adecuado.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	A Crestiriser l'orrimento per gli orrimenti, dove l'umidità che si crea in quest'ultimo scorre verso le altre orrimenti ed esce da loro.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	A comprehensive inquiry regarding the knowledge of whether you possess certain nerves and understanding if it's a distant or proximal fistula may involve examining symptoms such as multiple external openings, strength in palpating for any abnormal mass or swelling near the affected area, pain sensation during pressure application at various locations. Furthermore, identifying signs indicative of underlying causes and associations with possible conditions like abscesses would be crucial steps towards diagnosing your condition accur
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	E cum tu auras estat sobre totes aquelles causes am estat verades, lahoras ve a la curació segon confiancia: i es que tu consideres lahoram si és fistula apparent proxima o en lloc salàs, llarguina de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o d'un dels llocs les quals yeu a ti ja digut.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	The saliva from Lahor's fistula dries up as soon as it is spoken of in the narrative; its water that lies within that filtration and corrupted flesh, along with any liquid formed in the orifice of the carnation, or from dew and appearance, must be healed if present.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the anal fistula is of long depth and straight course, then cover it with incisions as close to each other as possible, and thoroughly cleanse that area from all its corrupted tissues; and apply poultices covered with acute medicines, and insert those within the cavity of the fistula which you have understood well.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	Eau fortifiant, some water solutions are used to prevent the progression of urinary tract infections caused by bacteria during their occurrence in a fistulous condition.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	A prop restores that which generates healthy flesh within healed skin.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If the wound is not healed by now, we'll have to cauterize it as soon as possible.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	The cause of the fistula is on the bone and it requires a certificate to confirm that; meanwhile, you should ask for proof regarding its severity following any reports. If there's no contraindence due to veins, nerves or major limbs as I have stated earlier.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	Mays si the bone is at your discovery and it's in lu alcuna corrupcion, then immediately go within that place where the corruption resides; and with great care approach the one who has been infected inside so they can be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	If it is not healthy and pure like that, you may realize that you have not yet achieved the complete eradication of corruption; therefore, you then carefully and thoroughly apply reason to cleanse it and thereby rehabilitate yourself entirely, thus restoring your former strength.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	If it is healthy, then you're fine; but if not, understand that this corruption lies in the depths far within the body, which has not yet reached there, and therefore do not worry about it at all.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	If the affected bone is small or close enough, now you may use fine forceps which are suitable for the location to gently grasp and manipulate it.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	If possible, I will extract all of them; if not, at least without any reason diminish your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	If your sorrows are caused by any form of dampness and in ignorance there is neither fear nor mistake, these aching bodies shall be buried here at this place, and the bones will be exhumed later on.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Do not scatter the bones of your work near a water source that could overflow during heavy rains or floods and cause them to be washed away. Additionally, ensure that the wall you have cut into is properly sealed to prevent any leakage, and reinforce the section where you made the incision during construction.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you fear it, pause above the submerged area over there of three days old oil or an Egyptian incense container or one of the vessels with green contents; when those containers are broken, and the bones separate from their ashes, that residue is scattered.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Mays is as great as the fish of Camba or Coissa or any other similar ones, and whatever may be corrupted on it is just its face, lately so much that the rust appears only at the back end, while there is such darkness and corruption; however, with proper restoration, the beauty returns.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	In Mays, if the bone is completely corrupted, it has already reached its core, at this point, it becomes necessary to remove that fragment and completely cleanse the area where the corruption has occurred, and then treat within until healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Sure, here's an example and explanation of my work in the context of creating a website:
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A man of thirty years old, who experienced pain in his groin, and from there proceeded malignant swelling on the tissue where it spread to the inguinal area that became an extremely large abscess, which was not caused by any external factor.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Therefore, the procedure for treating this type of abscess involves extending the affected area using a disinfected scalpel. Next, we cleanse the skin around with antiseptic solution to prevent further contamination. We then make an incision along the length of the abscess, draining its contents and removing any pus-filled sinuses; this process is performed gently so as not to cause additional pain or injury. Following the procedure, we apply a topical ointment containing antibiotcuents to promote healing and prevent infection. The area should then be bandaged appropriately for optimal protection until it has sufficiently recovered.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And so the many-blessed master of words around two years ago, and I did not focus on those sins in my writing, until I was called upon.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	I saw the chaos and the matters that were occurring there in those huge battles; by then, everything belonging to him was all scattered and his complexion had turned a shade of lemon.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	Then, you willingly enter the haunted house through one of those eerie gates and reach out to touch the wall.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	In the pursuit of investigating these anomalangs, one might endeavor to uncover their origins and trace them back to all corners of the kingdom.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	"Therefore you shall know and discern about one of those horrific events that took place when I discovered a portion of the bone, and it was found to be corrupted; already rotten within a section of the coffin where something had penetrated into the pillow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	Certaine, el meu colega estava muito bem equipado para desvendar esse assunto que eu havia investigado e preparado.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	In my will I have declared that the property shall not be in your hands but rather this corruption which has accumulated and been separated. I have already resolved it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	A comprehensive guide to long-term sustainable flood management in medicine does not exist as a single unified approach but rather encompasses various strategies and methods that can be implemented over extended periods of time. Here's an outline for such a guide:
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	In this text, the second person (you) is asked to explore and learn more about "the first discovery" and continue combating against it if it still exists in some form. The context of what "the first discovery" refers to is not clear from the given information. It could be a scientific breakthrough, a historical event, or any significant finding that was made initially and may require further research or action due to its ongoing relevance.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	In this verse from the Pardoner's Tale in Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, the speaker is saying that he has come to possess a certain corruption and has been obliged to undertake its cure and restoration but it hasn't yet been restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	So you discover another wounded being and do not stop trying to help it little by little; moreover, make sure to restore its health first before moving on to something else. If it is not restored within a certain period of time, extract the essence from it (the core issue or problem), and then use appropriate medicines to consolidate and cure it completely.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	E is not necessary in the operation of lungs and bronchi section but for the disposition of airflow and small tolerance to pollutcuation, as well as fear of lung death at all times due to excessive defecation - a condition known as mucociliary dysfunction.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Thus, let him be sound in health and full of vigor, with his flesh tender rather than tough; and may he have good disposition throughout his body and return the virtue to it; and may he talk about his plans positively without causing harm or inconvenience on any journey.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	Mays, when cutting off the prominent bone of that limb you have chosen in this manner: then take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that ligament using another thick ligament; and place the first ligament on the flesh left over from the removal of the bone. Then stretch out the extremity of that ligament so that you bring the flesh towards its previous attachments, then expose the flesh at the location where you wish to saw off by separating it from the skin. This will prevent the saw from cutting through the flesh when making your cuts.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	When the harvest season is over and most of the tables are cleared, it's not forbidden to use a wood fire, provided that you don't burn food waste as this may cause contamination.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	E cove que sa serradura sobrar sobre les locs corrupits petit a petit, car si es en la cavitat del os corrupcio no apareix en l'aparició al sentit, i forxa a serrara de l'altra vegada.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the bone is rotten and not protruding, then one part continues from the other, and the decay occurs either wholly or partially in a piece of it; occasionally you discover that the flesh is entirely gone throughout all parts; as soon as this happens, stop drilling at the place where the decay was, and continue along with the tool used for the first piece.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	Let S be the set according to the rules of corruption a small one, as we have stated.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	Corruption at the joint causes it to become weakened and splits apart at that compromised spot; thus breaking off a piece from itself.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	Corruption is in the continuous interplay of two junctions; it's not due to lack of reason but rather inaction.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	Whether corruption is in the mind of the man or woman can be difficult to determine; however, it may help if you explore how corruption manifests within yourself and that you cleanse and eliminate any such tendencies according to each situation as much as possible. Seek counsel from someone wise, and ensure that your actions do not cause harm or discomfort to others.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	E sapiens quae sunt insidiores et las serras quae ad ossa insidiantur, secundum modum sui, sunt motus; secundum situationem ossium, atque parvitatem ac subtilitatem ac magnitudinem ac dilucidationem eorum. Quare tu debe preparas omnem speciem operationis instrumentum convenire ad hanc operam.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	That operation signifies for you on the matter of the instrument about which you have long knowledge and extensive experience with these methods; and witness to methods causing harm, as at times you've employed them when it is appropriate for your discomfort in treating any illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	In this chapter, we present the names of various instruments that could potentially be affected by your restrictions and their simplified versions for easy understanding. These instruments may experience some limitations in terms of usage and accessibility as a result.
Forma de serra:	Serrated shape: In this context, "serrated" refers to a saw-toothed or jagged edge. This term can be applied in various fields such as biology (e.amoeba), geography (mountain range with jagged peaks), and culinary arts (knife with serrated blade).
Forma de autra serra:	Alternative name form for "serra": Mountain range or mountain chain. In Spanish, it could also be referred to as "sierra" which has the same meaning in both languages.
Forma de autra serra:	Title in another language (English): Alternative Mountain Range
Forma de autra serra gran:	Another way to express "gran" in Spanish is by using the word "énorme". So, translated into English, it would be:
Forma de ray:	In Spanish, the term "forma de rayo" translates to "lightning bolt shape" in English. This refers to a pattern or structure that resembles the jagged and branching path of lightning during a storm. It is often associated with suddenness, power, and intensity due to its representation as an electrical discharge in nature.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the tip of this vector follow a cone-shaped curve, and its points are arranged according to a star-like pattern.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	In the original text (Catalan), the passage describes an irregularity in teeth alignment, specifically mentioning a gap or deviation at the point where two joints meet when they are corrupted and that there is a large open space ("la boca gran ampla").
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Title: "Major Similarities Between Spanish and Italian Languages"
Forma de razori menor:	Menor forma del rasero:
Forma de razori lat:	Składać się na kategorie:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The shape of the blade is a curved, broad saber made predominantly of iron and steel, with handles crafted from hardwood.
Forma de lu:	Shape of Light:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Una forma con cavidad o concavidad se refiere a un objeto tridimensional que posee una superficie interna hundida. Un ejemplo común es una taza, donde el interior está ahuecado para contener líquidos. Otras formas de este tipo incluyen las cáscaras de los frutos como las naranjas o manzanas y algunas estructuras arquitectónnicas como arcos o bóvedas.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Frase con un tono más sutil en español: "¿Sería tan amable de aclarar su punto?"
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Another way to express "extremely curved edge" in English could be "highly bent boundary."
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	In Romanian, "petoitel mic" translates to "small eraser" in English. So the phrase you provided would be translated as:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Way of insertion where the screws are implanted into the bone.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Title: Alternative Methods for Minor Surgical Incisions
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another scissors; this form resembles the letter V and its tip is like a saw, and it can be found in multiple places in proportion to the bones.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Una forma de rai que conviene al ratio del agujero en los huesos sería una hélice. La geometría helicoidal se encuentra común # Question: What is the value of $n$ if $\log_{64} (n) = -\frac{1}{6}$?
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The vertex of the lune is formed by a triangle and an acute angle.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	E is a famous iron mine in India, and similarly claimed to be responsible for all the rumors of rusts, scissors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	The exception of the extreme cases and the bone's lock mechanism.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can become diseased or injured due to intrinsic causes or external ones; if you have medicated that corruption with medicine and the cure does not succeed, sometimes the disease may go away on its own of a member which it does not affect by any cause. At this time, you should enclose that limb in an oil bath so that the discomfort can be allewed (alleviated), thus helping the illness to subside and preventing greater harm or damage to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign of that which happens, is that the limb becomes black inside wherein lies a vein or artery that has been burned, or it swells with the darkness inward to the blistering thereof; and therefore causes great distress to the body as a whole. And hence comes the intense pain from such injury.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	"If it seems to be the cause of some poisonous harm, as with a scorpion sting, sea sickness, flu or allergies."
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	If there is bruising or compression at the end of your finger, cut it off immediately and do not give room for infection to enter into the wound.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	If you access the iron, please use its rightful time on the stove, and do not leave it there long enough for rust to develop.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	The years pass by and the clock is wound up in the junction of time.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	Corruption sometimes passes unnoticed, and at other times it is caught in the act; hours on end are spent dealing with that evil; administering another solution to this issue requires a great amount of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	It seems to me that the time has come for a change of heart; let'n be disclosed within one of these nuts.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	As we climb the steep hill, hour by hour our spirits rise higher with every step.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Mayes jumps into the denouement, hours later his ideas merge with the essence of the ending.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	If the corruption has not yet arrived at the heart, then in that case it is not anger but dismissal and letting go of the pain, leading towards death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The procedure for severing the limb or cutting off the flesh is as follows: you shall have the ligatures in place at the part preceding those which you wish to sever, and then remove another ligature over the site; extend the minister a ligature towards the previously placed sites, and extend the ministerress another ligature on theirs. Then separate the flesh that lies between two ligatures so that it is completely exposed, and thereafter cut or shear as appropriate.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	Article IV - The parties hereby agree that all disputes arising out of or in connection with this contract shall be resolved exclusively by arbitration and not through court proceedings unless necessary to protect the rights or property of either party. Furthermore, any damage awarded as a result of breach or misconduct will be fair and reasonable.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Mays decides to stop the flow of blood by applying pressure at the wound, or pauses and uses some powders that prevent bleeding; then promptly returns to his medical treatment once it is complete.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	A member of the agreement shall promptly notify the other party in writing, and within a reasonable time that he or she is ready for termination.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	Here is the text translated into standard Catalan: "Aquest hauria sido l'accident al qual he caigut sobre el meu pare, aquestes lleus accidentals són causats per la negreta que havia assegllat en el meu pare amb un adustor que era a combustió."
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	From that corruption arose first in the land called Hell where he had taken everything for himself.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Then that man prepared himself in order to go and heal the wound so that it would become cured on the limb. He inserted his finger inside the joint, and it started to heal.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time ago, there was a great corruption in the kingdom I mentioned earlier.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	Therefore, I have paid you for that excess water and the money spent on medicines due to my illness, along with other expenses; and this overpayment does not recur in another entry within that account where it originally occurred.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	In this land of abundance, the people were driven by greed to exploit its resources without restraint, and I feared not only the consequences of such excess but also the possibility that they might ignore the deaths caused by their actions, as if the harm was inconsequential.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	The man whom you had captured has returned safely to his land and informed me that the entire hostile army was prepared and defeated, and he is now safe.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	E has not included this narrative solecuously, but because it is of great importance regarding the spread of this disease and its significance for which it was written, as well as according to which it should be interpreted.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	The treatment of hemorrhoids and the quality of clitoridectomy with medications.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	In case of an abscess on the skin or underlying tissues, if left untrewed and allowed to spread further, it ruptures and perforates. This results in pus being expelled from its cavity along with thin layers as if through a channel. The discharge does not reach far nor imbeds into bone, nerves, or tendons. It is called a sinus, and it doesn't lead to further corruption (gangrene). It is also known as an unnamed fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is extended before corrosion sets in on any member, at that time it's called a fistula and not rust.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	The care of its use is that inscribed therein should be followed as much as possible; mostly when it becomes subtle and is done with skill, and made so that it does not adhere to the place due to its decay.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	If you wish for the wound to heal and that infection does not spread further, now attend to cleaning it with a cleanser or antiseptic.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	It is believed that the substance known as sinu should be used; when time has passed and it is great in quantity, the brain which contains this product exudes an odor. The Egyptian medicine mentioned herein consists of olive oil, vinegard (vinegar) and cumin seeds mixed together in equal parts and heated on a fire until the substance dissolves; then cooled to room temperature for use as an emollient or salve.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Go to the bed immediately after a hot bath that is necessary and dissolve the aloe vera gel; and compress your sinuses, and strengthen the nasal orifice, and leave the medicine in there for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	B. Apply a generous amount of cream or lotion to the affected area, and leave it for several days until it is fully absorbed by your skin and you feel rejuvenated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Some vessels are filled with warm water and lime (ash), when it is not ready, this remedy for you; take the ash of vines, and pour over them warm water; then sit on that vessel as much as possible until the afflicted area feels better.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	In cases of no intolerance to the Egyptian remedy or ashes' water, at present, one should use a combination of warm water and honey thrice, and for cleansing purposes, a mixture of warm wine and honey is used since honey has purifying and washing properties. Wine helps to adhere to mucous membranes, especially when it contains an excess of stiffening and drying qualities.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	The sea has granted you a few drops of water and instructs you that the wound is now healed; those are to cleanse it with an ointment made from mixing oil and water, so as to maintain its healthy condition.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	E is a substance that dissolves the fat in the oil and makes it emulsify; which also acts as an excipient for certain medications and other ointments that have properties mentioned in the formulation of the ointment.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	If the anus opening is too narrow for receiving the enema nozzle, gradually and carefully widen it with a small metal rod. Then pause while applying a warm cloth or using Egyptian balm or Basilisk's ointment that has been warmed up.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	If the orifice is wide enough, you may need to add some lip stitches and reduce the amount used in your cleansing process.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	In the event that a hole of which water flows is located at higher points than the outlets, during dry periods it will be found in the lowest place where the flow enters, because when the flow becomes blocked in the underground channels, the flesh is generated therein.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	If it is not within your capabilities to thoroughly dry the inside of the wound, after you cleanse it, prepare yourself for the subsequent procedure as follows; ensure that there are no constraints on your arm and proceed accordingly with the required attire.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	In the context of medicine, "consolidating prescriptions" generally refers to combining multiple medications into a single script or streamlining your medication regimen for easier management and better compliance. If you're considering consolidating your prescriptions, it is important to do so under appropriate medical guidance to ensure that the combination of medicines is safe and effective for your health condition.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	The cloth should be of such great quantity to cover the entire area; and then insert the forceps into the right side of the vaginal orifice, slightly wide enough to fit in the vaginal orifice; and place another layer of linens over it according to the amount of space required, and keep it there for a prolonged period near the vaginal opening so that the blood flow is not obstructed by the cloth after one or two days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	The one who is over the offense of the sea, he cleans it constantly by himself using all means that are available at his dispose.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	To understand whether the food you consume is high in fat, low in fat, easily digestible or not easily digestible, it's important to read labels and know the nutritional content of what you eat.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	Aayso, consider the site of that wound, whether or not it causes pain to the patient in this place, and if there is an abscess present.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	The prescribed medication is prolonged for a certain period in this treatment, and you observe the matter that accumulatur over the sinus tract opening; if there's adherence or if it becomes more attached on the third day, then remove the dressing at any time and change to another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil; lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, car la sanacio de tu se apropria, car so alces homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las once plaguas e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de ti.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	In case the sinus is inflamed and congested for several days, realize that this particular sinus does not adhere; if there's a delay in adhering of the sinus with prolonged cause, adjust it by means of medication dehydration. If the medicines are moist concerning their substance and quality, they should be dried similarly to an effective ointment that has been over-applied due to excessive zinc intake.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The following is the translation of your text into modern English:
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	In that action, when the braces are not in place, take a mortar and pestle; or take myrrh and cinnamon and ointment, and crush them all together until they form a fine powder, then pour water over it and stir well. Apply this mixture to your gums where you have placed the incense beads, ensnaring them with the paste, then line up the area again after application of the remedy.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Some well-aged wines are combined with long and rich notes of celesteblue (and blue celestial) honeydew, erythritol, and chicory root powder. These ingredients or their blends are adjusted to taste, some intensified, then sieved and sprinkled over the selected mead; finally strained.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	If the cold persists and is not cured by this remedy, hours know that the decay is in the lungs or joints, or in the bones or ligaments; then treat the inflammation with the same method as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Cure for calluses on the feet, nails that have been filed down and scratched, as well as a cut on an added digit and a severed toe.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaritium is an infection character cuases by the Staphyloccuus bacteria which results from neglecting to remove a thorn or splinter of wood from the finger or foot, and greatly affects other areas as well if it's prolonged without proper treatment. It can be classified as a type of pustule called an acute pustule, or as tissue corruption with flesh being eaten away internally that emits a foul odor. This leads to the extreme end of the infection and turns the affected area dark brown in color.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Then take the oil that we have mentioned in the division and do not let your carelessness overshadow it; hours before you start to apply it entirely on the excess that is raised from the gulf, properly disinfect the wound with it, for cauterization has been deemed useful in such cases.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"If the bone is not broken and the joint is healthy, but there are injuries to its parts - then gently puncture that area with an instrument, enscribing as subtly as possible at the angle of the joint; afterwards impel it slightly towards the wound and ease in a way that makes cutting into the flesh easy. Pause when you sense resistance from within the fissured tissue or when blood appears. Apply a healing ointment internally, while ensuring total purification by using corrosive medicines; then continue with care until complete recovery."
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	May it be that corruption has already begun in your house; then you shall seek to extract it and remove it, for there is never a time when something so tainted can remain inside the house without being cleansed.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the rust and corrosableness occur in the said thing, then insert that into one of the nuts according to its recollection, and while it is being inserted, make sure it enters properly.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If you injure or bruise your thumb and experience severe pain, at the first meal take aspiramolets (aspirin) to relieve the discomfort, and keep the thumb dry with a sponge bandage placed transversely below it. Make sure that the pressure of the bandage does not reach into the flesh above the joint; otherwise, you may cause severe pain and excessive tissue growth in that area due to trauma, so treat it with moisturizing ointment if necessary.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	Maya tells us that the quail is native to many of these rocky hillsides, it's quite plump and fat, with strong bones or a robust wing structure.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	The sound of thunder is heard in the silence of the meeting point, it's his birthday celebration at the foot of the oaks mentioned earlier.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	The one that is born in a palace does not necessarily turn out bad, and the one who is born at crossroptions will definitely be good.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	Among those who are meat-eaters, the portion is small, and it consists of a sprinkle of salt with their dish.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	From the one who is born at the moment of convergence, healing is difficult; therefore beware of excessive use.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	In the place where it is customary to eat nuts, take and insert into your mouth the round red meat of the lamb's heart using one of those appropriate knives, and carefully cut inside until you reach the healthy part.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Mays (May) concludes that all the properties mentioned above pass back to their original owners or heirs by birthright, through succession due to certain circumstances such as death of an owner who has no heir, consolidation after debt cancellation, fire damage, or similar events. Therefore, it follows that such a transfer takes place in accordance with the mentioned provisions.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	A propulsive force between layers of loosely compressed iron ore prevents them from being significantly solidified and separates these layers through a thin layer of molten lead, which is solidified according to its composition.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	If there is an accident resulting in paralysis of the arm, its recovery will depend on how it's prepared and corresponds to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the passion of vices, I am scars.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are so swolamoen, and thus veins become twisted thick full of superfluous melancholy which cause problems in the limbs of the body, and their major occurrence is found in the chambers of those who travel frequently, labor intensely, or carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Administer the purge of black fever for several days until complete evacuation is achieved, and then apply pressure to the patient's superior vena cava.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	May's curative properties of their olive oil are attributed to two methods: the first is that it contains antioxidant dark skin and the second method is that it has a high content of polyphenols and is extracted entirely by mechanical pressing.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of linseed oil is done according to this method: initially thread the needle with a waxed thread after ensnaring water-caused tail when the sinew becomes loose enough for it to be resolved, which makes it sticky from the wax, and tie up the bundle firmly on the upper part of its departure near the tip end, then press the vein in one place, or two places, or three wide spots, and elevate the black blood with your thumb toward the lower part of the bundle near to itself, moving back and forth until the desired quantity has been collected.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	A is about the plague and commands her to avoid foods causing black lethargy (the Black Plague).
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	It is recommended to avoid phlebotomy when the veins are swolebound and water flows incorrectly.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Mays increases his strength according to this method: Firstly, you take the hind leg of the malady and place it in warm water until it swells up; then insert its tail into the water so that it becomes mottled and its veins become prominent. Alternatively, if he is exercised by rigorous exercises but does not have access to a bath, immerse the affected limb until it is reddened.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	The correct sentence in Romanian is: "E apropie în ceea ce are codă în drept partea vei secție pe lung sau în ultimul de la venele, sau în cel mai jos al unei pieze."
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	A prop of the code aim unsure and excise the vein throughout that appears in the feeling, and it deserves your attention to times that request declining at darkness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	So come with ease you tell that change to the white keys on your keyboard.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Go to the place where two roads meet and choose one that is less traveled by; it makes all the difference.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	If the section is adjacent to another section and approaches that section within three steps, it may remove the opponent's piece from outside of the line in which it was placed.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	A prop applies to that and inclines it towards that on the forward section of the stem, and then extends to that within which there is air for the second cut, and extends from the branch above that one.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	The water that flows within the section which is more noble or higher than all sections, within which everything springs, shall be directed towards it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you don't obey his advice and extract it while heating, the magnet becomes twice as powerful. Then turn the iron core clockwise or counterclockwise until your entire device is fully assembled within which it should be placed.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Here is the translation of the text into standard Italian:
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	With that entire array of healing herbs gathered, the hours pause upon the land of the seaside submerged in wind and scent both rosy and not, bringing healing to all within reach.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the piece is twisted having deviations in its involvement with the parts, and it does not follow straightness as we have mentioned, then you shall cut across that deviation for the entire part of the twist and towards the enclosures of involvement, and support this at a level wherein you raise the whole.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Watch your section carefully and make sure you don't puncture the vein and injure it, because it will be difficult for you to raise it afterwards; use caution in that matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incident in which someone has suffered damage.
Forma de unci orp:	Una forma de "unció" en español sería "proposición". Aquí tienamo las dos palabras, una en inglés y la otra traducida al español correctamente. La forma correcta es como sigue:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not too thick nor as sharp as a needle and it does not have an acute extremity so that it would harm the vein, and it has leonine flexibility - if it were subtle, it would puncture the vein by its subtlenameness; hence, let's consider it to be superfluous in thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	The removal of the great saphenous vein, often referred to as "saphenous vein stripping." This is a surgical procedure commonly performed for treating varicose veins or chronic venous insuasteria (CVI).
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is produced in the mines in Thar Desert as well as in the lands of Arabia and in the dry lands of less fertility in India also, where there are neither grasses nor trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	Fee earned elsewhere is generated in other places through various channels and processes.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	The decay of cold is a filthy creature that leaves behind the bone, thus producing snakes and worms and scorpions and germs generating between the bone and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	Sign of the onset of his illness is from this vein that erupts in fiery inflammaturgy; and nearby the place becomes blistered; and there begins to ooze out from the spot of that vesicle, which appears like a plant's root.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some abortions occur in the first, second, third, and fourth months of pregnancy, as well as later on. I have verified that one woman had an abortion at six weeks, while another experienced a miscarriage throughout her entire pregnancy, which was caused by the actions of esteemed medical experts.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	T ant number of years ago from any cause to the parties involved, it was sealed in wax and notarized by that very same person.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If left untreated, the hours will unfold a serious illness and it will wrap around you; do not assume that just because there's no immediate pain or injury involved, it means you are outside of danger - for if you ignore this, it is contradictory and intrudes into your body causing sores, inflammebility, and severe ulcers.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	The water from the spring is usually drawn gradually and should be carried away gently in containers without spilling any of it anywhere else.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	The branch of this river flows through the villages that lie along its length for approximately twenty-five feet and it has reached me measuring about six feet in width.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	If the snake is bitten at the time of its medicine, it enters through the wound and pierces that long vein into the heart, so all contents are evacuated from the body within days, providing medications; and immediately after this procedure for treating abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein has several branches known as varicose veins, mainly when they appear near the wrists or on the neck, and lead to bulging outlets, which are characterized by what kind of outlet branch?
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	Therefore, we have considered the division and water that is above mentioned in it.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	From the section concerning worms generated under the skin, it is referred to as cattle disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is known in no land as "mad cow disease," also called bovine spongiform encephalopamia (BSE). It appears several times over among cattle and has been rarely transmitted to humans, where it shows up as a similar condition known as Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD). The disease affects the brain tissue in all directions, causing it to crumble apart internally while still maintaining an outer layer.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	The generation of light is caused by the decomposition of certain body fluids, thus accidentally producing worms, snakes, earthworms and roundworms in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	E is feared for its malice when it goes around the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, causing great harm therein; hours later, it overwhelms and destroys it, leaving nothing but ruins behind.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	Then you may want to know how to treat that and extract it; however, this cannot be done unless you must walk around the subject and appear before them in person, so then you need to bring what is on top of it and what has been left behind by it into a bundle and bind tightly over it and extract from there.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	The text seems to be a mixture of Old Occitan and Middle French, possibly from the medieval period in Southern France or Italy. It discusses a subject that is preordained (perhaps sinful) by nature but not by actions, and warns against causing corruption within oneself. Translating this into modern English could read as follows:
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If at any time you feel an ailment coming on around your head, immediately strain the forehead with a tight grip and press down upon it; then rub that area and continue to do so. Also make sure to use body cleansing medications for purging bad humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the passage on overcoming grief.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is known in our native land as "Plica Polonica," and the pain it causes affects various limbs, with sensations that seem to change from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	Once upon a time, there was a young boy who loved to read and learn about new things. His parents encouraged his thirst for knowledge and bought him books on many different subjects. The boy became so passionate about learning that he started teaching himself in addition to attending school.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	A woman sick in a village called me to her, and I found her arm vein with a small inflammamoine, and she said it had been there for an hour; as it moved around, it seemed like living silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Therefore, she felt pain in that area and noticed something stuck in the muscle; it stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Incorrect correction in the other course as it reaches the opposite arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	A prop recommended to me that it turned out to be all its own after I saw it; and was too amazed by the exchange of light and the speed from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	I had seen that before in the better houses according to that manner, but I also saw many cases where severe pain was transferred from limb to limpit.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	The rain does not fall on the trees as it does on a woman's hair.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	No, it is not water but through the window that the woman was seen, with her bare shoulders and exposed veins; in this apparition, a gust of wind seemed to be perceived.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	It is necessary that you do not appear in this rebound cure for those who are diabetic and have a history of blood vessel complications.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	E-cum I want to heal you, and the patient feels that pain; for hours it's not visible on your appearance as we have said, but strengthen over it and leave him lightly while seeping through any openings in the windpipe, then cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not visit your woods often enough, then you shall cure that annoyance of the body and the water which expels winds, as well as those foul smells and poisons from serpents and their likenesses.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Extracting honey from beehives.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Sagetas (arrowheads) are diverse according to the types of stone used and according to their shapes in the bodies where they are found, as their diversity is due to those that have large points, small points, concave or dull edges; and from those which have three angles, and from those to which sockets are attached.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	From the members and limbs in which death occurs according to two patterns: either your principal or fewest body parts together - just like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, nerves, intestines, stomach, and their appearances; therefore when you see any of these members appearing to you as signs of death, the cause I urge you to avoid bloodletting in that area if it is one where the majority are prone to die or if these bad omens do not appear and the sagacious aspect is not foreshadowed in the depth of the member, then treat and cure the ailment.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	The serpent'annointed seal is located in the middle of the temple atop your head, where an intense attack may cause severe consequences such as head injury and cerebral damage. This can lead to symptoms including but not limited to: sudden strong pain sensations, dizziness, vertigo, blurred vision, speech difficulties with slurred or mixed words, inflammation and a burning tongue, memory impairment, vomiting due to nausea, severe weakening of the voice, destruction of language abilities, white watery discharge from the nose resembling mucus indicating humidity infection, and watering eyes as if overly salty.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Then go ahead and tell me this secret, but please refrain from disclosing the curative process or extraction of the saponin, unless absolutely necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	Mays leans the stag'vee horns against the chest when touched by it, so that she is near to her left nipple, and feels a hard surface there, not soft at all; and great is the movement of the stag's antlers, resembling the rhythm of one's pulse, with flowing black blood, clotting in extremities, sweatiness, fever, and sudden fainting. Therefore be aware that death descends upon it swiftly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When the chest segment is filled with blood foam from the pleural cavity, and the vessels are affected by their location in the collarbone area, along with changes in the color of illness, and there's labored breathing with great spirit exhalation, there is a need for fresh air intake.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If the arrow hits the skin in the region that is near the heart, and the pain lasts for hours on end, and there is a great and vehement throbbing pain as well as sighs, and not all of the limbs' muscles are moved:
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If the cat gets a fish hook stuck in its stomach, severe vomiting of undigested food can occur.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If the stone is located in the bladder and is stuck therein, are there any openings from the urine flow, or a tear in the tissue, or some rupture which does not give hope for treatment through its extraction?
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If there is a blockage in the bladvee and it leads to an overflow of urine, with no apparent cause for such discharge, and severe pain accompanies this ailment, you should know that it could be fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, and their appearance of these parts, shall be saved according to the major provisions when the skin does not tear a vein or an artery and is not poisonous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	I highly recommend reading about how these sights have been associated with healing in the past and what it signifies regarding their curative properties.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason for this is that in a man there is a small gland (the lacrimal caruncle) near the edge of his nose, and you can remove it to another location while leaving the hairs from your earlobe with it; he will be cured, and nothing bad will happen to him.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	From the Jew I extracted another arrow that was lying in his gray shirt sleeve, avoiding lifting his eyelids too much, and by then the arrowhead was concealed and could only be seen as a small tip attached to its own handle, which was a very sharp Turkish-style arrow without any ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	The Senate is in session, and the Senator from Judiciary has had an unfortunate incident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	Once upon a time, there was a man named Cresta whose ring had been lost in the ocean. The ring was made of pure gold and adorned with precious sapphires. Determined to retrieve it, he devised a plan using two anchors tied together. He cast his makeshune into the water where he believed the ring lay submerged, then gently dragged it upwards. To his delight, he successfully retrieved the golden and jewel-encrusted treasure from beneath the ocean waves.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	In the story told by Friar Jordanus in his book "Medicinalis Compositum," he recounts an incident involving a man who found a snake inside his stomach and contemplated that it caused his death. After thirty days had passed without any changes to his condition, Friar Jordanus decided to act on the matter by removing the snake. Consequently, the patient recovered and no harm befell him thereafter.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	A man had placed a candle on his back, and the wick was secured over him, and after nine hours, he extingebated the candle at the edge of the table.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	A woman was given to him in her womb; and she became pregnant within him, but the child did not develop as it should have naturally, yet the woman experienced no harm or complications with any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I saw another house where the wall cracked on its face and the pavement was disrupted as well; however, there seemed to be no apparent pain or damage caused by this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	Extract the saddle of the ruler's horse that was found in the place near his house and had already been tilted towards the right by a little; the entire saddle was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	The person called for the repair of his asphalt pavement within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I approached the edge of the roopertop without drawing attention to myself; and then I inquired into that which tempted me so subtly, yet it did not seem dangerous. However, I felt a sting on my right ear, and thus I suspected that the sting was from the extremity of the roopertop.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	E Amplastregui has planted the tree in the place that is attractive and digestebile, making me believe that this spot becomes more appealing to me than the sacking ground, hence gradually surpassing it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	The storm did not occur at the accident site where the barge had been located; I continued to observe it from there for several days and no accidents happened. Meanwhile, the planking was solidified and the sickness caused by the strain on the front of it persisted for a few days during which time one day I felt the vibration within my nose and told you about it.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Consequently, I would like to take a break from discussing the acute medicinal corrosive disease within the focus of your interest. Moreover, I have tried and tested the substance you mentioned, and found that its extremity attaches firmly to the bark.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	In the event of an accident causing severe injuries to my leg where I'll be unable to walk for some time, and during that period until I can see movement in the area within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	In my capacity as the judge of Luca and Gaetano, I find that during their dispute over property boundaries, they both acted improperly and interfered with each cuffs (property), without due diligence; however, it was Luca who employed more cunning methods. Specifically, one day he used forceps for a stealthy descent onto the disputed land, in accordance with the form of those devices as described by their capital city's guidelperture, from which I extracted his evidence and restored order.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	The judge ruled that the cartilage of my nose was not restored and I had it repaired along with the graze which is consolidated; the wound healed entirely, but now there's a bad smell without any reason in this regard.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	The quality of extracting some quotes as a way to emphasize rules and meanings that have not been mentioned, because the sections of this text and the definitions thereof are not understood by means of narration nor comprehended in those lines.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The wise craftsmen know a little bit about the matter, and it is the heat that is present compared to what is absent; and they discover new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes related to the craft when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Thus, I believe that statutes are not imposed on members by default in the ones where they are established but according to two ways: either through the influence of the place in which it's made or due to opposition from another party.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	From that which is taken from the land, the fat animal comes in and its meat is thrown out and skinned.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If you do not adhere to the rules of hunting during certain hours, which specify times when game may be taken within a period spanning up to three days prior to the closing date for hunting in that area and until it has been properly prepared and transported out of the region.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	If you resemble this agreement and comply with its terms, you shall extend the duration of that loan by an additional period equal to one day per year, as well as reevaluate your interest rate on a daily basis throughout each day until fully repaired.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	If you do not comply with the rules and regulations of our event days, your performance on the competition circuit during that whole period will be subtly influenced by the atmosphere of the event itself, as well as external factors related to it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	If the splinter has penetrated into one of the brain's cavities and appears as the cause for the unpleasant symptoms mentioned above in those accidents, avoid its extraction and let it remain inside until its presence is equated to a few days; if the splinter goes deeper, death will not be delayed.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	If the ring is not actually inserted but only touching the skin and does not enter into the vein, and you do not feel any illness for a few days, then try to remove it yourself by gently twisting the ring or using oil/lotion. However, if there are signs of infection or other complications arise from these incidents, seek medical attention promptly.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Mays (Mary) decides not to comply with your request for extraction and, therefore, you manage the tractors in the circuit of the area as if you have reported it again, and so that they remain within the location until they are safe.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	The bird's nest is located on the branch, and it's surrounded by feelings; often you will feel that urge, and if you do sense it, then promptly direct those emotions towards suitable actions for maintaining the relationship.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	If you cannot perform the procedure on the beach due to tidal restrictions or length of drill pipe and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you will work above the high tide line where it is possible to extract the core sample.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	In the event that you find yourself without pliers to remove a ring stuck on your finger, do not panic and try these methods instead; all you need is time and determination:
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you perform the extraction of the tooth in any location where it is present, always use an ample amount of your own manual forceps throughout that period; and apply subtle manipulation so that the tooth is not broken and can be easily extracted with minimal discomfort.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you cannot appear within your hour, the parties involved shall have forty days to submit their pleadments in relation to any cases pending in that circuit and be prepared for trial thereafter.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	When this outpouring of blood disturbs you, then manage that water which we have advised for healing in your capital.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Pay attention to your tendency towards impatience or nervousness, or restlessness, and practice deep breathing techniques as much as possible during the massage session; it should help you achieve relaxation, tranquility, slowed down movements, and steadiness just like I do.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	Thus let us create the frame such that if there's any malfunction, it follows according to the figure which dictates how the framing should be done for better durability.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	It is not always possible to manage your time effectively, but here are some tips that might help you with managing it for various tasks.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	In case the tree saplings are outside of your property line and have been previously planted by another party or someone has encroached upon their external space out of respect for your own designated area, then you may cut it down; the quantity taken should correspond to the amount seized by forceps. Then, proceed as follows: If these actions were done intentionally against the will of the tree owner, legal consequences must be considered and consultation with a lawyer is advised.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	When the mays are locked in the barn, hours pass as they lie under pressure that tightens its grip on them, and gradually it becomes stronger until they release their grains, providing us with nourishment.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	C si no, lassà quella per sempre da quel luogo e apportala qui dentro dove c'è la fiamma.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the rope's end is in that place, you should pull it from there for hours.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Mays, if the baton is broken and you wish to administer an injection, then carefully approach her while she remains unaware of your presence; if she's hard of hearing, mutter quietly in her ear so that it touches the side of the temple and gently press the syringe against her.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	If the sail is concave, then the hours will push that wind forward entering into it, since the sail is expanded by the wind.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If the pan is detoxified, you should cover it with your hands and remove all the meat on which you see blood, if possible, and thoroughly wash that area of water that you deem appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	If the wound is on the head, chest or back, near to the bone, nerves and vital orgnels, then do not touch it; if it's in the stomach area or bladder, be very careful as these areas may cause severe bleeding. Take care when removing debris from such wounds and treat only those that are already healing.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	En inglés, la frase se traduce como "The way in which the needles are grabbed by the forceps":
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The birds' legs are bent like scissors which they use to grip the branch while grabbing it, in order not to let go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	From those of the bee'cups made by these small and large motes of spices, great or few, according to the size of the vessel and its own meagerness, and to the breadth of the beach, and to the constraint of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Mode of urging and driving this end was as much like the torment of hell as to thrust the intestines into it and impulsion from that silent one.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Title: Emergency Fundraising Campaign for Deaf Individuals in Need of Assistance
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Yes, a ball thrown inside the concave shape will be pulled towards that center and is accelerated by gravity. In simpler terms, if you throw a ball into a bowl-like structure (a concave surface), it will naturally roll back to the lowest point due to gravity pulling it downwards.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	The phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The standard veins used for phlebotomy are the median cubital, cephalic, and basilic veins. In English, these terms remain unchanged as they are proper nouns in medical terminology referring to specific anatomical structures. So, "mediana cubital", "cefálica" y "basílica". In the context of mathematics, "le cap" could be a typographical error or an attempt to refer to something that is not immediately clear. If we consider it as part of French text and try to correct it for clarity in English, we might rephrase it depending on what the intended content was supposed to convey: "Bring the pulsing veins from the temples, gently squeezed out; bring herbs found in both of these temples; and also bring tears from two wells known as 'aspicientz'; prepare a vein located on top of the forehead; extract a vein at the end of the nose; gently press a point below the collarbone; take venous points above and below the lips, known as algalic points; and also bring venous blood from underneath the tongue."
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The blood vessels that were just punctured in my arms are now numb. The following passage seems to be a mixture of Old Occitan and descriptions related to human anatomy, specifically the circulatory system' cued by the word "vena" which means "vein". However, it appears that there are some errors or mix-ups in terms as well. Let me provide you with a more accurate translation:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	E is the vein called femoral; and it runs beneath three vessels; one of those is that which follows the curvature of the thigh bone, wild hazel; and the second is saphenous, and its place lies below the vessel of domestic hazel; and the sciatic nerve, and its location lies below the vessel of wild hazel; and in the vessel there are other similar veins.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The juice of the veins that flows into the ears is an ancient remedy and migrates, nourishes, and heals old headaches and ulcers.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The quality of that sound you must listen to is such that it should be as low as possible in pitch and the ear lobes should have enough space for good blood circul circulation; also, keep your ears straight with one band which shows both sides and locations of its proper position on the head; then, you'll hear this tone, and if you feel those pulses at that tone, here is a sign.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	He takes up the kitchen knife and it is she who incites him; he thrusts that remaining vein into the artery through which the bleeding will come to an end.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	He takes your hand and raises it to his lips, gently pressing the vein in your wrist before slowly biting down with an intensity that leaves you breathless.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	In this traditional Occitan love charm, the person desires to attract someone's attention and affection. The incantation is as follows in both Occitan and translated into English:
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	C will strengthen and support the pillars within, ensuring that they are sound and secure.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth. However, in the context of this free translation from Esperanto to English, it could be interpreted as: At first, there was a desire for those skies and lands, but their purification followed.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The four veins that flow through the heart, known as great templars in ancient and malevolent chronic otitis with accumulations of excessive fluids causing sharp chest pains, are the superior vena cava (SVC), inferior vena cava (IVC), coronary sinus, and pulmonary veins.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The quality of bloodletting is as follows, which I recommend to you: using a poorly made tool and applying the instrument so that two veins appear at once for the sensation through clearly visible signs; and then try your own strength.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	You place your fingers above the vein on both sides of your elbow, as shown in the image indicated by you. Then insert the needle just below and slightly to one side of the vein; and puncture it as you did with the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to the quantity required for the test.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Remove the cast from the fractured area, and rest your voice for an hour, then apply pressure to that spot with a cold compress, and leave it there until healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	Once upon a time, there was a king who had forgotten about them and those memories of joy and celebration during the beginning of freedom.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	Indeed, the juice of leeches used in bloodletting at the forehead is applied to treat the head's ancient ailments like migraptions and foul-smelling sores and ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The quality of the flebotomy performed by you is such that I recommend to you; it's because strong pain grips its head with a band around which appears the vein; and quickly take the instrument, which is called "fossor", this is its shape:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	The tip of the needle stands out at the end of the catheter over that vein and hits upon it in the manner of the lever or another tool, and then lets the blood run according to the desired amount; and after loosening the puncture site of the malfunction, tighten up that area which is healing.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	Some fractures are suitable for the use of a Foley catheter (also known as an indwelling urinary catheter), however, it should not be assumed that all types of fractures can accommodate this device. It is more likely to apply in cases where there's a transverse fracture rather than a sharp or acute one, as the latter might make it difficult for the thin tube to pass without breaking due to its delicate nature and proximity to bone fragments.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	May's juice from the two veins that are like tear ducts of two wells for skin irritations and to treat illnesses on the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the foot massage is such that it relieves the severe pain in his leg with one bandage, and you gently apply pressure on those areas while standing atop your head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	E should have the lithotomy performed according to the guidel cuis longitudinalmente un poco ampie fratture poco, quarto en el loc no es carne; y si los litotomies son subtiles, fort la extremidad de lu è trancada.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Avoid running on the same side consecutcuously; pause for those times and strengthen them for one night, then release those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	May's application of leeches to the nose vein is believed to treat acute fever and severe sunstroke, as well as diseases affecting the face such as migraines, facial eruptions, and other issues that arise in the face, mainly when they are old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The quality of the flebots injection is that the strong illness attacks its own neck and approaches your left hand, and takes the fine needle long ago into that area on top of the nose bone just behind according to rectitude because the vein does not appear here, and as soon as blood starts flowing.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	I will administer your insulin injection gradually and as needed according to your requirement; and we'll apply it at night so that the area is healed completely.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	The Mayse oil of the flea-bite remedy for the two constraints, along with the commencement of leprosabies and various infectious diseases such as severe ulcers and erosive skin conditions, acts just like a herbal antidote.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The quality of that beekeeping is such that no disease remains from which one can save its sting and the bees are on top of this illness; and the illness itself lies beneath a veil.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	The vein gradually widens from the tip towards the end where it'amo wider and becomes similar to the other veins, providing blood according to its quantity or in response to the body's need for more water; and appropriately appearing like another vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Here lies the body of a faithful soul whose malady was not fatal; by this anchor are strengthened the diseased veins which have migrated to prevent further distress. The plague has been healed within four days.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The jujube tree's sap can cause irritation and inflammation of the blood vessels in the mouth, small abscesses, pustules, gum decay and corruption, as well as bad ulcerations near the nose and lips area.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of those bleeding rituals involves the following steps: Firstly, you tie a cloth around his neck to strengthen it and twist their lips open with it, then observe both veins on either side of the lip - one on the right and the other on the left. You assess each for darkness indicating vitality; if in the circuit of these small black veins there is more darkness on one side than the other. Then you cautiously pierce each one based on this difference.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	I am doubtful about these things, and you do not know which of them is the greatest or most evident among those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	He folds the appearance of those veins that are on my lips beneath them.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	May usually cuts the remaining veins on her labia majora.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Two of the veins that remain on either side of the tongue lead to the forehead at the area in front of the ears. They are associated with headaches and diseases of the uvula, as well as mouth disorders.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The quality of the fever that follows this illness appears when you stand in front of the sun, and it raises your tongue outwards, observing its end from one side to another, as blood flows through each vein; and the color gradually turns to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then he did not give up and made sure to avoid cutting the veins too deep while dissecting those areas, as they are close to major blood vessels.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	E is your veins that are phlebotomized in the manner they usually flow through all men, and the phlebotomy of theirs has been done according to two methods; either they put amber or olive oil at a decline towards subtlety; or they use leeches as an adjunct, and this is how it's done:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	The correctness of this section lies in the fact that it corresponds to those specific cases and according to the width of these veins as well as according to the narrowing of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Projectile mode of the bottle launcher:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	These lymph nodes become larger as they filter the blood vessels with bulging thick walls and those containing large clotted red cells.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	This is the form of foliar spraying in olive orchards.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	A fine-needle aspiration is of smaller diameter and more delicate tips, and it's suited for biopsy of thin veins that contain subtle citric fluid.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Mays's blood test focuses on the femoral vein, which is one of three veins: two carry oxygenated blood away from the heart and towards various organs, while the third carries deoxygenated blood back to the heart for re-oxygenation. The femoral vein in particular transports deoxygenated blood from the lower extremities upwards to the heart.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	At the phlebotomy station, determine which needle to use for that individual, taking into account any fear they may have regarding needles, as well as their vein condition - if a mistake is made and you puncture an artery instead, it could cause blood loss. Therefore, ensure not to use an overly sharp or painful needle unless absolutely necessary.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilica does not appear with visible damage, then you may leave it as it is and move to another one or seek some other ruin; or carry out a survey in the place where the arm ends of the bracket are located, since that is visible; likewise, you should fleubotomize (trim) them as we have instructed.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform the palm vein puncture for May, place your fingers around the brachial artery that lies within a length of skin which you are familiar with in order to locate the pulse area; then gently press on it until blood is visible. Then wrap the arm and find the concave section of the vessel suitable for vein puncture as we have described here, but be careful not to tap near the artery site excessively.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	Once again, you must gather your strength in this battle; inflation is the increase in prices of goods and services over time, and so it escapes from that very place where you've felt its impact.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	As the blood flows into the femoral artery like a gentle river of childhood memories; then you realize it's your own blood from the vessel; for long moments your words pause over that distant space; and as you press, let go of your speech, if the blood separates, many times has separated, now strengthen your arm and release that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	The sickness of the eye causes him great distress and extreme fear; he remains in darkness for several days until he recovers.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the limb does not have a black color and if you do not feel your pulse, then during that time you should cut into the artery, provided it appears to you; when the extremity is paralyzed and has lost its blood supply, or take yesterday's clot from a wound, and put it there, and pull up one side more strongly than the other over the site of the constricted vein and pulverized material enters into it on the following day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the blood has been drawn, it is valid; otherwise, healing takes place when that person who was mentioned earlier in memory of the graves from which the blood flowed is remembered.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	The extraction of the shark'n is difficult in most cases due to the limited space at the beach and the possibility of arm injuries.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	In the forest of Fusca Vena, venipuncture is less painful than extracting blood from the upper part of the arm or lower part of the body; for this reason it is composed of branches from the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have mentioned.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The butcherfly that causes excessive fear in the butterfly surgery of it, resembles a nerve; therefore, if it adjusts to the puncture of the butterfly and numbs the nerves, it may cause stupor, making healing difficult for it. And this particular nerve tends to reappear with feelings; if hidden among many people and subtle and not shown, one might fear that you should restrain from using the butterfly whereby you perform an incision of alnessil, avoiding the nerves in your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If a vein lies between two nerves, the length of the vein in the longitudinal direction is determined by their positions and lengths.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The purpose of the vein phlebotomy in the cephalic vein is to draw blood and deliver it to treat human diseases.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	In this very essence, if you want the phlebotomy to be from an olive tree or a myrtle tree; it's the safest of all veins since it doesn't end in any artery nor nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, I recommend that you seek medical advice regarding the botox treatment to ensure that it does not cause pain or harm sole groin area; instead, opt for a location closer to the spine and avoid the lumbar region if possible unless initial pressure is applied during the procedure on that specific botox injection site.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, the forceful leak in closed compartments does not allow for immediate needle aspiration at first percussion, hence it may not become a noticeable abscess thereafter.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	The quality of veterinary care and the number of animal accidents in that region are issues worth considering for improvement.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of them is which you know that phlebotomy should not be administered but for the conservation of health and by hope of healing, and that it should be performed on one of the veins located in the neck, namely: cephalic, femoral, or basilica; and that it should be done at the commencement of spring, after breakfast during spring and autumn, and near mealtime during winter, when signs of congestion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	"The patient should remain flat on their back for at least three hours after the phlebotomy procedure."
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The administration of a bloodletting by Dr. Mays that is carried out due to convenience and necessity, either during the day or at night, in any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	The following are the exempted persons from having a medical check-up within fourteen days (14), and women to have prenatal visits every month during pregnancy, and the elderly not to undergo medical examinations for those who have already passed 60 years of age.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	The E culex mosquito is used in various methods to perform phlebotomy, as it allows for the modification of its abdam before the procedure acts as a leech clamp, along with those having a retained slit cut, so that the veins do not rupture during the phlebotomy of its abdomen, which is painless and does not affect major limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	E avoids surgical abortions and infanticide in any form, as well as escaping from illness or insanity until healed completely, nor malady of epilepsy, but also fear of colic pain following circumcision, as well as vomiting, abdominal discomfort, increased bowel movements, nocturnal awakenings or vigilance and for any reason that weakens the virtue, whether physical or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	An approp is considering in subtle detail the harmful effects of smoke before water if the sand becomes thick, as well as food and drinks, and also medicines if it's possibly to water.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	Article IV - The following shall not be considered as causes for sanctions or being subject to disciplinary action, nor should they serve as grounds for engaging in any physical exercise or activity:
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	Pause the flu vaccination at the end of the day, as it's already one-third past four, just as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Then He performs the sacrifice of that animal in such a day filled with all kinds of evil events happening to creatures - as they are burdened, enraged, frightened and experiennce all sorts of physical afflictions, like being overworked, suffering from excessive pain or hardship, and appearing distressed.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	A is the case of humans, usually exhibiting fragrances and scents and having balance and similarities to those, depending on the possibility of quantity.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	The following individuals should follow the flyboys over that which is higher than the flyboy of the person who was to be flybombed.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Take your left arm and show the doctor your three tattoos, then extend that arm with your sleeve rolled up. Next, stand straight as you wrap those tattoos in a bandage.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	E is the prescribed penalty, if the transgression is not equal to it or the penalty is excessive, hours of fasting are prohibited from flowing in; or it is a mitigation, and hours of fasting are significantly reduced.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Upon the application of this technique, it is expected that those who have undergone a vasectomy will experience increased sensation and blood flow in their scrotum as the veins become inflamed and are fully engaged.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	The phlebotomist applies a small amount of antiseptic to their phlebotomy equipment and carefully places his index finger on the vein just below where the puncture will occur. This is done so that the vein retracts slightly, ensuring proper venipuncture technique for all surrounding vessels to flow away gently as if with a cord. The procedure must be performed close to these areas and attentively in relation to them. If the phlebotomist fails to do this, they risk puncturing the vein incorrectly or too shallowly.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, let the flood controller be stopped and remain alert for all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	In case of a pause in the use of the fleabane spray and if there is an inflamed vein during one cycle, it should be treated immediately; otherwise, try another treatment method after that cycle or as soon as possible if the location is not infected, showing signs of acute inflammation.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the wound becomes suppurative or infected, you should leave it open for a day or two and do not apply any bandage, as this could trap pus underneath and lead to an abscess formation, nor go in water.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	A) She is against deforestatură and loves beekeeping.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	The opening is quite small and flows subtly, and you are concerned that it does not have the amount of sap that you want, so repeat your presses in this direction until correct and adjust slightly with the apperitif, then do this quickly before the place becomes blocked again, because the location tends to become blocked in many people.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	Twice upon the wound it swells, do not press on it immediately, for that could cause harm to your veins; and rest over the wounded area near the opening of the cut, so as not to aggraeviate the bleeding.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	E smells better in this place than old and that the others smell.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	In a similar manner to phlebotomy, the medical procedure in which veins are accessed for blood withdrawal and transfusion, this technique involves making an incision across the entire length of the organ. Through this opening, turpentine oil is applied, followed by aloes and sagittaria, when it is deemed necessary at that particular point, as the blood vessels are delicate and tend to move easily within them.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a bruise is formed at the location of phlebotomy, there are certain complications that may arise; mostly in cases where the person does not have excessive bleeding but rather the appearance of a small vein and pain afterward. To alleebate this, place a sponge soaked in warm water and salt on the area for about an hour to dissolve it.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	Cave that FASA water flows toward the sediments of that vein as well as from other veins.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	In the chosen place for the candlelight ceremony, there should be no trace of blackness or greenery; and if you wish, pause over that element of water (aloen), dissolved aloes, or an extract from myrtle or chamomile or any similar substance.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Frequent coughing can lead to the formation of tonsils and lympressions, which may require a phlebotomy procedure at the base of the throat.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	So be it as you may pause upon that, and if your hours bring weariness of this compression upon that, then the intensity becomes evil and bad; therefore watch that you pause there for a cause we have mentioned before, because soon blood will flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	A saltwater is used to induce contraction in the body, so that this place may last longer and care for the other injury within which it heals.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	We remove all grains from the urn one by one according to their quantity and in order of how much they weigh, with heavier ones being removed first until none remain.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If you see the blood red, grant him a few hours of sleep before he leaves in a subtle way; and if it appears thick, allow him to leave through a more subtle approach; similarly, if it's sharp, let go of the intensity of his pain.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	In a certain area where there is abundant blood and the vein needs to be extracted surgically, both sides of the venipuncture procedure should be enlarged.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	In the case where it is feasible, let him make a counter-claim against that which is false and demand the removal of such in multiple installments; let the payment be promptly made.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The best way to perform a venipuncture is by using the transverse section technique rather than piercing directly.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This particular type of phlebotomy is free from blood leakage and nerve damage issues, and it is more commendable and safer than the transverse and longitudinal methods.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	E is usually accompanied by syncope, so you should take care that before the phlebotomy procedure you drink a small amount of water or orange juice mixed with a pinch of salt; and then lie down for at least three to four hours.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If you have an allergic reaction to any of the ingredients, do not proceed with the bloodletting process using either myrrh or honey infusion enema along with similar spices such as pepper, cinnamamo, ginger and others, or with aromatic and fragrant herbal infusions.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	The Sichuan Peppercorn is an essential ingpert in Chinese cuisine and it's often used to add numbing heat to dishes like Kung Pao Chicken or Mapo Tofu, giving them a unique flavor profile. It has a pungent taste that can be quite intense but also pleasantly exciting on the palate.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	In the case of other causes mentioned in the division at the capital regarding syncopation by embolization...
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	If the vein ruptures and bleeds for a second time, it may lead to an accumulation of blood (hematoma), causing pressure that must be evacuated through surgical intervention. The value of such procedure lies in its ability to gradually remove the blood over a continuous period depending on the amount present.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	If Mays' arm were to fall off suddenly, and his blood pressure drops for the second time, along with his strong heart rate, it would occur approximately between seven to nine hours after the first phlebotomy procedure.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	In the game of basketball, May's shot will bounce off his own court to the opposite side from where he starts, ensuring that it occurs on the second day or third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	In the case where a person has been stabbed and is bleeding profuscuously with visible loss of blood leading to fever, it's crucial that you have them move around frequently so as not to accumulate too much blood at once; this will prevent shock. Ensure all principles of first aid are adhered to, especially when performing the tourniquet technique: elevate the stabbed area and apply pressure above where the bleeding is occurring in order to stop it. If you're unsure or not skilled enough to perform such a procedure, seek immediate professional medical help.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	In the cove corner you want to unfasten your arm and evacuate the blood for a second time; as it has been closed by the orifice of the vein and it's making difficult elevation of the blood, which you press under that much vehemence and curve its extension lazily, because this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	First, make sure the area around the injection site is clean and free from any obstructions; secondly, check that the needle of the syringe (the point where it enters your vein) has been coagulated with blood in the venous opening; or place pressure on a tourniquet above this, or below at the level of the forearm. Then gently compress the surrounding area so the bleeding stops.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is thrombosed, wait until the thrombosis settles and do not touch it.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If there is an urgent need to defecate and it cannot be delayed, you should move the bowl onto a surface over that spot or another place on the opposite side of the room if possible.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The brachial vein "funnel of the arm" is usually punctured in the cubital fossa or antecubital area, when not thrombosed or partially occluded, as it consists mostly of those vessels.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of the phlebotomy that indicates the disease has entered her vein is when blood appears to darken while in the syringe before it starts to thicken, and the vessel walls become clearly visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	The text you provided appears to be in the Occitan language and not in French. Here's an English translation of your text:
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	Here is the translation of your sentence from Esperanto to English: "Let there be an open space and let your toolbox contain what you use for that spot above a small joint."
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	If the flow of blood is prohibited in your hand or feet during menstruation, try to raise your legs while you're showering; this will allow the blood to circulate and reach a point where you can address your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in those summer days, the hours you would be exempt from attending mass by water and your body being bathed in holy water during winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	The phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all other veins because further down there are no pulse or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	The botfly of the cattle warble is responsible for diseases of the rumen.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of the bloodletting that you perform depends on whether you are strangling the limb or your own mother, so that you have made it warm behind, while ensuring that the vein is inflated and clearly visible at the time; and then perform a transverse incision. And if this incision goes through completely without drawing any blood.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	E do not cross the line of spilling your own blood, lest you disturb those bare nerves exposed by words.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	A propitiate the ma in the water tail and let the blood flow freely through it; otherwise, if you do not iterate that into the water tail, the blood will become coagulated at the vein's orifice and its flow is forbidden.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	Extract the blood according to the required amount, take breaks during venipuncture by applying oil and salt so that it does not get hardened too much; similarly ensure you do everything in a tight manner.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The healing power of beekeeping is attributed to the treatment of melasai diseche.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	He operates in a similar manner as he did with the others.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	The essence or juice of the sephena vein from bloodletting is to illnesses in the lower part of the body, just as it helps with diseebilities of the mother, and retention of menstrual flow, and various ailments such as fevers, ulcers, old wounds, swellings, and similar maladies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The quality of the flebotomy procedure involves inserting the needle into a vein that is just below the skin surface and guiding it along with slight pressure against the blood flow until the desired vein becomes apparent, usually near the point where the arm bends; then the chosen vein should be gently punctured by the needle, branching out in the facial area of the wrist.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Thus sprinkle the essence generously over the field you wish to enhance, for it is better and more beneficial than milk.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	If you remove that mole on your face using a mole remover or laser treatment and leave the nerves behind it intact, pause the mole removal process for which you are moving across while you would like to cut it in half. How?
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	Let S be the set of all voiced consonants in a given language.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	The blood is prevented from clotting by the constant movement of water, which washes away and makes the blood flow through channels that allow it to be expelled.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the beekeeper makes a mistake in the first planting area and the hives are not quite correct, four times out of ten the place is ruined; but don't fear the malice (of others), rather guard against your own nerves as we have already said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Pretend as if you are the spokespader of someone else, similarly positioned.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	Certaine, e da vea sinaciaga, l'lo gai suzu dicu haviam dute le talon jace la ciavalla de la pedra selvastra.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The essence of the flea'amoor lies in knowing where to strike with precision.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The quality of the flebotomy is that the illness enters into rest, and eats and sleeps deeply under the skin layer on the chest side below four fingers widths from a single long subtle vein, which does not appear except by water.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	When it comes to choosing the right path for you, each option should be considered carefully according to your own preferences and circumstances, and then determine which one is best; whether it's following a hunch or making an informed decision based on facts, wherever that leads you will ultimately be the right place.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	She has two ears on each side of her head; and if you touch that area, the feeling spreads throughout, so at times a hand gently brushes against a lock of hair, and it's there where you see them in the second row next to the mentioned auricular and anular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	I watch over the nerves, and make blood flow in the amount you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Lifting the restrictive regulations and breaks in the field of podiatry would strengthen it considerably, leading to significantly improved health outercomes.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Wind farms and the use of their quality features.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	There were once three bears - Mama Bear, Papa Bear and Baby Bear. They lived in a cozy cottage in the forest and loved to take baths, but one day they realized that someone had been there before them! So they went on an adventure to find out who it was.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	A spinning top is made according to two different models: one of them is carved and extracted from wood, while the other is a whirling top.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	This sudden gust of wind is due to two factors; it's either very hot or getting heated up.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	The text appears to be a description of the cranial nerves in Catalan (a language spoken in Spain and some parts of France). Here's an approximate translation into English:
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	In the context of medical practice, venous insufficiency is a condition wherein veins have poor or impaired blood flow, often due to weakened valves within them that fail to keep blood flowing in one direction towards the heart. This can result from various factors such as age, obesity, pregnancy, and prolonged standing. The treatment options for venous insufficiency may include lifestyle changes, compression therapy, medications, and minimally invasive procedures like sclerotherapy or laser ablation to close off the affected veins.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	Mays necessità provoca a ventocecum per malattia o continua, amministramus ata in tot moment al desfasten del mes și în fiecare zi, la mână de slujitor e în oriunde lu se afla.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason why some men have those in which the punishment is increased when they are extracted by winds, and graveness and solidness in their head; and from those it replenishes strength and vigor on their face and head, and heat on their forehead and eyes, and darkness and dullness of senses; and from these comes the place for wind extraction. And from those their laughter is multiplied, and from those gustation in the mouth is diminished, or that the tongue is swoln up and spits blood; and from some sleep is increased, and from others they feel pain while asleep, with strength and pains and other effects on their appearance.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	In any case of such matters, provided it occurs on the third or fourth day of the month, the order should be made at least a few hours before the mentioned date, ideally two to three days prior.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The slight breeze from the neck is what gives it weight in the head and at that point where it settles into your hair; but also, that fluid is an overall drainage of your entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This shot is at the head's cleansing station, in the cranial area.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	In English: It is not adviseste to make use of that liquid which belongs to a completed fermentation or contains diarrhea; for it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	I use water from a spring that is known to have healing properties and helps alleviate the pains mentioned in ancient texts.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	The one that is above the other who overlooks it has made forgetfulness of it; and therefore beware that you order the fan to stop for a moment at the window openings, lest the generation fall into oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Mays ventosazza's extract from alkehel plant is found in pulmonary vein and basilica herbs: it provides relief for asthma, bronchial constriction, blood clots in the lung arteries (pulmonary embolism), coughing, and breathlessness.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	A cold wind blowing from the northeast, when it is accompanied by stillness in the air afterwards, causes weakness in the body and the stomnag.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	The fumigant of Alhagi maurorum alleviates accidental pains and otitis media, and migraines, and pain in the tooth roots; it is used for bronchial lavage of the bronchi.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	I advise you to avoid pressing your scars too hard as it may puncture the vein and cause bleeding. If you have a fan or air circulator, set it on low speed in the room for better airflow without causing discomfort from direct air pressure. Remember not to strain or apply pressure directly on any of the healing wounds.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	A windy gust blows away the residues of alcohol in the mouth and the corruption of the gums, along with signs of diseases present in the mouth, positioned for a bloodletting ritual that is performed on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	The May wind that blows over the two spoons creates a hat-like effect, which is made to retain warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	In the anatomy of the heart's left ventricle from the dissected specimens collected by the microscopic examination of the vasculature, it consists of three main veins; namely, the anterior basilica, middle cephalic and posterior great cardiac vein. These are accompanied by other smaller venous branches that form a dense network within the heart tissue, connecting to these larger vessels.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	C commands the fan to operate without causing friction, as its surface is stripped of flesh and only nerves and vessels remain.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	E is an herbal remedy that helps heal wounds and reduce the swelling, pus, and inflammamoins on the skin's surface.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	Make the fan spin at a high speed and ensure it is not too noisy; also make sure there are no loose blades or subtle malfunctions causing issues.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	In the Mays procession of Cambias's boats, numerous torches illuminate the scene magnificently while simultaneously carrying out all tasks of the body, and causing ancient pains in joints and motherhood, as well as menstruation, heartache, and depression; they are placed at the location for bloodletting using two sophancians, leeches, and scraping with two needles.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	Children who are severely overweight may experience fainting spells and sudden drops in blood pressure.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	The doorway leads from the backyard to the front yard and vice versamoors is the property between two gates.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	The quality of the placement of the windlass should be such that it initially pulls and uncoils slightly during early tensioning, without prolonging the position of the winches; rather pause them quite firmly, releasing them gently, allowing the fluids to return by eventual expansion.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	The process does not cease to iterate onwards until it observes that the area is already turning reddening and swelling, and when the pain signal appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	At times he would skim and iterate over the text very slowly, and also carefully consider its implications on the reader's perspective.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	The house that is made of tender meat and rare pores, cover it with a vegetable layer so that you do not scratch the surface and prevent it from becoming ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	C commands the fan to increase aeration and produce a gentle breeze that makes the air feel more comfortable.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	When the blood vessels are blocked, hours before undergoing surgery, in the first stage of vascebrading, the pathway to subtler circulation and fluidity is opened up through the intervention.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	In the second approach, May acquired data extraction from the large sample.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If the sanctions remain effective, he will make another attempt to achieve his goal in the next hour.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	At the end, when we want to extract little or just some sugar, it's enough for us with minimal effort.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	If we want to extract blood by scratching the skin, then let's proceed with a scratching procedure; and if we know that the blood is thick, it may take some hours before the bleeding stops after scratching.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	The term "scarification depth" refers exclusebly to the depth of the layer being scratched or scraped, on its own.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	If the one whose name is thick, hard, dark and its leaves are tightly packed, so that the locks of the tendrils are made more mild, open easier; if in summer it's like almond oil or violet oil or wild apple oil, or hazelnut oil, and if in winter it's similar to orange blossom oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or saffron.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	If the scent is too strong - rosemary, lavender, or oil of camomile, balms mint, or orange blossoms, and so on.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	In case the wind turbine has large blades of metal structure, it should be forbidden from being placed near buildings or other structures that could interfebrate with its aerodynamic function; and those locations must not have nearby bodies of water such as springs, streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, or similar features.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	The one from which the wind of moisture emanates, cleanse your windows with vinegar and lemon or similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	The dandelion greens from that of which the leaves are thick, wash its windows occasionally with water or spring water (which is horsetail), or with fennel seed infusion, or with chamomile, and so on in similar ways.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	The ventouse should be kept away from the bathroom sink; ensure that it is administered for at least one hour or two intervals, and let it rest near the ventouse.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	It is necessary to control the populations of sandflies, which are potential vectors for disease transmission before they undergo their flight period or prior to their peak activity season. This can be achieved through various methods including environmental management (such as reducing breeding sites), biological control agents, and insecticides. By implementing these measures, we can help prevent the spread of diseases such as leishmaniascuosis caused by Leishmania parasites transmitted via sandfly bites.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	I believe that the dish is somewhat controversial: whether it's being served with shrimp or whatever else it may be, some find it to have an aggressive and inflaming taste while others perceive it as having refreshing qualities such as cucumber (a bit too sour), mint, julep, and the like.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	The rest of the meal consists of assorted cold cuts, roasted birds, seasoned dishes with herbs, and other delicacies.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	In the land where harvesting is freed, let him take to drink mild almsiva (barley juice), or else ale of bitter barley seed; and sumac, as well as some fragrant herb between summer and winter; may he be counseled that he consume sparingly in his eating and drinking, and avoid the flesh of roebucks, hares, rabbits, young birds, and doves.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	On the day of baptism and bar mitzvah, let there be more wine than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	In certain hours, when people are affected by muscular alpharac or medicines containing musk (such as muscada), near the ventoce or after flebotomy or aspiration therapy, it is advisalled that the main members feel comfortable and the blood flow is subtle; but do not advise those who experience bruising.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	In acupuncture, there are twenty-five points on the body that should not be needled because they are vulnerable or sensitive areas, including the spine and skull base (except for certain locations), as well as the elbows, knees, and ankles. These points include:
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	E is not a curse but an attraction of the blood vessels, just like a vacuum pump on a nipple in mastitis caused by blood leakage from vessel walls; and using that to dissolve invisible bloating in the member, just like applying a vacuum over the abdomen and umbilicus. This makes the member feel warmth and pain relief, thus resolving the bloating.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	The hillside is prone to rockfalls when seismic events occur in its vicinity or due to the strong gravitational pull loosening rocks and displacuating them from their location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	Applying pressure on the buttocks and groin should be avoided during kegel exerciseby those experiencing discomfort.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	These windows are only swept with brooms occasionally, and sometimes they are cleaned using just water; at other times they are cleaned with a special solution or focus cleaner.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Some poultices are fully saturated with water, used in the treatment of lupus erythematosus.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The water should be cool enough to make the bottle full and have plenty of grains; it could be pure water or water in which there are clusters of suitable herbs.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	The shape of the venturi administered is determined by the width of two holes, according to how we have formed them; and the amount of pressure should be equal to a palm's breadth; and it should be in length as much as possible along its circuit, with the narrowing being small proportionate to the quantity that enters through one hole.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	The sun is shining brightly on the blue sea where the members are enjoebling their positions in order to catch some fish; they use nets, lines and hooks with baited citirips, large margins, leon, enguals and terses so that no one gets away.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	F is the midpoint of a transverse line segment that crosses GEF at point H or F, and it's located exactly in the middle of EG.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	That's this great windfall we have mentioned before; and the small portion of that, according to its illnesses and condition of the one who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	The gums of infants and those of other individuals are tender, while the gums of young ones and large sharks are tougher.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	In this location I pause a vessel on fire over the extended arm that reaches out towards a small candle made of beeswax, and place it there upon the cross-beam in the center of the tripod, so that the vessel is ignited by setting its tail end alight. This way, the flame does not burn down the arms of the ladle.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	A certain herb is placed over the sick person's limbs, and it is said that this will help cure them if they are exposed to strong winds without causing any harm or burning on the spot where the herb was placed; soon enough, the illness would disappear.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	The following is the translation of your given text from Catalan to English using the Lusophonic approach (Portuguese): "The company proposes Igneys [a name] according to its pattern, and iterates it whenever there are any discrepancies in that."
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	In the treatment of polio disease, a tube in a cast is used without any transverse or groove, and it is filled with water instead of being administered as such; it rests solely on the limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the form of wind: The stronger this gust becomes, the better it gets because it can receive a greater amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	In the United States, Congress meets at the Capitol building in Washington D.C., which is where lawmaturization occurs. The number "XCVII" corresponds to the Roman numeral for the number 97, but it does not seem related to this context directly without further information.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodsuckers are not administeruted in joints but rather in the limbs where it is impossible to establish suction points due to their small size; so like the gums and similar tissues, or on a naked skin area as if it were mentioned earlier.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	The quality of using those that you have found bloodsuckers in the spring waters from polluted sources.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	People suffering from diarrhea should drink plenty of water throughout the day and night, avoiding any alcohol or spicy foods that could further upset their stomach. They should also consider enema therapy for relief during mealtimes if necessary. Additionally, applying a warm compress to the affected area may help reduce inflammamoent.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	When the leaves turn into a rich brown case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	It is better to be in the calm sea and sink than to be caught in a storm at sea. (Translation of Piedmontese saying)
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	In the old days of Laharre, hours were spent washing in the local stream; and it was enjoyed and expressed with great enthusiasm.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	If the leech bite is prolonged near the concrete of bloodsuckers, and it oozes, then after a few hours remove the cloth from your leg in cold water, and keep that which contains the exudate covered tightly so that nothing can escape.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	If the sanctum is multiplied and hours are spread over its vitriol trissac (threefold), or walls and appearances to their stiptic causes; within which the sanctum is separated, they should be paused on the place where there are shelled broad beans peecued, and laid within which the beans adhere to the location until separation occurs.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	If necessary, you can rotate the leeches by turning them gently when applying them to the affected area of the skin. It is important not to force or break their jaws as this could harm both the patient and the leech. After feeding for around 20-45 minutes, depending on the size of the leech, it will naturally detach from the body once satiated.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	If leeches are banned from use, bloodletting hours shall be held in vain or even using a needle on the spots where bleeding occurred; and they will only cause pauses, for those who feel any soreness immediately afterward.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	The old recipe for a traditional Catalonian dish goes like this: Take some small wild mushrooms, sprinkle them with a bit of thyme or salt, or ash, and cook it soon after. Enjoy your meal! (Note: This is an adapted translation as the original text seems to be referring to preparing mushrooms in Catalan.)
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Chapter Three: Restoration Techniques
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it concerns the restoration of bone fractures and joint dislocations.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O ye of old, do you know that they boast about this capital with the fools and commoners alike? And those who never respected our ancient freedmen nor learned from them a single letter?
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	For this reason, it has led to the fact that this method of scientists in our land is being deprived; and I will not forget it at any time for ever; and since then, I have not used it except by reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding within which I extracted the science from those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	The translation is: "A research and studies conducted throughout the course of one's life."
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	I hereby declare in this chapter all that is contained within my knowledge and which has been the subject of my experiment; so it is accessible to you others and reveals its occupation by elongation; and extends into its end after elongeration; and demonstrates at its conclusion various forms of structures we have administered with it, as it is done through additions in declamations, just as I did in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First capital.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summa and collection of broken bones that require the preliminary description before we proceed with recalling the individual parts and various components.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	In this initial chapter, we shall convey the essence of geometry as presented in Euclid's Elements and how it relnates to our present work; This includes an understanding for those who may not be familiar with these subjects, and also for those eager learners like yourselves.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	In case you have any bone fractures or dislocatur, torsion, or craniomandibular dysfunction, it's recommended that you visit a healthcare professional for an initial examination and possible treatment options such as arthrocentesis or manipulation. However, there are certain cases where these treatments may be contraindicated due to underlying health issues, severe debility, advanced age, during extreme heat conditions, or in the presence of intense cold. In such situations, it's advis
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	"Consume food abundant in herbs and small fowl meats such as quail or pheasant; avoid fatty meat and filling your stomach with various types of food that may congest blood vessels, especially if you have a history of coughing fits. Do not consume excessive quantities."
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	Three hours later, he returns to his original regiment with which he is accustomed to fight.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	Thus, once the broken bone starts to be healed, as soon as the pain from consuming nutritious foods with low fat and protein, such as wheat grain cooked in water, milk, eggs, fish, kidnecks of cows, blood, fresh peas, meats or similar items is gone, this regiment has been made by coagulating fracture more strongly and easily.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	In the fields and among men, as well as old and weak individuals, it is not feasible for them to be continuous and stable according to their nature due to the drying out of their body parts.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	Bones are formed and continue to develop according to their nature throughout the drought of those members, and they also remain and consolidate those which were in at the end of clemency, just as the bones of little children do.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature also adjusts and neutralizes any excess of all those parts which leads to grossness that adheres and strengthens within us; wherein lies the source of weakness and frailty, as fire does during consumption, unless prevented by some means.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	For this reason, it is necessary that you abstain from foods of bad quality, such as those with heaviness and stickiness, as well as greasiness, which we have mentioned earlier.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The type of fracture varies according to the member involved.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	The types of bone fractures are diverse according to the variety of members, so a fracture in the leg is different from a fracture in the head; and a fracture in the hand is different from a fracture in the back; likewise, all other limbs have different fractures.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	An overview of all the types of fractures can be found in their respective sections within this capital, distinct from one another.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Various types of bone fractures in the femur.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	The types of bone fractures are diverse; an arched fracture occurs when certain stars happen to be present; and some variations have a longitudinal length of the bone; there are also fractures due to compression and traction, both occurring and non-occurring, as it is prepared for writing, which results in a plagiocephaly and disruption on the cap, and a small crack.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	A complete specialty of cuisine, this restaurant is sure to offer unique and memorable dining experiences in its upcoming restoration, evoking nostalgia for its former glory at these locations.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The water's sound is known as a bone fracture; its twisting and winding nature along with the prominence and visibility of light reflecting on it when you come closer to your mother, gives it an unmistakable quality.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	It's not an obvious fracture nor does it require immediate attention when you touch the bone; there is slight discomfort but no severe pain. However, this could still be a hairline or stress fracture and should be examined by a healthcare professional to avoid further injury.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there may be some degree of tortuosity or a small fissure, so do not worry about the shape of your heart and overall compression; take a pause before taking any medication that reminds you of that moment when it was necessary to visit the doctor's office; and continue with such subtle strictures.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	The one who lays claim to the place where it is arched and not divided into two or another element that does not reach the sky, as if remade entirely of its kind, should start rectifying what they have possessed from their hour when an ulcer occurs within them.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	If the eye boils with an abscess, wait for a few hours before considering surgery to remove it within one or two days when the abscess subsides; and proceed accordingly based on each individual case of swelling or inflammatury that you may have of levitation and ingenuity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	The restoration of his health and the healing of his wounds were considered a miracle by those who witnessed it in that place where such events occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	E = "A proposal is made strengthening the one that will follow this recollection of yours."
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	In the event of a broken arm with two separated parts, hourly medical attention is necessary if it's your right or left arm, or if it's your mother's and the limb is small; or you have two slings or one sling and a strap.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	S is your position where you pause the limb according to its natural figure, while letting the extended parts of the limb relax; now proceed in returning those added parts again to their original place and follow each method that may apply to their respective locations.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	Look upon the strength of your faith, so that no sickness or injury befalls you due to your work; and use your power accordingly to reconcile each other as best friends in accordance with these guiding principles. (Note: This translation is an attempt at literal rendition but may not capture nuanced meancujent or idiomatic expressions from the original Catalan text.)
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	At that very moment, it would be appropriate for you to touch your mother's hand; if there is any other cause present, correct that and equalize them according to the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Extravasion and compression can lead to the formation of bruises and hematomas due to their intense actions, or result in muscle strains as we have seen through the use of these devices.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	In relation to this topic, one must consider the proper positioning of a body part before initiating movement or exercise; also ensure rest and tranquility. Warn against excessive strain on that area during your waking hours and sleep time, and notice any unnatural movements or agitation; be mindful of its function in all its movements; wait until the position of the affected body part is adjusted so as to alleebate pain, which may occur when changing from one position to another. Seek a posture that does not cause discomfort; and ensure proper alignment during the recovery process to avoid any torsion or deformity in the healing limb.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	The quality of the limb's flexibility is as I have described it; thus you know that severed limbs vary in their smallness and greatness, and also in shape, according to those factors.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	The little ones are like the arm and the staff and appearance to those; at times they seek shelter in a very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	The fish that are as large as the basket or the bowl should have their skin wrapped and hardened so that the ligaments connecting the larger member tighten it from all sides, although there may be some imperfections in them.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Begin with the application of a cold compress to the area of the strained muscle, pausing every 20 minutes or so for convenience, and then gently stretch the affected part. Apply a small amount of cream as needed.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	B) You should go to the location above where you caused the break and strengthen it more than the previous restriction that you had enforced at the site of the crack.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	A topical cream promotes the healing process around the site of the fracture and gradually softens any scar tissue, eventually allowing you to regain full mobility in that area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	The band is wrapped around another band, and the latter is placed over it so that they are both in contact; then you move along with the wrappings until past the fracture point; your work involves tightening of the wrapping and softening as mentioned previously in relation to the primary wrapping.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	The time interval between the volume of fluid stops in a stop valve or trap and when it is drained through another one should be equivalent to the turbulence level of the fracture, if not, do not pause at all for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	A prop of the other wound, and apply a bandage on it if possible without causing inflammamoins or infection at that place; let pressure be applied to that which is swollen/inflamed for a few days; afterwards, treat with appropriate creams for as many days.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	The leaves of the sugarcane plant are long and slender, and they are typically shaped in a manner that is wisely formed; they are either made from wood or from palm fronds. Each leaf has its own width according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	Cove that the splint which is placed over this fracture be made of a thick and evenly distributed small material compared to other splints; and adjust its length according to the size and delicacy of the limb; then wrap another band around it following your initial wrapping technique, ensuring it lies firmly but gently according to our instructions on how tight the binding should be; and make sure that its length matches that of the fracture as closely as possible.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	The threads should be of different thickness and fineness; if the threads are too thick, as I have seen in the case of loosely woven fabrics, it is a significant mistake when the tension exceeds that of evenly sized strings on a loom.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Subtle essences do not always mix well; you should avoid mixing those that could react violently with the ones you wish to combine and ensure there is at least one inch of space between each layer for safety reasons.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	The illness is said to occur in the extremities of the limbs near the narrowing places, hours later than those of Stop A Leão or Lãnça Violada when it does not cause injury therein.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some earthquakes can cause structural damage to buildings and sometimes injuries or fatalities as a result of collapsing structures. We remember them especially at the Capitol, honoring their impact on our history with remembrance ceremonamo.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	On the first day after surgery where all members are completely cut and bandaged with straps; this causes it to be very important that you do not put pressure on those straps for one or two days, or even more if your concern of developing an abscess is high.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	Here is the mechanism of the ancient prostheses and which the ancients used to restore, including their beliefs about healing broken bones and joint displacement or twisting.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	"Following the ancient tradition of grinding grains into flour by hand using a quern stone, it was mostly women and children who carried out this task in cool temperatures with little heat or sweat involved. It is made from sifted wheat bran, which moves through the grooveboard's teeth within the millstone."
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	"The same is not as Aeolus' winds in the sky, but rather resemble his breath upon an album of hair, and thus he disregards both the thickness and subtlety; and then takes hold of that."
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	Then the extremity will appear, so cover it with one layer of lead weighting exactly one drachm. Later, place that and let it hang from the beam by a string.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	This text appears to be in Catalan and discusses various herbs and their medicinal properties for treating joint issues such as fractures, dislocations, and sprains. Here's an English translation of the provided text:
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	The old farmer's dog was always on guard, protecting the cattle and their milk production, with its bell collar and loyalty to both water and the farm owner'anno administration.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Injuries involving joints and bone separations, as well as accidental pain in those areas along with fissures and fractures can occur. They may be treated using a combination of suturing or submersed in warm oil, followed by resting the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	In this particular plaster, there is no indication of healing or soothing properties; it does not alleviate pain directly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another mixture to restore the cracks: take pine resin and poppy seeds from wild poppamo; combine all ingredients, including wax, into a paste for filling.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manieyra of plaster bandage is administrated to restore the bone fracture and how do you want to solve the issue of bruising? Here'anno recipe with almonds, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, divided in parts. Unfortunately and sadly, his coat is not scratched at all in that area.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	May slip and falls, he quickly fetches cold water from the refrangeted jug or warm water and uses it to clean the wound.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Autumn mixtures of emplastras are even more effective in healing and recovery than the first one when a severe boil necessitates the restoration of limb: recipe with wormwood, tansy seeds, and balmony, mellow melilotus (sweet fennel), marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all divided in equal parts and crushed; everything shall be soaked in either sage or cold water, or warm water, depending on the condition of the limb and the color of the wound.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	The Mays Ypocras must not be distilled in the vessel from which it has been drawn, nor for any other reason but to restore its sweet flavor by using wax and oil. Also note that it should be mixed between richness and subtleamo.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Mays Gualia is aware that they have to apply balms and ointments on the broken limb for its healing and recovery due to lack of warmth as if it were myrrh, oil, and similar substances from those causes which we have recommended before.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Here is a recipe for an herbal poultice to relieve pain and inflammation:
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	According to the quantity you consume after having your ligament ruptured and being dislocated properly, if it does not cause pain or irritation nor is your bone broken, then usually do not exceed six weeks without letting go of motion.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	When you experience intense pain or inflammamo(n), apply ice immediately and keep it in place for the time being.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Take a piece of clean linen and sponge from the sea-anemone, wet it with boiled water, then apply that to the burned area until the pain ceases and the swelling is reduced; let the limb rest for an hour; afterwards place the moistened linen wrapped in warm iodine oil over the affected part through the night, ensuring prevention of suppuration (formation of pus), and allowing relief from inflammation and reduction of pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	A subtle weave that binds the primary constraint and gently intertwines within it is healed in that space.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	Sometimes the swelling and pain and inflammamoiu, as well as all other injuries, have subsided completely, and now you should be treated with a plaster cast or compression bandage in the same manner as when you first came in.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	If the accused does not commit any of the acts that have been mentioned, then within three to five days or even longer, depending on the case. In case of an open fracture where the bone is exposed to air for more than 2 days since your arrival at the wound site as we have mentioned earlier, until the fracture heals and new tissue forms over it, follow these steps carefully:
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	In the original Hebrew text of Ecclesiastebeth 7:15 (KJV), it reads as follows: "As for every working thing by which they are, their strength is to be reckoned on its continuing; so also with man when his work shall have ceased from him."
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you come across a fracture that is dry and exhausted, don't cover it again; know when the nourishment becomes prohibited for this area; and always provide enough water through an aqueduct or tube during all three days; gently loosen the tightness once; by doing so, you will allow nutrition to reach the limb, which will heal considerably.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	In the case where a person is injured and seeks compensation from restaurateurs for an ongoing injury to another part of the body that has not been healed by the start of meals, according to tradition, and is restored in accordance with curvature, this would be considered erroneous based on their procedure, and great fear arises if they were free men. They could have made amends for it beforehand.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	In fact, I have not seen all of those in their waters before, which is why it seems more reasonable that the water does not boil.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Second Capital Fracture: When accidents occur at the top.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of bone fractures are varied, and the causes behind them differ greatly as not all fractures occur from a direct blow to the spine; instead, the impact displaces the entire bone so that it remains in its final position just like in woodworking. This particular type is called an avulsion. Alternatively, if the object pierces only part of the bcu and penetrates both the flesh and does not pass through entirely at the back end, this specific type of fracture is known as absolute dislocation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The extent of these two fractures is either great or small, and the type of fracture is either contusion or avulsion; its cause is due to percussion with a heavy blow or impact against stone, similar in appearance.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This is either an open or approaching the pancreas which has been left behind in the bone; it is on the face of the bone and the edge of these two types of fractures can be large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	H hairline fracture is a type of break that occurs in the bone and is characterized by its subtlety with very fine hair-like lines, hence this specific kind of fracture is known as a hairline fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	E is a fracture that occurs either from the impact of a stone or from the percussion of a rock, causing one sheet of bone to enter into another section at both ends, similarly occurring as in ram's horns when they crack due to percussion and are divided into their parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	The majority of human bones are filled with water, just like children's play sandbox toys.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	Certainnly! The given text appears to be in Catalan. Here's the translation into English:
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	In the warm embrace of water, I find solace and peace in my own space.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	E consumed all these types of fractures by detection and through inquiry, for the temptation and display of corrupt flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	An uncommon type of hematoma is found over the skin and it spreads out, forming a dark patch when there's a fracture.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Mays in the healing of fractures considers maladies that occur due to illness and hours if you ever experience accidents meaning severe anxiety, thus vomiting as in cholera, and extension, loss of understanding, abstention from voting, syncope, acute fever, hemorrhage of blood vessels, and such similarities to those affected by accidents during major illnesses cannot be healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	If by chance you have an electric shock, the healing process begins immediately.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason why it is allowed to eat on the day of Lent in the beginning when you are fasting and water only during the days of winter, is that you should study in your room before noon on Thursday as per the instructions given.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If it is during the summer days and you stay outdoebetween noon and before seven in the evening, ensure that by now they are not rotten due to dampness, and prevent any occurrences of accidents that have been previously reported.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the jaw fracture has led to the covering of the brain and it consists of small and brittle fragments, you should try to stabilize the broken piece as I recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	RESOLUTION E is that your race understands the nature of the disease epidemic and reveals according to its usual customs and methods about how it can be treated, being knowledgeable about the illness.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	He decided to take care of the issue with the wound or abscess/pus drainage and now you need to help him by providing clean water, and making sure he has plenty of room for dressing changes involving wet gauze and odorless oils, and allowing the patient time to rest until the inflammamoent is settled; and also make sure there are no signs of bleeding. Start with caring for around the wound area and the surrounding skin.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	There are two different methods of operation in water, namely:
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Un manira per dividir una línia recta en partes iguals ètxerament és utilitzar el princípi del triangulum equilateral. Aquí tens les seves instrucions:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	A prop holds more scissors than the second one does.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	In the Court'atur be of different subscribers, among whom some are taller than others; and those who are tallest should stand at the end of the line according to their heights, wearing either a belt or a sword with metal inlays.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	He gently taps on the incision site using a drumming motion with his fingers to ensure it doesn't hurt too much for him.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bones are strong and hard, it takes a while to drill through the circuit you manage with the scissors or saws that don't go too deep (named non-deep cutters).
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	The E is not known as such but rather those who do not stop the term of the bone in this area that belongs to him, because after all the helmet has a rounded extremity or margin above that which is left at the top of it, appearing like a small margin or circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the density of the beak.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	E is appropriate that you choose from among the various tools available in plenty of which whichever suits best for the purpose of each tooth should be used while it remains at your disposal throughout all parts of the brain, whereby its length and width correspond respectively to the sharpness of such a tooth.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the procedure for three types of teravels (trepanning instruments): The quality that characterizes trepanning on a broken skull is to pause the teravel above the bone and turn it in such a way so you know when the bone has been penetruted; then appropriately move the teravel to another location, and pause until all of the width or thickness of the drill or blade has been traversed.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Apropriate instruments for this surgical procedure include the following tools placed in or on water that are used between each of your teeth, as well as a very fine substance which you can apply over the area to facilitate levitation, as previously mentioned, within which you eradicate the bone, or touch any other causes related to staining and forceps with subtlety.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	A: Take great care that the scissors do not touch any of the fixtures.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	Therefore, you will have circled the perforation hole and then separated it from the cipher while maintainnig its continuity. You'll extract that portion which resembles a sawtooth in the roughness of its surface where water is present within the bone, but however, ensure that it is finer and more subtle than other cutters.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	If you experience any itching or discomfort, take the remedy we have provided to alleviate those symptoms. This will help with the pain and prevent further irritation from the creams we mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is the alleged one, far from fear and with great care; it dissects Gualia and Lauzec. And this is its procedure: it'aturessentially necessary for you to identify where the bone fracture occurred in the area that presents a very clear and prominent breakage before proceeding to sever the tip of the dissector, which has a gentle yet joyful form.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	The lens lens is like the Leonese moon and does not impart any cause, while the acute angle is of two lengths in length, such as times; that the lenticular lens be adjusted to its shape with the face of the acute angle inciding on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	E is aprop porcetives sobre as ciseleiras de un pequeno malhete entro que inscidas tos os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur do pannicol que no accida en llu acciento que tens dengan arrenyra, e sei le medicant1amo era o pos fol de tots les homes e o mays ignorant d'elles; certoament, e sei era dormient.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Lahore's Romania does not have any attachment to the Os Pão de Açúcar peak in Rio de Janeiro's local area. Consequently, it would be easier for them if they were detached from such concerns and troubles.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	If the fractured bone does not penetrate into the abdominal cavity, and when it is separated from the body, there exists an aperture of the bone; then proceed with removing the asperities and fine protrusions through which you have prepared various amounts so that it can be administered in the most suitable places throughout its entire length. According to how much of your operation has been lost due to this fractured bone, ensure proper removal of all such fragments from the body with utmost precision according to medical protocols and practices.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	The following is an English translation of the Occitan passage you provided:
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any of the other small cuts and subtle fractures, administer treatment according to how severe you have lost in correcting it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	"E is not pleased with those who have studied that subject."
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	The Earth's crust is what we have shown in great cracks.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	If the wound is rectangular when you remove the bandage, take off as much gauze as needed according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in lukewam water, then pause that on the edge of the wound; and again take another folded or tripled gauze and immerse it in warm water and oil, pause that over the first one, and do this as much as you can without pressing too hard on it. Then apply it to the affected area, but only with the amount of gauze needed for the wound size.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	Layssa (Lass) should take this remedy for one or two days to be sure of a cautery; then remove the lass and apply medicines as needed, such as linseed and barley flour powder, talcum powder and similar ointments.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	E is about using these powdered medicines that are spread over the body when they are dry; and universally, apply any medicine with properties of prevention and not biting.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	Here is the translation of your text from Occitan to English:
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	Acycles in the crown of his head, as he becomes infected with it and most of the time when he is exposed to its cure, a blackness appears on its surface; therefore consider if accidents result from these diseases that we mentioned earlier, knowing that they are all harmful.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it's not the blackness itself but rather from medicine that is improperly stored and its effect due to this medication causing such darkness, then at times you may take portions of honey and fragrant rose water in equal parts. The doctor examines the lines and skin tone of their patient and decides on an appropriate herbal remedy from the available ingredients; then prepares it properly according to the prescribed recipe for healing purposes.
Capitol .iii.	III. Capitol Building
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	In the restaurant, they served a special dish when it was time to close.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	The text you provided appears to be in Catalan language and seems to describe some sort of biological or physiological condition related to osseous tissue (bone). However, the original text is quite technical and somewhat unclear without context. Here'angs a translation of that text into English:
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of her lip is torn, it should be taken inside your mouth to keep it moist, and you must match that fracture as closely as possible with another piece from the same individual, ensuring that it returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	E please take a moment to relax and ensure you have enough water for your well-being; also, pay attention so that you don't lose focus on your work regarding the illnesses of those people.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If the fracture is in the superior part of the nose and you cannot see it with your naked eye, within a few hours check that there is no deformity at the end of the bone where it was broken.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	If the break is in two pieces, then his face shows signs of agony.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	On the first day of the injury, if possible, I should restore light restoration to you; otherwise, wait until seven or eight hours have passed since the onset of bruising before taking a break.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	If the injury involves only a portion of the nose, apply two strips of gauze; if it affects two portions or covers most of the structure with significant quantity, use multiple layers to stabilize the area until medical attention can be obtained.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Five days ago, I learned about the old restaurants that had their walls covered in board and were changed every day, but not seen by me; people claim that the wallpaper is kept in a binder of comfit wrappers with powdered wax. And let's assume that something has made it harden and stiffened its cartilage.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	Some drops have entered the nose, in place of calgua (an old remedy), resulting in severe pain and congestion; and if you've already suffered a serious nasal fracture, it worsens with involvement of silk-like leon fabric. The malady is not prohibited from breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	In this matter it is not necessary for you; and if you wish so, do it, and if you wish otherwise, go your own way.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	He decides to use another treatment for the hickey - he applies a warm compress or an ice pack on his neck and leaves it there until it turns violet-red.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	Mays, if you do not acquire the aposteme (cough), cover it with warmth as soon as possible using wheat flour and egg powder mixed together to form a paste; then place this over the lesion carefully without pressing down hard for any reason at all.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If your nasal bones are fractured (minor or comminuted), you should seek to stabilize them over each other, and extract any fragments using appropriate instruments; then close the incision with sutures as needed, and treat that area with antibacterial and healing ointments according to what is suitable.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If you feel a pain in your nose, then use a cloth to apply cold water around that area and administer metal straws inside which is totally safe for healing.
Capitol .iiii.	In the United States, Washington D.C. serves as the nation'cuperior capital and is home to the federal government's three branches: Legislative (Capitol Hill), Executive (White House) and Judicial (Supreme Court). The Capitol building itself houses the U.S. Congress, which consists of two chambersthe Senate and the House of Representatives.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Jaw fracture during the restoration of the mandible.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	If the mandible is broken and the jaw fracture is not an open one, it should be addressed within hours if the fracture extends only slightly beyond its limits and is curved towards the adjacent sections without being split into two, then the loss of sensation will be slight.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	If the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the mouth of discomfort and gently push the swelling at the fracture site outward through the oral cavity, while simultaneously pushing inwards with your other hand from outside the bone. Do this carefully until realignment occurs.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	If the jaw fracture is separated into two parts, administer extension for a couple of hours according to the possibility of achieving alignment within that time frame.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	In the event of jaw dislocation or fractures, stabilize those areas where you expect to find gold, silver, or lead veins; and pause over the severed mandible joint, and place pressure on it twice a day with your fingers (or an equivalent length), as well as a small piece of cloth matching the length of the jaw. Apply this according to how you have adjusted the ligature for them and what is needed. Do not exceed until they are no longer damaged.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	C commands the patient to rest and find peace of mind, and stops the treatment for his suspicious lions.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	The ancient belief is that once the figure has been altered in any way, on the third day you should feel joy and remove whatever it is from its place; then immediately correct what had already been changed using flour of cumin, an albumen of hen's egg or farina (a type of wheat), so that only a trace remains, and gently press with a wool cloth.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	Therefore, the implant remains properly adjusted on it and the position of the bone is not changed, as long as it does not protrude so that it becomes saturated and strengthens the fracture; in many cases this fracture heals within three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	If the boil becomes recurrent or does not heal with initial treatment, we may need to prescribe antibiotangs and follow up after a certain period of time during which it has been healed and reabsorbed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	If the fracture is a comminuted fragmentation, you should consider if it's an isolated or segmental separation; then carefully assess those fragments according to their position in relation to the surrounding structures during the repositioning process.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the plague outbreak is widespread, you should increase your use of fogging machines according to the level of necessity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Away with those past grievances that you have not yet forgotten, and if they are now too great to let go of alone; then pause upon one of these monuments which appease you the most, within which lies healing.
Capitol .v.	Capital v.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	The restoration of the furcula, also known as a wishbone, is traditionally cracked.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The displaced patella is broken at the insertion site of the tendon below; that fracture occurred in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	The text appears to be in Catalan language from the northeastern part of Spain, specifically related to construction and building materials. Here is my best attempt at translating it into English:
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	In that operation, when the fracture is partially dislocated, you must be present as two ministers; so one holds the assistant and follows the broken furcula, while the other extends it to that detached area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Article A shall specify the fracture lines and state that they must be made in a way that follows the second method mentioned hereinafter, and not on an area that is too low or concave.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	If you are experiencuing pain and discomfort, take breaks as needed to rest your eyes from the strain of reading or screen time; ensure sufficient size according to your needs; adjust the chair's height so that your feet touch the ground evenly while keeping the monitor at eye level.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	If you cannot throw the end of the furcula outside the gates, once it has reached its destination, a few hours will pass before the pain is relieved from your neck and rests on his muscles with a greater intensity.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	The minister will massage the muscles in your arm and then lift the remaining pieces of bone from under the furcula that are above the pubic region, after which you should correct the fracture and align those with your own instructions.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	I feel the lingering traces of the feathers and my bad dreams; now you must fly over them and extract those remnebrances with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If it remains in the bone, for hours you engraved a slit with your instrument which you had prepared beforehand, so that you had left behind the furcula muscle that serves as its support; and this is the form of wood or metal from which this is made.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	C is similar to the curve of which this convexity exists; and its width should be according to what you need for it, depending on the size of your head or hair length.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of Luz lies in accordance with what is possible at the operation site; it has two extremities as often as times, and one extremity wide while the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	If the rupture of the vein through which you have extracted blood is extensive and may cause hematoma, adjust the two lips of the vein with sutures promptly.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	If the disruption is minor or you fear bacterial infection, use a small amount of gauze and pillows following the severity of your wound'n stitches.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	A cat decides to take a nap on the warm rug in front of the fireplace and drifts off into dreams. As he sleeps, his tail gently twitches above the soft carpet.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	The Mays surgery of the bone where the bruise and section are located is that pauses impregnate with a paste made from flour milled by water, and placed on the lamb's skin, and then the bandage (cast) is applied there, so it should be long enough to cover the area of one palm or around it. Then pause small cotton pieces over the wound and bandage; and then take a thin tablet whose length is about three fingers wide and similarly in shape; and wrap this with cloth, and then wrap the cloth with the tablet at the site above the fracture; then apply the cast as if to rotate it, and turn it around the neck and both sides of the titillic (inflammation), and return it over the whole area, ensuring that when there is descent in the fracture's swelling, it should not be hidden underneath you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	"If the sheep's fleece is torn, it is not unfortunate; and see that you witness any illness every day, whenever the suffering is alleviated or you see the star has been restored, rectify this situation and strengthen the bond."
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	The passage describes the process of sleeping with a bad cough and how it leads to certain physical reactions in the body during nighttime rest, including elevation of specific anatomical structures. To translate this into plain English while maintaineri accuracy:
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	The wound heals without scar if not subjected to excessive stretching or infection within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	She notices the broken wing bone and carefully sets it in place with glue before adjusting the bandage to ensure that it has healed properly and the fracture is fully cured.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	E is strict and comfortable according to the standards of XXVIII days, and sometimes stays in luxurve houses for months at a time during that period.
Capitol .vi.	In the United States, a capital city refers to an urban area that serves as the seat of government for a state or territory. These cities often house important buildings and institutions such as the legislature, governor's office, and supreme court. Some well-known U.S. capitals include Sacramento (California), Denver (Colorado), Atlanta (Georgia), Boston (Massachusetts), Austin (Texas), and Tallahassee (Florida). Each of these cities plays a crucial role in the governance, administration, and cultural life of their respective states.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Shoulder joint fracture surgery.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula tart is torn at the location of your love and not torn by you, but rather by its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	Then it is broken the place of you -- and it's also broken in its second part -- and no longer known, only touched, according to the shape of the fracture that releases from you and prepares for your use, which then reduces according to the natural figure in any possible way.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	The artist Paul Gauguin created the series of paintings known as "Tahitian Women on the Beach" and "Where Do We Come From? What Are We? Where Are We Going?"; he also produced a version of Dante's "Divine Comedy"; moreover, he depicted the starry sky with subtle nuances according to the quantity of the spatula used.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	When the stone's concave indentation matches all the grooves of the trowel, then align that concavity with the lion-shaped stopper and carefully move the stone according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Article IV: Strengthening Humanity through Long-Term Commitment and Adherence to Decency Standards, Respecting the Rights of Others within One's Territory
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Every day he considers the lambs in every place; and all reprieves that are granted to him, another reprieve is given by both sides of the pillar if they are renewed at their respective places. (This translation tries to capture a sense similar to what might be found in medieval Latin texts.)
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	A shadow of anger casts over his face.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The spatula is restored in XX days or less (XXV).
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	Therefore, to find the prime factorization of this number (2310), you first break it down into its prime factors and then multiply these together; thus, you know for certain that none of those primes are part of a set which you fear initiating or dissolving.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	The swelling of the lymaturm region and tailbone area persists; now divide it, keeping its axis intact, as directed in the bifurcation technique from Sadday's abscess treatment if necessary.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII - The United States Capitol Building
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Restaurative treatment of the Pott's fracture.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Some of the leaves are torn in their local place and gradually at the edge, while the tips of the leaf gradually curl and become wrinkled.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	The injuries of your elbow when it gets dislocated involve a decline in the range of motion and occurrence of pain, difficulty in movement, swelling throughout, and considerable weakness and numbness; this is clearly visible in the bone fracture at the elbow and cannot be hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the broken bone is that it should be realigned on its own axis, and a pause between the shoulders of it; and then gently press upon its muscles, and adjust the backs of it along with most of two vertebrae, and subtly during the operation and in achieving balance according to all possible means and those that are suitable, so that the shape of the bone returns as it should.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	"Apply pressure upon the plaster and stiff twine above the slender table of ash or poplar, so that they seem to levitate; then you wrap it around this over the severed bones, making sure it's not too tight; and go along with the binding following a roundness on the back for some width, and strengthen that with decent grip. Consider the binding throughout the hour, and how well it has been softened, and then reinforce that."
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If it is necessary to cause the wound of that area to become contaminated or irritated, painful or inflamed due to an accident occurring in that place, you should remove and discard any dressing causing discomfort, and rectify as needed for the proper healing process. Additionally, regularly cleanse the wound with appropriate antiseptic solution; if possible, cover it with a suitable bandage. Adjust the bandage to fit snugly without restricting circulation.
Capitol .viii.	Capital VIII. In the United States, this term refers to Washington D.cu. This is where you'll find the U.S. government headquarters and the iconic White House, among other significant landmarks. It's also known for being a city with plenty of historic sites and museums. If we were talking about capitals in general (not just Roman numerals), it could refer to any country's primary city where their central government is located.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	At the coastal restoration, how many sections are being reinforced?
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	It is known that coast fractures do not occur in small bones but in large ones, and from the ends of their length it does not happen on those opposing sides, but through this due to being cartilaginamoes.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	The awareness of your thoughts should not be tainted by emotions; seek to understand what they are telling you.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	"The surgery must restore the fracture as accurately as possible according to the available methods; ensure that it is set properly and apply an appropriate plaster or brace for a broken bone if necessary."
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	If there is a fracture of the rib cage with the fragments shifting downward, it leads to severe pain and puncture-like sensations so intense that even breathing becomes difficult, as if the bone penetrates immediately; this also causes difficulty in swallowing, coughing, and vomiting of bloody substances. This condition is challenging to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	The ants are known for their impressive engineering skills when it comes to building nests.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	E of lor so that says: Cover with provisions the evil that I have created, inflamed and windblown, so that the belly may be inflated and extended, and the fracture pushed towards the outside parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	We advise you to avoid alcohol consumption as it could be an easy cause of developing catarrhs or if they occur, provide water promptly and help alleeve them.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	They advised that it be paused before the windy season and resumed when calm again; although it seems logical, but there is fear that the windy conditions might cause excessive water levels in the area due to weaknesses.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Two days before the full moon (12th), place a linen cloth on wet wool that has been immersed in oil and scattered with pulverized plants between the coasts where it is fullest, so as to cover it according to its roundness; and keep it well cared for against pleurisy and fever of cold and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	"The surgeon vehemently constrains the malady that has not yet suffered; they quickly puncture it with their hands and place a tube to pierce through the wound, fearing the illness might spread further. Over time, as the patient heals, they remove the instrument preserving the catheter, which is now no longer needed."
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	If the gap between your lips is large and crooked, visit a doctor and get them stitched before it heals completely.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you get an ear infection, feel pain and pressure in your ears, apply warm olive oil on the affected area and rest while keeping it elevated; also ensure to stay hydraturd by drinking plenty of water which can help with the symptoms of the ear infection.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	A house should be built on the foundation that lies beneath which one sleeps and is healthy within.
Capitol .ix.	In the United States, "Capitol" with a capital 'C' specifically refers to the building in Washington D.cu where Congress meets - namely, the U.S. Capitol Building. On the other hand, when used lowercase as 'capital', it generally denotes either money or an important city that serves as the seat of government for its state or country. For instance, Austin is the capital of Texas and London is the capital of England. Therefore, context plays a significant role in determining which meaning is intended.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Postoperative care for lumbar and cervical spine fracture repair.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Some hernias involve the rupture of bone fragments in the neck and may extend to the spinal cord, similarly as with fractures of the vertebrae.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	As for your question about whether the acute injury you're referring to will heal or not, we need to consider several factors such as how many times it has been previously treated and if there have been any complications like swelling or stiffness that could not be relieved. Additionally, think of how much pressure you apply when pinching the affected area with your fingers or a needle; if it doesn't cause pain, this indicates that it is not healing properly. Moreover, if these symptoms have persisted for several months and there were unresolved issues like infections, inflammation, or poor circulation, then it may be potentially fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if that pain occurs again and you feel discomfort in those areas, know that the root of your ailment is cured and that this affliction will soon heal with care.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	If you believe that a cold may be related to water temperature and want to know if it's likely to get better or worse, the time of year is an important factor to consider in terms of its impact on your health. Generally speaking, during colder months (fall/winter) people tend to catch more colds due to spending more time indoors, where viruses can spread easily. As for water temperature, while it doesn't directly cause a cold, staying warm and dry is important as extreme temperatures or getting chilled by wet clothing can weaken your immune system. So pay attention to weather conditions and dress accordingly during those colder months!
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If you suffer from severe diarrhea and are unable to control it, sometimes even defecating on yourself, remember that this is a mortal condition and therefore does not require medical treatment. However, seek immediate help if necessary. (Source: Lahoras si tu vezes - Old Occitan text)
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	If Maynard does not choose any of those options, the cause is better and more plausible.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	The treatment for this consists in applying cold compresses on the inflamed area that covers over the spondylitis, or osteoporosis of the lumbar region; apply them to those affected by severe heat, and do so during the day when the inflammamoent is subsided.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	In those moments of rest and comfort, he strengthens himself over the pain; and commands the illness to take a break and be calm so that it does not aggrave on the wound where it causes such intense suffering while healing.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	The wound is cleaned with water and soap or any other disinfectant that has been separated from it earlier, hours after which the edges of the cut are sewn together; and appropriately, the deeper flesh wounds are treated with an antibiamoint if necessary.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	The original text appears to be in Catalan and describes an ancient method of treating fractures using leeches, applying bandages, and utilizing gravity for alignment. Here's the translation:
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	"I feel the remnastered hours upon you, and this along with that, and heal the storm after which comes before being healed."
Capitol .x.	The word "Capitol" has its origins in the Latin word 'caput,' which means 'head.' This term was used to describe a place or structure that served as a central point, representing leadership and governance. In ancient Rome, it referred specifically to the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus on Capitoline Hill—one of the seven hills where Romans believed their gods resided.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Restaurant Grand Wide.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	When the oxen's horns are broken and if they pull, then the fracture is not just at the extremities but extends into those parts; and accidents result in painful local inflammamoins and punctures, and the chest is stunned when it breaks.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The key to the restoration of Lu is for you to extend your hand over that entity which lies above the fracture, as per what figure of Lu is.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the bone breaks at its end, over time it will heal to resemble how it should be balanced when reconstructed in accordance with which one is assembled to its original shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	If the break is in the long bone or that goes to the lower parts, hours after you must do something about your stomach so as to prepare for the healing of such fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	Here is the translation of your text from Old Occitan to contemporary English with correct grammar and spelling:
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	The sentence in Catalan translates to the following in English:
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	May you recover from your abscess quickly and without complications, so that treatment can resume soon afterwards. Make sure to rest properly and stay hydruted as per the guidelines given by your healthcare provider, and then gradually return to your regular routine when appropriate. Take care of yourself!
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	When you decide to end your contracts or they are terminated by mutual agreement, the hours worked will be calculated accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter X.1 Capital Expenditure and Investment Strategies in the Public Sector
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Bone healing at the site of an implant.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Assistant: The water jug is placed between the clock, positioned atop the head of a shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	Si se rompe el reloj, restórealo y el tiempo le restaura dos vías. De estas opciones, ¿cuál es aquella en la que te embarcas primero según esta forma?
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Sienna lies between the two extreme latitudes and approves its location at such an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	The following text is in Romansh, a language spoken in Switzerland: "E plurains che s'imbatan cun maladat sur una seglada; e el porta fora ils sias braccs trencads sul funs entro ch'el vegn en il titschic dal mund al qual sia annexa la curvaziun dal funs."
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	A surgeon approaches the injured person with great care, extending their fingers along both sides of the wound; and placing a finger within it, they feel for any fragmented bones as the wound closes gradually.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The other method is to have the malady repositioned over his own cervix, and suspend its head from the neck of her left arm; and then commands two assistants that one of them holds water that overflows near the fracture on their hands; and the other takes hold of the lower part of it.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you wish the extension to be stronger, let hours strengthen over the crack and on both sides of it, as well as from the two parties' parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	If the fracture is close to the tip of the bone, you should immobilize the middle part of the limb above and below where the fracture occurs using a splint or sling.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	If the fracture is caused by a fall, care should be taken to place weight on that limb and that joint as little as possible until it has healed.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Elaborate on that tool and its function, and determine how closely it is adapted according to what covers and is applied for good application, so as not to cause skin irritation or infection.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Mays decides to apply a steroid cream for the cystic acne, and he observes significant improvement within 7 days, with reduced redness over his skin where treatment began in early June, and now it's much clearer.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method of splinting that you should apply to the fracture is first placing it in a padded splint, and then wrapping this splint with a navy blue bandage; afterward, adjust the arm brace over the stabilizer, and place your open hand over the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	The arm sits in a resting pose with the straps placed over the shoulder supports to ensure that it remains stable and secure; however, if any accident occurs causing bone fracture, this restriction applies only under such circumstances.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	In Lahorat, they use a lot of stars.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	It is required that you pause over the broken stela which lies on a hill and also surpasses the other steles; and pause between each stele according to its width, and be as long as the steles are in total length based on the division by three units from either side.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Article F: Enhanced Strength on the Statues and Compliance with Specifications Mentioned at the Initial Project Outline
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	The cavity of the fracture must be meticulously narrow.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	The X-ray reveals that the bone fracture is slightly elongated and there is a minor narrowing of the canal.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Then if you want to repeat the situation with the stones and say so as we mentioned at the time when restoring its position, do it now.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	If you fear an abscess, please do not hesitate to contact a doctor immediately so that treatment can be started within seven days as we have instructed.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Article E proposes that, in order to prevent leakage or inflation throughout the entirety of three days, no provision shall be made at the site for consumption by a member due to an abundance of supplies; therefore, it rectifies all matters as we have previously mentioned.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	In the event of an accident that causes injury to another person, you are required to provide first aid within three days or less unless otherwise directed by law enforcement officials.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	Blessed are those who can find solace in the midst of sorrow and their burdens rest upon the heart; may their troubles remain within their bellies.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	Upon the sight of a fully healed wound and considering all times during day or night when it is neither painful nor loose the figure of the severed limb, or if there is a soothing lymebreathing, then restore completely to your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	Break the food into two portions according to the order in which we have listed above, so that a subtle dish is served at the beginning and heartier dishes later on during the meal when they are consumed with more appetite.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	The usual remedy and treatment for a fever is to stay hydrated, rested, and take over-the-counter medication like paracetamol or ibuprofen as needed; also using cold compresses on the forehead can provide relief. Always seek medical advice if symptoms persist or worsen.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	If the fracture is a simple hairline type, you should typically heal within several weeks to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Bone fracture treatment in the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Brassica oleracea is a plant with two stalks called "dos focils"; one of them is small and is the one that forms the top (pous), while the other is large and is the one from which the smaller stalk sprouts, on the side further back.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	The great hearth has been split solefly, and the small one as well, they were both broken in half.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	The light bulb is slightly damaged above, shortly after its restoration the brightness of it is slight, and the healing of it is more significant.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	The left leg's socket is broken at the end and its healing is difficult, while the right one is challenging to recover from.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	The poor boy has broken two bones in that leg of his.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	If the bone that is broken extends into the joint below, you should see a doctor, who may be able to repair it easily while it's not fully healed yet.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	The glowing fire of the grand hearth is hotter than a tightened spring; hours pass as I extend my fervent gaze upon it.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	If the two foci are enmeshed in a knot and cannot be pulled apart, then the effort required to untie it is much greater.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	The priest shall take the form of the cross with both hands and place it over his chest while extending his arms out to either side as in a T-shape; moreover, all fingers are to be extended towards the ground except for the thumbs which should be held upwards alongside the other fingers, and the index finger should be elevated above the rest of the fingers with an emphasis on the middle joint.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	E shall be a cozy cottage near the height of the mountain, for there may trouble not arise through labor.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	The minister extended his hand for the offering of blessings from the altar above as another minister extended likewise.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	The apple fell from the tree, striving to reach its best shape possible.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	In this scripture of the Lord'perturbations, the hours shall perform your task in its place at your virtue's location.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	C is also separated from the source code and it does not contain your hope for its restoration, so you'll move on to other things according to the method we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	If May's broken arm is at the capital (humeral head), I have already performed a single procedure on that, so let me take care of it again.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	If you notice an abscess forming at the start of your meal at a restaurant, immediately use a clean cotton towel soaked in olive oil and white wax, ensuring its softness and subtlety. Place this compress on top of the area where the abscess is emerging beneath the skin's surface. Afterwards, remove the cotton towel and apply an adhesive plaster prepared with a powdered molybdenum clay mixed with honey; ensure it fully covers the affected area for support and protection.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	The name of the stone crosses in these major decisions, or a division into one field or two adjacent fields.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	In cases where the fracture is severe and vehement, maintaining restriction to movements beyond or below the site of the fracture is necessary; however, a slight relaxation may be allowed once it has been recalled in the commencnent of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The cloths that wrap around the fracture should be several layers of fine linen, and not be too tough or rough; the bandage should be held firmly in a manner that is both delicate and thick as we have described earlier.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	In the evening, I contemplate the members of my family as they rest for the day.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	If you sustain any injury that requires rectification, as quickly as possible apply the remedy to the affected body part and cover it with water until the pain subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Leonardo leaves the member out of reach that relaxes, and restores the restriction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	If the injury is healed and your bones are restored, then all things will be corrected as to those who have mercy on you. (Luke 18:9-14)
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	E also considers whether the nutrient is prohibited from reaching the member due to strictures, as it may help soften that area and strengthen it over the days it runs through that nutriebet, and therefore supports its growth.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	In case of no injury due to any of the mentioned reasons, he/she should not be dismissed within 14 days or prior notice is given.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	The door of the guilty is now shut with its fault of restless motion, and he sleeps on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	This fracture will be restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or sooner if possible according to the circumstances and conditions of health.
Capitol .xiii.	XIII, also known as Capitulum or Chapter Thirteen, is the number that follows twelve and precedes fourteen in the sequence of natural numbers. In Roman numerals, it's represented by 'XIII'. The term "capitol" may refer to a place or building associated with legislative activities, such as the United States Capitol where the U.S. Congress meets. If you are referring to something specific related to capitol and chapter thirteen (such as a book, an episode of a TV series, or another context), please provide more information so I can give you a detailed answer.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	In the restaurant, there was a reconstruction of a skull and crossbones.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	He who does not heed the words of his mother and disregards her advice will surely have broken relationships with siblings. Do not let old grievances cloud your judgment.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	If you fall or trip, the pain may continue to spread and move down your back according to gravity, so immediately pause and reach out for something stable in front of you.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	The Minister shall extend the broken bones and match them with equivalent ones that are within its capacity for a good fit.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Hours ago, cover the wound with plaster and ointment to prevent infection from occurreing. Then apply a bandage on it according to the size of the location and wrap that area up using a cloth or fabric.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	The bridge of Mays is located on the northern banks of the river Ebro and connects Zaragoza with Catalonia in Spain. It spans a total length of 200 meters (656 feet) and consists of three arches, making it one of the oldest bridges still standing today. The bridge dates back to Roman times and has undergam various renovations throughout its history.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	B is the armchair where one's body is wrapped in a blanket such that the body is applied to the palm, and stretch out in that direction.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	In Mays' fracture method, if the fractures are outside of the designated area, it allows for stops to be placed on either side of the parted area in the palm, so that the line remains open and straight; moreover, you place a marker at the bend as it is revolved between the indicated lines.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	If you crack the shell of one of these nuts, wait until it pops open before proceeding. Then use an appropriate tool to remove its husk and, if desired, gently tap with a small flat stone for elevation; make sure not to damage it.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Mays if the break is in the other toes, then it should be equal and proportional to the one of that day mentioned here; or all the same according to continuous succession, which is better; or a slight pause on that little stone, as we have said about the foot.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	In your establishment, you must take into account the position of potential hazards and prevent any accidents as a result of these issues according to your operations - specifically when such incidents are caused by reasons mentioned in this report.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV (Capitol) in an English version of a book would likely have the same content as its original language counterpart, but presented in English for accessibility to readers who speak this language instead. The translation process ensures that the meaning and essence are preserved while adapting cultural nuances so they make sense within the target audience's context.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Orthopedic surgery for a tibia fracture.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the cuyaca statue have been broken and it is declared according to what has turned out in the hearing before and the higher authority.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The laying on of hands for a bruise is performed when the pain becomes unbearable and another part of the body near the injury is stressed; then let the illness be subdued over its own abdomen and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	The minister extends the entire compensation according to the quality of which the fracture is in the middle location of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Mays was close to the essence of the chicken, when suddenly he felt compelled to leave at sunset for the departure of the penguins, because she wanted to extend her handshake and the other one left with a broken heart.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	If the termination is granted to the defendant, then it shall be done through proper procedure and the claim shall also be terminated against him, and its effects will extend to previous transactions.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	The dentist takes equal care of the patient's teeth and gums to prevent them from receding according to their natural appearance; after a while, one should take measures such as filling and suturing if not for the risk of developing an infected limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	In case of an insect bite or sting, you can try the following home remed very often within which the swelling subsides and then resume your usual care routine.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The wrapping of Luisa was made as follows: Cover that wraps over the fracture, fold it two or three times more and remove any excess; then wrap it around to reach the end of the tube and the edge of the cuffs.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	A long iron rod is inserted between the chessboard and the table at the feet of the king's side, and the rooks from each party move to their respective extremities along the length of the rod; then they rotate around the board and the table in such a way that they surpass the edge.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	He approaches the fox in the place of that cracked wheel, and places one stone over its bones.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	To seal the vials between the chamber and the cold water bath with many layers of insulation, to ensure that the extractor is properly cooaderated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	A proper bandage should be applied directly over the site of the three fractures or four wounds; as you move away from the location of the fracture, your bandaging should become looser and lighter in terms of pressure and moisture content.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Extend your fence to the edges of these parcels as far as it reaches until you get to the neighbor's pole, and strengthen both ends of the stakes on the other side such that their anchorage is not compromised from their own location.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Article II: Appropriation and Use of Funds for Health Services
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	In case the sickness is of your bone or joints, you may take as much time as possible to seek out that second one, if it is feasible for you; and if not, find someone else who can do so on your behaturship, and ensure this remedy within which there shall be a cure.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Some patches strengthen this ankle fracture by being adjusted to the straps similarly as we have said in the adhesive and brace.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of such a fault in this manner made, it does not lead to an immediate failure; and if it is restored alone, another water should be applied along with the other cambium, then at that time it will eventually fail due to the same issue as before.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	The swelling of the lips lasts for a few days or slightly longer, and in total it depends on the complexity of the cases and other factors.
Capitol .xv.	In Chapter 15 of the book "Capitol," we delve deeper into the lives and struggles of the characters as they navigate through a society governed by strict rules and regulations, set in a dystopian future where beauty standards are taken to extreme levels. As tensions rise and secrets unfold, readers get an insightful look at the inner workings of this intriguing world.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	In the restoration of Denolh'vee's scaphoid bone fracture.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	"You know how the round shield's broken piece ended up in such high places; various accidents occurred."
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Mayzie decides to read the book; however, it's not a break or disturbance in her routine, but rather an adventure, and that'ps all she needed. Overall, it brings great joy.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	The restoration of its waters is such a matter that it should be as closely matched as the broken parts thereof are reported to have been added and combined, according to what is feasible for fairness, convenience, and manufacturing.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	In the pause of pastime and on that round stele, if you are thirsty for it; and strain out with an appropriate measure of water.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	E Section A also considers all devices that have been recommended in other fractions, so as well as cauterization and similar approaches to those cases where it is necessary to avoid any accidents while the wound heals effectively.
Capitol .xvi.	Book I
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Restoration of the clavicle fracture.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	In the basket there are two bones of which one is large and is called by the name of the basket; while the other is small and is called a mouse-bait (pinchette).
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	The accident causes a rupture of the fluid that affects both bones of the arm, and through which restoration is made as much as with the alignment of the arm, and the procedure for it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	If the same number of bones is inserted at both ends, the chain becomes separated into two equal parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	If the ox is too stubborn, the cart becomes unmanageable on the journey.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	Se è trinca i ossi troppi grossi, allora hai quel residuo, ed è di quelle cause che non sono solo le tue colpe.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Article I - General Principles of Expansion and Equality for Asteroids in Accordance with the Agreement
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	Nevertheless, if the break in the bench is a rock that has several protrusions, then I extend it to be more moderate and lighter, while also acknowledging your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	In the carpenter's workshop, there are various tools and operations for working with wood, including when you align the slats and carry out the entire process of sawing. You will take small pieces of wood from a large log left over from previous cuts; remove those that have little growth but do not include knots. Make sure their length corresponds to that of the beam as closely as possible.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	A proper wrapping involves wrapping each drape in double envelopes according to its length and stopping at the edge of one panel from one side to the other, ensuring they are all evenly aligned along the bottom part of the piece.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Article E establishes that the bridge spans three lengths of extreme points and an additional mid-point, where this structure prevents tilting to either left or right, ensaturating stability.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	He is managing a small business according to the size of the capital, and he has been careful with it in order to maintain that momentum.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	In the event of a boat accident and if it becomes necessary to escape through broken glass or portholes, always wear protective gear and handle sharp objects with care. Ensabregut de que la seguretat és primariamente important en aquestes circumstàncies.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	On the day of consideration regarding each joint and study that for first studies you watch over them from inflammamation and swelling or other similar causes; and upon occurrence of any such cause, promptly take measures to enter into a safe mode of treatment that is suitable in order to heal.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII: The Capital City of the United States
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	The ankle and bones of the foot and toes are injured in a broken ankle. This injury occurs when there is excessive force or stress applied to these structures, causing one or more of them to fracture. Some common causes include falls, twisting injuries, sports-related impacts, and accidents such as car crashes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The bone structure of the talus is not affected by any fracture; however, some metatarsal and phalangeal bones in the foot may have healed fractures, while there are minimal injuries to the skin without significant trauma during treatment.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	In the Bible, Jacob wrestled with a mysterious man until daybreak and then blessed him. The passage from Genesis (32:25-30) describes how Jacob's hip was wrenched as he struggled with the angelic being. As a result of their encounter, the location where they fought is known to this day as Peniel ("the house of God"), and Jacob said that he saw God face to face and lived.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	A prop of space above that area which is high up among those bones, and it approaches them, and presses down on them, and compresses them into the hollow spaces within.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	The pause before "pasta" and after "stop", followed by the rest of the sentence where there are two plates on the small table in front of them.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	The strong winds have caused that arm to stretch downwards, so you've wrapped it in bandages and other devices of which you are dependent on.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	After three or four days have passed and you find the wound loosened up, if you notice bones that are broken or severed, or displaculed, proceed with caution in treating such injuries.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	May I remind you to polish the silverware, restore any worn-out items, and match them as best as possible with what you have here in the restoration of my family's pieces.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	The bridge is built continuously with respect to the length of this structure and its width on one side is slightly more than another; just below this table, which has been described earlier, and strengthen that edge securely.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	May's gently place a towel or two (or three or more) around your shoulders and relax into the chair, ensuring that the chair supports its entire weight on the back of your legs, with your head slightly elevated by placing it on one side of the chair. This position will help keep your tongue in good contact for swallowing.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	E is advisable not to forget that you haven't considered all the causes mentioned in other accidents, as they may pertain to this one too.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18 - The Capital City: Exploring the Heart of Government and Society
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	The woman's pelvic bone fracture, pubic symphysis injury, and man'cuar vertebrae damage.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman's skirt is tied up, she should remain seated in that position for an hour, then slowly lean her body to one side, and hold it there with support behind her.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	A woman came upon the head of a serpent and felt in its mouth just as she hoped, then approached the woman who was terrired, and gradually lifted her little one up, for all that water is outside until they reached the part where the snake's mouth opened so eagerly and the bone snapped.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	A propulsive procedure involves placing catheters over the urethral opening and when it's time to urinate, gently guiding the device outward, easing and reducing discomfort as it returns along the same pathway through which it was initially inserted, back to its original position.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Easy enough for seven days or so, once it's restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish so, take one of the goat's bladders and stretch it over a wineskin; then insert the whole bladader into the neck of the wine skin, and blow through the reed that is in there until the bladder has been inflated within the wine skin, as this causes the fracture to heal.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	The weather tomorrow will be partly cloudy with occasional showers for the next few days following the report, by which time you should have recovered.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	The Pentaquine of Home or Woman is broken, and its parts are used in the restoration and alignment of your leg that you have complained about at the hip joint.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	The right that is not hidden in these close-knit cracks and which mostly does not disappear, mainly to the one who has some study and interest in this book of mine; for that fracture means you in the greatest legal measures regarding restoration and tightening of it, and so I mean.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	Mays in the goat's hair when it is shorn, take the wool of sheep, and put the wool on that; then wrap it up in cloth, and have it wrapped, and leave it there for three days or a week, and let it heal.
Capitol .xix.	Capital IX (Roman numerals for the number 9) is commonly associated with Washington D.cu, which refers to Washington D.C., the capital of the United States of America. The city hosts various government buildings and monuments such as the White House, Capitol Building, Supreme Court, Lincoln Memorial, etc.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Bone healing process after a bone fracture when it is immobilized.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient to seek that person who specializes in fracture treatment, especially if the bone is large just as it is with the cow'cups or thighs, or similar to what you call a shepherd. You can use scissors immediately if the conditions for bandaging are met, as we have previously mentioned.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	If the rain falls on dry soil and you wait for an hour before treading upon it after it has dried out, unless there is another cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Person A: Hey there! I heard you're dealing with a broken bone?
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	When the broken bone protrudes through an open wound, it's crucial to seek medical attention immediately in order to minimize complications and align the affected area with minimal discomfort. Time is of the essence, so please visit a healthcare provider as soon as possible.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Mays, if not suitable for your use and the purpose of health, you should reduce that which is most appropriate for yours by this instrument; it's an instrument made from iron with a length of seven or eight palms (about 16-20 inches) and a width according to the amount of plaster required. It is necessary for the physician to choose three or four such instruments based on the specific type and extent of fracture treatment needed.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	E is generous, and let there be a small favor in return for which it does not have to pay an exorbitant price at the time of the transaction.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Article I: Definitions and General Proviser
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	Esta es mi versión en español de lo que mencionaste: "Esta es su forma de ser". Sin embargo, si deseas una traducción al inglés exacta de esta frase podría ser: "This is your way of being" o simplemente "This is who you are". Si necesitas otra palabra en particular, estaré encantado de ayudarte.
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	The phrase "nompanat en grek labre volentz atelarem" doesn't appear to be in Greek and seems nonsensical. However, translating the words individually would give us something like this: "nompnat" (not a real word), "en grec" (in Greek), "labre" (which is close to "labrys," an ancient double axe symbol from Greece), "volentz" (unknown origin or misspelled, possibly intending "veloce" which is Italian for fast but doesn't fit in this context), and "atelarem" (not a real word).
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	The end of the raised limb is immobilized at the level of the prominent bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	In the pastureland within which cattle graze and roam freely, a well is to be constructed along with an equal-sized pond.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	In case of a fracture where the ends are not easily aligned, and if the transected end is too slender to be properly managed by good acceptance (grafting), you should insert the transected end into another bone that has enough power for fixation.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	If you cannot reduce the debts to total water that have been reported, then now within that amount of water which corresponds to those skeptical individuals we've mentioned; or cut that amount by one of the mountains in any way possible.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	The person who made the mistake of laziness and small successes in the past.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	When the bone is broken and set in place to heal properly, it often causes intense pain that lasts for hours until the bone returns to its normal position; thus, taking this remedy can greatly alleprise the suffering from such a fracture.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	The completion of your restoration work affects you as follows: After the restoration is finished and while it remains submerged in a sealed black container, especially during summer months, do not pause on the beach or any other place where oil might be present so that nothing happens to cause rusting or corroseby.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	After a certain period of time following the completion of bone healing, an appropriate prosthesis can be placed and make sure that the metal screws and implants are visible only if required by the amount of tissue coverage.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Be very careful not to get the wound infected due to dust particles that may have fallen from the walls, and it may result in severe illness or decay for your patients, as this is a serious matter.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	A possible translation of this text into Spanish could be: "La estrictura ligamentaria es diferente según el tipo de fractura y su localización". However, it seems like there may have been a mistranslation or misunderstanding in the original sentence you provided. The word 'leugiera' does not appear to fit contextually.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	Is the plague large or is it a bad plaster? And you fear those accidental injuries that we have reported to you, and experience pain in that location; for some time now I don't want you to rest on that cast, but rather to wear a stiff wrap of bandages at the site of injury.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	In case the rain begins one or two times already while it is brewing a storm, from which your armor has been hanging for a long time over that object you mentioned earlier, and promptly arrange for some assistance, as we usually do when dealing with such storms; use substances similar to those of Tetra pharmaco and remedies apt for the situation.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Here is the translation of this text from Catalan to English:
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the rain continues for several days and it is not solidified or separated from your armor, be aware that here you may suffer from small puddles through which you could try to cross the river.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	In cases of those injuries that have not been separated and remain attached, as well as those where the limb cannot be detached and cause pain or harm, proceed to amputate according to your ability at the scene.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	Ecclesiasteus decides to cast himself into the plague or persecution, for it is better than being deceived and corrupted by lies, which often lead men away from the cure of the wound described in its preceding chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	In the place where my speech stands and you present your plea: when they tear apart the big bones, hover above the limbs just like the jawbone and of the lever and resemblances to those of large members; do not assume any twisting or pulling out from there, as many times this causes death. Leave that part untouched, for it may strongly break off in 12 days or 30. At Hour of Need: When you encounter the storm, he will calm it; if not seen, then let him rest in peace.
Capitol .xx.	The name of the legislative building in Washington D.C., where both chambers of Congress meet, is the United States Capitol. It'amoemba Capital!
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The healing process that occurs in the tissue of any type of fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Frequent movements aggravates this condition in the healing process of a fracture, especially near joints, and it is characterized by inflammaturity of the affected limb; moreover, strongly hinders the member's normal functioning.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Adonc, he considersé si la nodació és recenta i aministra en aquelles medicaments que han stipulat així com aloe, essèns, serracoll, acròsia, i similars a aquells. Així que prenguis de aquestes alcunes o totes, i convulsions aquellas am vi estipulades, o am album d'ou, o am vi agre, i pausa aquella sobre la nodació en estopa, i constringues aquelles sobre ell per bona constricció.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	The wax that has not been displaced for several days should be replaced with a new one; meanwhile, reinforce the previous layer of lead padding, as lead possesses the property to remain intact within any body part it is applied to.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays if he is convicted, shall be converted into stone and thrown outside to cause astonishment. Later, the wealthy will divide that property among themselves, taking away its surplus and eminence, but keeping within it what belongs to any relatives - until redeemed.
Capitol .xxi.	Capital XXI
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	During the restoration of a bone fracture, the body restores and repairs the injured limb according to its natural structure.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is healed, and the appropriate blood supply to the limb is ensured, later on it does not cause pain but for several reasons: one of which is excessive swelling in the ligament and tissue from previous injuries; or due to an overabundance of scarring within the channels that restrict nutrient flow to the affected area; or due to excessive scar tissue buildup; or due to excessive movement at improper times; or due to insufficient blood supply in the body and weakened healing capacity.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	In the curative power of water, there is the ability to ease maladies and make your tender heart within which the wound has been multiplied, heal; and bring about calmness and joy within you.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	When the food is paused in the intestine, it's so that it can release its essential nutrients, while continuing the absorption of water through the body, allowing for the nutrients to flow and return to their original form.
Capitol .xxii.	Title: Acts of Congress, Public Laws, Resolutions, and Concurrent Resolutions Passed During the First Session (107th) Congreses - Volume 22 [Legislation]
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	The healing of fractured bones when they are properly set and the operation involving their exposure to water is forbidden.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	Quantum acceleloys the healing of your fractured and prominent bone ends and nodal enlargement, it is due to a correct form of the limb; however, this does not mean that you are excluded from the natural course of recovery after surgery. Now do not expect the words of one who believes that your fracture has been completely reset.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	Mays did so much harm to many chefs and restaurateurs in our area, which is an appalling action that will cause great fear for the reputation at stake; this operation can be fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	Mays, a mildly claudicating person with numbness of the limbs, can benefit from bathing in warm water containing soothing herbs such as comfrey leaves and chamomile flowers, which have similar properties to those mentioned; or by applying an ointment made similarly softening. Alternatively, they could use a mucilage from elderberry roots mixed with the fat of a bull'amoletas similar to the remedies described above that involve comfrey and chamomile-like plants.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	Some feet are frequently immersed in warm oil by the hands of an experienced massage therapist who ensures they are fully submerged at all times during every session.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	The twisted nature of May'ebone causes it to protrude and shift due to bone growth or other factors, necessitating the care of a skilled farrier. Therefore, every few months it is essential that the excess growth be carefully trimmed and its continuous dissolution prevents hardened material from accumulating, which could lead to sensitive areas in the horse being affected by subtle cutters. This process should be administered easily with regular maintenance and attention.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII: The Capital City and Its Secrets
De sermo en dislocacio.	Topic: About the topic and dislocation injuries
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is a dislocation of one of the joints in the body, which makes it impossible to move and causes severe pain and significant injury to the affected area.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	When an acute dislocation occurs, it must be reduced as soon as possible and not delayed, because if it's done late, the site becomes edematous and very tense with water formation, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	Pain and discomfort in the affected area that is not severe or extensive during the inflammation process; however, many cases result in muscle spasms and persistent pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	Mays quan aquo accideys, las horas coves que tu t'acozes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sies layssat entro que repause l'apostema; e aprop el membre sia embrocat am agüa cauda e oli, e aprop sies reduzit am facilitat.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	A member of the clergy shall be buried with water, from which the memory will eventually come to rest in its proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	The capitals are relocated according to the order mentioned in the event of separation; from the highest supreme authority towards the lowest inferior authority.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Postoperative care for mandible displacement injuries involves ensnaring a few critical steps to ensure proper healing and avoid complications. These are some key guideleins for the postoperative phase after such an injury has been addressed surgically or through other medical interventions:
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Dislocated jaws if not treated; the dislocation of both can be done in one of two ways: either they are gradually repositioned into their original places with slight movement and mild force, or they are completely dislocated and then fully realigned, during which time saliva may leak from the mouth, and the tongue is wrapped around the lips.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	The recurrence of May's shoulder dislocation is rare; however, in cases where it occurs repeatedly, there can be a few causes to consider. These may include:
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If Mays's injury is complete and severe, I urge that it be treated promptly and not delayed at all, to the best of our ability.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The minister must have knowledge about the injury, and insert the doctor's finger from one side into the reason for the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth; if the dislocation is on one side, or insert his two fingers at once in case of double-side dislocation, otherwise all other methods should be considered equally. The minister then commands the injured person to stop their mandibles and absolve them from any displacement; the doctor aligns the mandible and pushes it back into place until it returns to its original location.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	It is very difficult to reduce the swelling when both mandibles are dislocated, as it may require surgical intervention and intravenous fluids along with pain management; therefore, repositioning of one jaw should be done immediately followed by reduction of both jaws as previously mentioned.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	So let them both return and be equal in the eyes of justice. The mouth of misfortune is closed, its bitternereness softened. Now rests upon those dusty threads of grey wool a balm made of beeswax and rose oil; it shall be applied with ease at your request.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	E should lie down on his sickbed, and his head be situated between two pillows, so that he may not move to the right or left; nor do anything forcib cuase without permission. While eating his meal, let him have a clove of garlic, in which, when pains are intensified and jaws become numbed, it will help relieve them.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	Water intake should be as easy and not involve opening the mouth fully for eating, drinking or breathing exercises until the jaw is healed and restored.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws in any case and they are not returned to their place promptly, then he suffers persistent fevers and intense sweating, and very soon the abdomen shows signs of illness, along with bouts of pure colic.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	Once upon a time, there was an old clock that had lost its ticking sound. It stood in the corner of a dusty room, and over the years it seemed to lose its purpose. One day, however, something changed as someone came along with curiosity sparked within them.
Capitol .xxv.	In the United States, "Capitol" refers to the building where the legislative branch of government convenes. The most well-known Capitol is in Washington D.C., which houses both chambamoons of Congress – the House of Representatives and the Senate. This iconic structure serves as a symbol of American democracy and has witnessed countless historical events that have shaped the nation's history.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	The reduction of the fracture in the furcula and at the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The furculum is not dislocated from the left clavicle due to its continuous attachment at the base; however, in some cases it can become partially detached and move away, which has been observed.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	The restoration of your health is that the malady casts a shadow over your head and extends its reach to your arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	A proper comma is used in the location of your hand to make it return properly.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	A propósito, passe na pasta e pólips e estique-os bem.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	The extremity of the limb that one feels and it continues with this, is not dislocated at any time; hours later you will feel it reduced and balanced according to what we have mentioned and as your body allows it.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	He prays for the balm to apply on that wound and powder, plaster, and ointment, and commands it to cling to tranquility and rest within which shall be healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	In this case, the injury's healing process is reduced when the muscle fiber is detached from its original location.
Capitol .xxvi.	"Capitol XXVI" translates to "CAPITAL 26" in English, referring to the 2eby-old building or structure within a series titled 'Capitals'. If this is part of a larger context such as a book or collection numbering system, it would typically denote the twenty-sixth installment.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Reduction of the shoulder joint dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	According to the information provided, there are three ways in which a tendon can be mislocated or displawed. Of these three, one of them is when it detaches from its origin and inserts at the other end.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	The second rule is that the tendon must be torn away from its original position, and it's started like this; and it's not torn away from the parts behind near the shoulder; and it't not torn away from the parts in front through the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	The majority of people experience a sense of displacement and dissatisfaction with their lives, especially in those whose bodies are lean or thin, as they falsely believe themselves to be disproportnented; however, it is more difficult for those who have abundant body mass.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	In the event of an accident involving a fall from height at an alcohol-serving establishment, causing injury to your arm and possibly resulting in bruising or muscle strain, as well as displacement of any foreign objects like coins due to impact, please follow these steps:
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	I urge you to take a deep breath and relax, as well as process things in the healing of your soul.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	E is the dislocation of the upper arm when it comes to the joints that follow; so you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the torn muscle, for you will manifest their differences; and you'll find in the hollow part of the muscle and beyond its tendon, touching with your finger as if a pin, while the pain cannot be reduced to its original place nor can that pulled muscle move completely throughout all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If you remove the stone or its shadow and it causes a tremor, and it is not feigned, then you will be disqualified from participation in the contest.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	The error in this Catalonian sentence is the misspelling of "fayta" and "enfan." It should be corrected to "faig" (made) and "enfants" (children). Here's the revised version, also translated into English for clarity:
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	The elevation of the land is that the minister raises its height above previous levels; and accordingly he shifts your property borders behind him, and raises his link to strengthen it in his own location, and the minister raises the height therein, extending that further, and then that returns unfaithfully.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Mays, drink plenty of water and avoid returning to the meal that caused the indigestion; this should occur several hours after the onset of symptoms, ensuring that the discomfort is alleviated with a mildly flavored broth containing soothing ingredients such as fennel seeds, fenugreek, and melilotus (sweet clover) in water.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	The illness rises over its back and spreads throughout the body of hope; gently wrap it in warmth and care to provide relief from discomfort. Then place your hand on top of this hopeful spirit, elevating the muscle of strength above, and throw the cloak of ailment away so that it does not harm any further parts. Provide treatment for its head too, ensuring it does not cause more damage to other areas, as it may soon return to its original place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	If you wish to do so following this method: I present the idea of a person who is far less malevolent than the illness itself and stands on the side of good. He uses his influence, like a gentle breeze, to lift the spirits above where the sickness hovers in the air, while another individual draws the malady away from the areas below their belly, towards its own demise.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the illness is a lie, then there may be another cause that suspends it because if serious, such as the displacement returns soon.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	E is reduzit en forma segon un'altra maniera: haja una estaca larga y larga como un palo de pistola que tenga su redondo delante, así como el mortero; pero no debe ser grueso ni fino. Sobre el cap del fust se colocan lonchas de león (encaje), y la maza está extendida sobre toda la longitud del fust hasta las partes opuestas. Los guiones están fuertemente apretados en su lugar, ya que al retorcerse vuelven a su posición original con rapidez.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	If it's difficult to reduce your fever due to all the reasons mentioned earlier, here is a natural remedy you can try. Take a stick that has a length of two palms and four fingers wide, with its thickness being half an inch. Then follow these steps:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	The Red Dragon, according to legend, could speak every language on earth but chose not to do so because of the evil nature it would spread through communication.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	The patient is positioned supine with the affected limb elevated on pillows and the other arm placed across his body within the bed's side sections, while the leg is lifted over the supports and assistant's hands as well as at its extremities.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	A pair of ropes are laid across a ladder rung according to the longitude, and each one is extended outward on either side so that the junction lies just below.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	C cleanses the inner part of his ear as thoroughly as possible and afterwards makes sure he rests for at least a quarter hour before moving on to the next area; then prepares properly with plenty of oil or almond oil applied over all the muscle, so that it is covered, and strains tightly but not too hard around the cleansed ear. The wrapping should be moved downward over the plaster, and its end tied secureively at the neck, ensuring comfort for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	The food poisoning symptoms should be relieved within the member being comforted, as it is more likely to aid in healing.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	The food must be warmed up thoroughly before consumption and then allowed to cool down slightly; otherwise it may cause illness later on.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	When Mays' joint is dislocated due to humidity or another cause, it should be treated with heat at three times a day as mentioned in the chapter on caustic treatment.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	If the bandage and strapping are applied for more than seven days without being removed, they may gradually loosen and their effectiveness reduced; therefore, one should not be able to elevate that limb above the level of the heart at any time during this period as the nerves which lie at the head of the muscle may become loose or stretched out, causing the joint never to regain its natural position.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The dislocation that has occurred must be corrected with the help of the cast and splint or traction method; it should then be extended as much as possible within a reasonable time frame before returning to normal.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	C is to be administered in the other prescription and within that which is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	When gravity's pull is disrupted in the body and movement of blood gets delayed, the disease may use this opportunity to spread with veins becoming blocked until that gravitational force returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Treatment for dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	The junction of the elbow is dislocated due to difficulty and similarly returns to difficulty; and that one is dislocated in all directions, mainly towards the front part compared to the back part, and the dislocation from there is not diminished by any means after recent surgery or touching according to any figure it may be dislocated. And when you adjust the dislocated elbow joint, this shows clearly that the junction has become concave and cannot bend the arm nor reach its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	The swoln veins and dilated vessels often lead to an abscess that soon appears; if you see the abscess coming up, it is difficult to reduce it, and severely hard not to be cured at all; especially when they are behind the parts, as there's worse pain, more suffering, and increased chances of death compared with any other types of dislocation.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	In the restoration of harmony, when it's possible to reduce it, is that the art of harmony be extended by a lot and the skill of harmony be expanded, and the tools of the healer lie over the joint with both thumbs, or in the center of his palm as he turns it back into its rightful place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	The dislocation is in the sentences ahead, hours returns as if doubling my mama's hair, before hitting the door with the speed of her hand'ease.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	If the displacement does not obey the reduction, there will be a strong and continuous flow of current in one direction only.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	Two ministers reach out their arms and take that moment between them to ensure the extension is not disrupted.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	The sleeve should completely cover the entire arm and be wrapped long enough over the hand, without showing any skin.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	The doctor rubs the junction with his finger, applying some oil there so that it becomes slippamo r (smoother), and then forcefully pushes the junction inward to make it rotate. This helps facilitate movement at the joint.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	In the procedure of reducing the affected area that is swoln over the wound in which there is inflammation and excruciating pain, the bandage shall be removed from the body, the pressure applied should be strictly decreased, and the arm suspended by its collarbone for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	First, make the string lowercase and remove spaces so that we can easily match characters from both ends towards the middle: "twinkletwinkletwinklelittlestar". Then find the midpoint index (10 in this case). Now compare each character on either side of the midpoint. If they are equal, move to next pair by incrementing left pointer and decrementing right pointer; otherwise return false as the string is not a palindrome:
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	If the joint is not broken, apply your turn to plaster and bandage her limb, and leave that for about ten days until it has healed; then remove that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	Mays decides to rest his arm at the elbow joint, and its position is slightly bent, while softly warming it with moist heat, and then wrapping it up for a short time; he may also keep it in motion as if massaging gently, before leaving that warmth on the joint throughout the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	The following text is in Galician, specifically from the northwestern region of Spain where Galician is spoken. In this language, a common recipe could be described as follows (translated into English for reference):
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	In order to create a fragrant oil blend similar to the qualcomfereys fractura and torcio, try this recipe using essential oeils of lavender (x), rose (y), jasmine (v) for roses; and sandalwood (a), patchouli (b), ylang-ylang (c) for woods:
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	If you want to, pause on that cow's damp and scratched crevice at the edge and start spreading some ointment there; then apply it generously as this area is moist and reduce its inflammation.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter Twenty-Eight.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	The Malassez's curvature is a dental term that refers to the curve found between the arm and the jaw bone (mandible). This curvature is related to the development of certain teeth, particularly incisors. However, it appears there might be confusion as "dislocacio de malassen" does not correspond to anatomical terminology directly recognizable under that spelling; it may require more specific context or a correct term for accurate translation or explanation within dental anatomy.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The displacement of Malassez's remnants is minor and the reduction of its dislocation is negligible; however, it seems to have a certain speed in reducing its position at the time it was dislocated, before it becomes encapsulated or turns into an abscess.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of the dislocation involves stopping at a table and extending the affected arm over it. The doctor places his hand on the near end of the joint, then pushes that part until it returns to its original position.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it should also be considered that the palm has already been removed from my stomach; at this time I will place the doctor's hand on a table and extend/reduce it; if the displacement occurs before doing so, then the position of my stomach would intrinspectly lie over the table in such a way that the doctor's hands are placed on top of that imminence at the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	If it returns soon, that's good indeed; if not, let the swelling subside and leave that abscess alone - don't touch or apply anything to its area. And please, do your best to keep pressure off of the affected limb as much as possible until you can see a doctor for further evaluation.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the Roman joint due to its twisted nature; and there was not a single bad cause, but rather that it is quite mollified and cannot raise any cause; hencefornose you know that nerves are either tied or loosened, and at times they are not in motion unless driven by an appropriate cautery for their location and much water brings about certain causes.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	The text provided appears to be in Occitan language (also known as Provençal), which is spoken mainly in the south of France, Italy'cuesta y malestar, las horas pausan sobre él empastre que han repetido, e está deslizado y estirado por V días; Y así sea desgasificado y descargue su máquina.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	The movement of the sun causes changes in light and gravity at any given time, resulting in high tides every few hours, depending on the location being affected.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX - The Capital City Adventure
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	The curative approach to language disorders.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Some shifts are displaebed across the entire party.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	It's a cold day in December when she tells him of those two people on the palm or belly, hours before the story unfolds and pushes for her own pursuits, until she returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	A proper support is needed for the injured area and avoid any movement of that limb; rest it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Article LXII - Prohibition of Discrimination
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	On the night following that narration, he took that second one and did not cease to exercise it during the day and at night; for a period of several days within which it was strained.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	If you think I'm crazy, then imagine water within my belly and a piece of it moving to the desired location where I want to perform the first operation, ensnaring that part in its initial procedure until it is healed. (Note: This appears to be an incomplete thought or a fragment from another language with potential medical connotations.)
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	The correct translation from Old French to modern English would be: "Semblance of an amount of water that is displaculed among the others." However, this sentence seems a bit unclear and may require more context for accurate interpretation. If we are aiming at translating in a way that makes sense, perhaps it could relate to something like comparing quantities or levels within a group or setting where one stands out from the rest (akin to being 'displaced' or not fitting). Without additional context on what "fay am aquo" specifically refers to, an exact translation can be challenging.
Capitol .xxx.	Capital X-Ceptionals (also known as Capitol X) is a fictional American company in the DC Comics universe, known for its state-of-the-art technology and weapons development. It was originally founded by Dr. Kolarov of Romania during World War II, with the primary goal of producing advanced weaponry and equipment to aid Axis forces against Allied nations.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Spinal disc displacement treatment in the lumbar region.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When one or more discs of the spine are completely displaced, and a surgical procedure is performed to relocate them in that location, it often does not result in recovery, as death may occur due to complications.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	Signs of water intoxication are beyond one'e control and cannot be retained; often times relief is provided to the affected limbs with lu(tea) or two cups of lu (rice soup), or half of either; sometimes it has worsened a spondylosis in his/her location, as many times it has improved while others have seen those symptoms transfered across four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	That one has already been updated in the records and is now named "yellowed".
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	May's concern about the pollution of our waters is that if its contamination levels continue to rise, there won't be a cure or sanity for it at all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	In that which you see in the construction or percussion or imitation for those, ancient people used ways of speech to be prolonged, from which one should return at length; I am tired of it and ashamed by its excess of length due to my proximity to the true intention, for which I have exposed and formed this instrument different from that with which you showed me these things.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	The speaker says that the small cakes made from shortbread dough, which are placed on the edge of the tray, are neither healthy nor satisfying when they're prepared in such a way with two layers.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	In this case, "E" is not cured but the one that occurs in the same area where you live.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	It is evil to have the illness spread over his face as if it were similar to a wall; and also spread by the terrible moisture so that none of the stones are left untouched on the surface.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	A prop up a straight stick placed in the ground at the base of a tree on one end and weights attached to it on the other end of the pole.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	The bishop shall hold the scepter, and not be confined to a tomb; another minister holds the orb according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	The handle of the axe surrounds over the head and ends of the mallet, with the extremity of the haft reaching to the end which is to be the head of it; then that one strengthens the other end of the haft against its shoulders on each side, and holds those in place; and adjusts all the parts so that they are joined together.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	The minister of Casco extends the deadline for the submission of the documents, and neither are the two pieces and their contents to be removed from the places where they are located, but rather secured as we have stated.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	Place your hands on the holy stone within the stronghold, then place them upon that table and adjust to align with it before returning.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If Mays does not return in this manner, hours take a table where the latitude or longitude is three degrees off from where we stated that there should be an issue with a location between the endpoints of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	The patient lies down on the examination table and the doctor places his hands over the opposite extremity, then gently rotates the vertebrae until they are centered in their natural position and return to their place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	If you wish to do as is written above regarding the wheel, which revolves around its own axis and that of the ground, in a direction opposite to each other, then you shall remain on the earth at the point where it can be safely done so. The length between each part (spoke) of the wheel should be one palm; hence there are two fists' lengths between each spoke turn. Each individual component must also be fastened securely in place to prevent injury or harm.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	Let S be a hollow cylinder in which the torus is wound and rotating around its two axes of the two cylinders.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	The top of the mast is a trunk in which the wood is formed, whose length is one span above sea level and is curved; while on the other two parts it resembles that shape.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"Thou shall strengthen the bonds that have weakened during times of illness and grief; thou shalt reconcile differences with those who have wronged thee, and forgive as thou wouldst be forgiven."
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	Nearby should be each boarder's master and a minister who knows the borders as well as his own hands, and can measure accurately the distance according to what has been said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	Ciertamente, aquí está el texto en inglés de "La forma del tono":
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Once the disc is returned and its location restored, hours are covered that painful breaks result in an X-ray of the humerus, and the region is expanded so that its length equals three times the radius of the table on which it leans, and its width is sufficient to cover the area of radiance. Moreover, over the cast there hangs a shining metal support with hooks attached at intervals along its edge for added stability.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	Furthermore, as previously mentioned, use the malady of subtle deficiency that is present and ensure your health is maintained accordingly.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	There seems to be a possibility of infection at the wound site following surgery, so it would be advisesteemed necessary that medications which promote healing and prevent contamination are administered for an extended period of time, which we have recommended; and plastic sheeting has already been implemented there.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	Some people experience acute episodes of pain in the latter part of their spinal discs, and it'am your cousin who is affected by this displacement; therefore, you shouldn't consider surgery as an option for him at this time, because such a procedure could put his life at risk.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capital, XXVII.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Treatment for a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	"Bear in mind that the junction of the elbow and the muscle does not lead only to dislocation, but also does not result in those accidents occurring at other small joints due to slight movements or curvatures."
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The joint of the large bone is dislocated in four different ways: firstly when it's dislocated towards the inside, secondly when it's dislocated towards the outside, thirdly when it's dislocated forward, and fourthly when it's dislocated backwards.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	The majority is moved to the forward positions and few to the rear or behind.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	Sign of the displacement from the parts of the foot to the heel is four, when you adjust the latches of sickle sore against the healthy one, it becomes longer and sharper than the healthamoor; the pain cannot bend its own edge. And it is a place where swelling and pus formation from an abscess can occur. Therefore, so that the end of this matter has reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	A) The occurrence of this displacement beyond the parts is to those events contrary to this event.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	In the case of dislocation in parts below it, the affected limb expands more than usual, however, this does not cause such a severe pain as in the head, and if it continues to move but cannot cross over those parts; urine is retained, and swelling occurs. The person must walk on crutamoins/crawl.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	Sign of the place where an accident occurs causing displacement to parts behind is that it does not expand at the front end, nor can one bend the protruding part without breaking the other; and its handle is shorter than the others, and the protrusion is softened, and the head of the tool is towards this location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	The reduction of these spices related to this dislocation is that you consider, for now, if the displacement is ancient and antiquated, such that it has already been assigned under your administration according to its disposition; therefore, at present there's no need in that case for any reparations.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In the case where the dislocation is recent and it's one of the four types of dislocation, hours should be at ease when you return to the joint and extend that into the inner and outer parts as well as towards left and right; so it can easily return on its own without requiring any other care.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If Mayse does not return in this manner, the hours will reveal that you must prepare and extend the blade of departure above his head, or on its sides; and another minister shall extend the mace from beneath it so that it meets with his own lethal weapon's edge. In addition, a third minister shall hold onto the handle while he hovers over the cause; and yet another minister shall stand at the extremity of the blade.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	Article E is an extension of the boundary between Lu or the departure to the neighborhood and the departure from the tail, or the departure behind to the departure of the two.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	E is the extension of all those in a village within which malaria prevalence remains high and their fear towards the land persists.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This kind of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	If the displacement returns to water that we have mentioned, then it is not serious; otherwise, several hours are necessary for all kinds of treatment related to the specific injury.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	During the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, the displacement occurs towards the inner sides, causing that pain to be located on its left side; and after rotation, the limbs are placed over the axis of the process in that place which lies between the head of the process and the location from where it was detached; and extending the limb toward the anterior part of the scapula.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	The esteemed minister took the initiative and addressed the issue at hand with great fervor; he extended his departments' efforts to spread awarennce about this matter far and wide, ensuring its return to its rightful place in its own location. (Note: The text is in Occitan language)
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This is a less severe contusion among the various types in which this body part is reduced compared to others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	Mays is sorry about your disregard and does not comply with this type of cure-all treatment at all times; it requires both faith in its effectiveness and adherence to the instructions, without exaggeration or misuse on both the good and bad aspects.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Let S be the length of each side of a square and let T be its total area. Then the difference between their quantities is four units (S - T =
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	The cargo weighs two brasses in length along the land'ebore of the mast and is suspended atop its head.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	A boy commands a strong kid to remove the cap of the cup, and let it hang from another boy's illness, while the other kid strengthens his grip on the cup, so that the joint returns to its own place at high speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	In the original position, when it is displaced outside, the pain runs to the groin after we have repositioned in the hips; and it strains the sinews over the affected limb properly as well as over its joints.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Near their coffins' lids, one should lay the heaviest items and the other with its lid closed; and near their lids they shall adjust their shrouds in which moss is wrapped around which their illness may not be desecrated for that the weight of it lies between his possessions, so that you must extend those leftovers.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Article X - Each minister shall contribute his share and the physician hiss own equates to the reduction pursuant with the said article.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	If reversed, it becomes great indeed; and if not, stand upon that diligently as such we have said in justification for that equality.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	At the end of his journey, the traveler found solace in the words he had written on the leaves.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	When the dislocation is at the lower jaw joints and hours of clenching that the change may be extensive, and according to this narrative on puer's leg; the surgeon places his right hand palm over the affected area and cuts around it with a surgical tool. He then ties off one artery and extends the dislocation back towards its original position in the lower jaw joints.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	The dislocation is towards the posterior parts; there is no certainty that the pain extends to the posterior parts and it is elevated above the ground; people believe that if it were placed on a hard surface, then as we have said regarding its placement over two widths, it would be extended along its length according to this, on its face and the limbs would be stretched out, as we have stated, there's no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	The translated sentence in English is: "The patient requires administration of compression at the table where you see the joint."
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Once the reduction is completed as you have told - and the sign of the reduction in you does not appear, and if you extend from there the bad intentions, and when you encounter those impediments and take the evil outward to your side and expand that excuse, then know that the member according to which it was reduced returns. Then adjust both sides with a paste so that the width is not harmful in any of the parts; and let the evil remain at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Here's the comparison of both languages regarding their sentence structure and usage in terms of grammar rules:
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	If you see those false pretenses in yourself, know that the separation is over and therefore let not any ill will arise.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	If there is no sign of improvement, after three days you should return and apply that dressing again according to your initial compression, and leave it on for another three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	The patient may feel sore after the procedure, and it might take him or her several weeks to walk comfortably again.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 23, Title: The Grand Capital
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	The treatment of shoulder dislocation involves several steps, depending on the severity and nature of the injury. Here is a general overview:
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The dial is located according to three directions: it is positioned towards the outer parts, and towards the inner parts, and to the left sides more than to the right sides; but not facing forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of the fault's displacement is that you command your anger to apply its force at the cause; then know that the defendant is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The full restoration of all thy lands is that you shall remove the evil rightly; as soon as they extend their boundary, if possible do so; join your two hands to his face, and pause his foot between your feet; then firmly press those on his temples with your palms, and turn those gently over his temples again upon your thumbs, providing strength. Extend his own body within that the temple returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	A sign of reverse gravity on Earth is that its surface attracts without effort to float upwards.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	In that place, there was a woman with child who had just given birth to twins - one male and the other female. The people of that town decided to perform an experiment on them; they bound each infant separately by their legs for three or four days, then released them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	The patient has used the medication for difficulty in walking due to arthritis, and as a result, feels relieved and comfortable.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	My apologies for taking so long to respond; I've been managing several other tasks which led me to focus on the recovery process of the hand as described in the previous story.
Capitol .xxxiii.	The number "33" in Roman numerals is written as "XXXIII." To break this down, the letter "X" represents ten and there are three of them (XXX), which equals thirty. Following that, we have "III," where each "I" stands for one. Adding these together gives us 30 + 3 = 33. Therefore, in Roman numerals, 33 is denoted as XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Curative treatment for ankle dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	In some cases, the field is levelled by small movements, and in other instances it has been shifted following an earthquake, with the displacement of the ground either towards or away from neighboring areas or areas further apart.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of the displacement is that it occurs in the direction of the flattened tire from where it got detached.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	Mays's cure for the removal of his liver is a slight rectification, and it should be extended to make it more accessible as well as being equal in terms that he returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	Mays in the place of Lu Quan is dislocated according to complementary texts, which indicate that you should perform a ceremonial cure for the right remedy, and have someone strong and capable from our party as an intermediary behind him at his dwelling place.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	On finds oneself on the top of the highest summit, and one's right hand is towards the most superior portion while one'amo left side lies beyond your foot in the location of the thumbtack.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Turn to your right and take two steps forward, then extend your left arm outward. And with that hand, grab the nearest object within reach, hold it tightly for a few seconds, then let go and repeat with the other hand.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	"Let the water flow following what has been counted."
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	C applaudites les pièces du paquet de la troisième série et vous y voyez un trésor.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	If a certain value appears once or twice according to this method and you see the same pair of values, then it's okay; otherwise, repeat the operation for an hour until that value reappears.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	As Mays, you are forbidden from reducing the good water that we have recounted, to bring bad news about your fate on earth, and instead sing a merry tune on land, and let it be part of its things, and you already have covered it with cloth so that no evil touches it.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Article I - The Minister shall make known his actions to the other ministers and extend his hand over his head in acknowledgment of their authority; each minister, in turn, should do the same with respect to all others present, for the purpose of establisher la communion among them.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	The swelling around the fracture decreases as the bones heal themselves, and another procedure restores normal function to the affected limbs, which helps alleebate pain and facilitates mobility.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Thus returns the dislocation, and it is declared safe for you to approach the site of the collapse, without hesitation apply plasters externally there, and gently lift that limb forward, while tying the bandage tightly.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	A remedy that you may use to protect yourself from the nerves which are behind your scalp, in order for the hair not to fall out vigorcuously and become thin significantly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	A clay is applied for two or three days; and if the inflammaturess calms down, extend that period.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	The law from the olden town states that on every third day or fourth, one must avoid any misfortune for twelve days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	Mayst thou forget to go through that space; it is not guaranteed that the displacement will not be over your soul and disturbed, nor that you won't suffer harm from water.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	In the event that you feel inclined to take a nap or rest your eyes for a while, kindly do so before addressing any concerns related to our story's setting and healing practices; meanwhile, we hope for your well-being.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Title: Act I, Scene i
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The treatment of ligament displacement in the ankle joints.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	He who is considered lazy has little extent in his work; and what is not difficult appears more deceptive.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in either of your shoulders blades on the back of your body or over a chair, and it's so severe that you feel intense pain, seek medical help immediately to prevent further injury to yourself as if you were moving without support.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Go towards the east and pause at your feet over the water that lies before you; then step on to the one that brings good fortune inside it as you turn around, and see how evenly they are matched and do not appear in a prominent location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	AI, from the depths of her belly, she pulled out a table that would encompass everything, with two heads and sturdy enough to support it for three days; then she removed it and allowed herself to rest in motion for several days until she was refreshed and rejuvenated.
Capitol .xxxv.	"Capitol XXXV" is a reference to the 35th studio album by American country music band Alabama, released in 1amoadia on April 26, 1994. The album includes popular tracks like "Dancin', Shaggin' On The Boulevard," and "A Deeper Love." It reached Number One on the Billboard Top Country Albums chart and was certified Platinum by the RIAA for sales exceeding one million copies in the United States.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Among the displacements that may occur at sea, in a fracture or during an earthquake.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	He who causes any harm to that (body) and you seek treatment for it as well as the restoration of its health, numerous times death succeeds such injuries.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	In the matter of selecting a doctor for your condition, do not choose one who presumes to cure you based soleanno on his reputation alone, but rather one who is knowledgeable in their field and possesses extensive experience, mercy, compassion, patience; and uses medications that only suppress symptoms as needed, while directing the disease towards divine judgment. Seek a doctor from whom you hope for recovery from danger, instead of alleviating illness at its worst, where there is some hope to be found.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Thus, we shall begin to make the reduction in favor of him at once, before he is overtaken by an unforeseen event or misfortune occurs.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	Then if the member returns as desired, we manage its treatment according to which type of wound and water is needed for it that suits its dressings' drying process.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	When a bone fragmentation occurs due to multiple traumatic fractures, the patient often requires surgery and is at risk of developing infections associated with these injuries. In such cases, early intervention and appropriate treatment are crucial for recovery from this condition that follows after initial simple illnesses.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	He observes and avoids following the path of fear as his preaching precedes him; for it is better to devote yourself to your Creator, and more beneficial for your glory, and more comforting to those true ones in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	I wish that the words of Albus Dumbledore were perfectly understood by everyone, and that God may bless them all.
Amen.	Indeed, amen is a common expression used to affirm or agree with something said beforehand in many different cultures and religions worldwide. It's derived from Hebrew and was originally used in Jewish prayer as an endorsement of a blessing or statement. Today it has broader usage beyond religious contexts and can be found across various languages such as English, German, Spanish, etc.
