of the hip pain
When pain comes to the hip joint, caused by cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of the thick humors with fetid pills or other good pills.
Afterward make the cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two ways: with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is done in many ways, one of which is: cauterize on the hip joint with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make them deep and large, with a space between each cautery the width of a finger, and let the cautery be olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on the head of the hip, so there are four according to this shape:
And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery mentioned earlier for the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire hip, and the entire thickness of the core is burned.
And this is the manner done for sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. If it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers wide, a little to the left; and let the cautery be knife-shaped, and burn the thickness of the core; and if the patient feels the pain extends to the toes or near there, cauterize where the pain is felt with three or four pricks with the cautery called "poins".
And if necessary, make more; if the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, make a cautery with the knife-shaped or circular cautery, and be very careful with all your cauteries not to leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, causing the patient greater harm and contraction.
And I myself have seen many who made cautery on the ankle of the foot and left it so long that the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot too, and the foot was pierced and corrupted. Afterward a bowel disorder from which he died.
And if the pain is in two places together, make a cautery on each, in this manner. The wise said for the hip cautery, whose manner is this: make such an iron tool and let it be at the head as thick as a date stone, or a little less, and let it be interlaced, with a space between each interlace the size of a knuckle; and let the interlaces be open on two sides, and be like knots, and let there be a well-made iron handle; and this is the shape:
And heat it until it is all red and sparks, then place it on the diseased hip joint, and turn it on the healthy side; and cauterize once with a round cautery and leave it for three days; then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; afterward treat with ointment until healed.
Albucasim said that we use little of this cautery due to the fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it; however, it is a good cautery, for those who can endure it, and where it is appropriate.
