Of squinancy
The ancients spoke and wrote about the incision of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who performed it, and it is in their writings.
For those who have squinancy, it is necessary that the opening of the throat called "epiglottis" is cleared; and that no aid is given in this way, because all the veins and the lungs of the patient are affected by hot abscesses in the mouth, throat, or the two tonsils.
When the disease is in the airway of the lungs, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
So, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should cut it below the third or fourth ring with a small transverse incision, between the two rings or according to the size of the membrane's incision, not in the cartilage;
and this area is suitable for the incision of the epiglottis because there is no flesh there, and the vessels are sufficiently distant.
And if the surgeon is fearful, he should stretch the skin of the throat with a hook, then cut the membrane until he reaches the channel; avoid the blood vessels if any are seen, then cut the membrane as we have said;
and it is indicated by the phlegm of the channel that comes out through the broken place, and by the loss of voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the time of strangulation risk has passed, bring the two lips of the wound together, and sew it without including the cartilage; then apply medicines that promote flesh growth, until it is healed.
Albucasim said not to do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and breath is failing.
Then, the epiglottis is cut because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
and for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is past, and it passes in three or four days.
And then they commanded to sew the wound and heal it until it was cured;
and I will tell you what I saw.
I saw that a young lady took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the lungs;
and I was called to heal her, and I found her almost dead.
I uncovered the wound, and found the blood that had come out, and knew well that she had not cut any veins or conduits except the throat, and the wind was coming out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed the wound, and healed it until she was healed;
and it happened to the young lady that she was hoarse of voice, and later returned to her normal state;
therefore I say that in the incision of the epiglottis, there should be no fear.
