Of anal fistula
Fistulas that come below the anus are nodes, and swellings that come beside the anus externally, or in the space between the two parts,
there is one fistula or several; and when this node is old, it opens, and discharges watery moisture, whitish or subtle pus,
and sometimes these fistulas are piercing; and they are known by the fact that feces or gas come out when the patient defecates, and sometimes a worm comes out.
And there are fistulas that pierce to the bladder, and to the middle of the penis; and they reach to the joint of the thigh, and to the anus.
And thus one recognizes the piercing fistula in the anus, and the non-piercing one:
and it is by inserting your index finger into the anus, and inserting a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when it is not tortuous.
And if it is tortuous, insert a fine lead probe, or a horsehair, until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and no feces or gas or worm comes from the opening, as we have said:
know that it does not pierce; so hurry to treat it.
And when the fistula pierces to the bladder or to the urinary tract, urine comes out, and it cannot heal with medicines.
If it pierces to the joint of the thigh, the probe reaches to the place;
if there is no tortuosity and the discovery of the pain around it, it means that pus always comes out, and no medicine or ointment can heal it;
and in these piercing fistulas, there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of foolish doctors who get involved.
In those that are not piercing and not old, there is hope of healing by surgery, as I have proven,
and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you raise his legs to his thighs, and his thighs are inclined to his stomach;
then insert a brass probe, or lead if it is tortuous, until you know where the probe comes.
If the patient feels it around the anus, you must insert your index finger,
and if you feel that the probe has pierced it; and it is discovered where you feel between your finger the membrane or the flesh, then know that it is piercing;
then do not bother because it cannot be healed.
It is said that some can be healed, but this happens rarely;
and the aid given is that the fine cautery is heated according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned;
and insert it hot into the fistula, until it comes near the anus; and do this two or three times, until you know that these foul flesh are burned, which resemble a bird's feather;
and then treat it with probes soaked in butter, until that flesh comes out, then treat it with ointments that generate flesh and heal.
If it is healed this way, it is good. If not, otherwise it cannot be healed;
and if the probe enters, and does not pierce to the finger in the anus, and there is between your finger and the probe a thick cover of flesh or membrane, and you see the fistula under the cover of the skin;
then cut it from the beginning of the fistula, and always insert the probe further, and then the cautery, until it comes to the end of the probe;
and the probe will be released, and will fall; then clean that foul flesh that looks like a bird’s feather, and nothing remains.
And if the blood overwhelms you, and runs between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
For the fire cautery combines two good things: namely, the burning of this added flesh, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
then treat it with probes soaked in butter or crushed things, until the place discharges pus, and the burnt flesh comes out in the pus;
then treat the wound with healing ointments generating hard flesh, and these are dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula reaches the depth of the anus, and is away from the body, insert your finger into the anus, and investigate it.
If you feel the probe, and between them is the membrane or flesh, or it is about to pierce, there is no other way but confidence and hope, by administering one of the three methods:
either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can place probes and treat it as before;
and do not go too deep, so as not to cut the support that holds the anus, and feces come out there involuntarily;
then treat it as we have said;
perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that cover and clean it since it is cut near the anus, either by probe or other pointed instrument;
then clean that foul flesh in the wound as much as you can;
then work to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part away from the anus: it will be easier for the patient.
And sometimes there are fistulas like this: and it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the anus near the skin above,
then take a probe pierced at the end in this form:
And insert a twisted thread into it, and insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it is at the end.
If it is piercing in the margin of the anus inside, then pull the thread from that hole, as you insert your finger into the anus;
and pull the end of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and tie them tightly, and leave it for one or two days;
and tighten it sometimes, until the thread cuts through the flesh that is between them, and they fall;
then treat the wound until it is healed and closed.
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways you can, if it is not too deep.
Because it is not necessary to cut too deep for the ligature, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the sharp spatula with which the fistula is cut is very sharp on one side, and cutting;
and not on the other side, so as not to cut what should not be cut, as you see here:
