Of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "fosciles," one of which is small, and it follows the thumb; and the other is large, and it is underneath, towards the little finger; by chance the large foscile alone fractures, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small foscile is fractured, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is fractured, the healing is difficult, and more serious than when both are fractured together. If it is the small foscile that is fractured alone, then it needs to be lightly stretched, and set evenly.
And if it is the large foscile, then it needs to be bound more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the thumb higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and the patient should be crossed on himself, and a cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any strain; then the assistant stretches his arm to the part below with his hand, or with a strap, and another assistant to the other part above. And then the physician sets it evenly, according to its best shape.
And if the fracture has pieces, then place each one in its place, and if any are dislocated that pierce the flesh, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut above it and remove it, as we said before.
And if the fracture is with a wound, I have spoken about it in the specific chapter; so take the treatment.
And if a hot abscess occurs at the beginning of the restoration, then glue a cloth with a plaster made of rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind a cloth above subtly, until the hot abscess is soothed. And then remove the plaster, and apply the poultice made of mill powder with egg yolk, then place the splints, and the splint of the fracture should always be stronger, and a little wider than the others; and know that it should have six splints on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone, or in both; and bind more on the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as you move away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and the cloths on the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and the thread, with which it is bound, should be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we said. And observe the limb and the binding after a few days.
And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, like itching that comes to the limb, then you need to moisten the limb with warm water, until the itching is soothed; and let the limb rest, not tightly bound. And then start the binding again, and if the binding is loosened and the bone dislocated, and similar things, then adjust it.
And if you see that nourishment cannot come to the limb, because it is too tight, then you need to loosen it a little, and leave it so for a few days, until nourishment flows there, and then bind it again.
And if none of these things we mentioned happen to the patient, then do not unbind it for twenty days or around that time, then hang the hands to their neck, and the neck should be even, and avoid movement and dislocation, and sleep on their back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and sometimes in twenty days, depending on the composition and complexion of the strengths.
