The author of this book, when I had completed for you, my children, this book which is the sum total of medical science in its entirety and had reached the ultimate goal of clarity and elucidation, I deemed it fitting to complete it for you with this treatise which forms a manual of practice by hand.
For the practical application of the hand is non-existent in our country and age, so much so that its science has almost vanished and its traces are about to be lost. Only a few outlines of it remain in the books of our ancestors, but these have been garbled by hands and beset by errors and confusion to such an extent that its meanings have become impenetrable and its benefits remote.
Therefore, I have decided to revive it and compose this treatise in a style that is both explanatory, concise and to provide figures of the iron tools for cauterization and other instruments of practical application, for this is part of the process of elucidation and an account of what is needed.
The reason why there are no proficient practitioners by hand in our age is because the practice of medicine is a lengthy one and its practitioner should first be trained in the science of anatomy as described by Galen."وأما الكّى فلا بدّ فيه من معرفة مواضع الدم والعرق والمفاصل وحديد الكّى وأوقاته على ما هو مذكور فى كتاب جالينوس. For cauterization, one must know the locations of the blood vessels, the joints, the nerves and muscles, their numbers, the points where they originate and terminate, the bones, the stationary and pulsating veins, as described by Galen in his book."ومن بعد ذلك يرتاض فى النبض وأنواعه وعلاماته واختلافه.
Hence, as Abqurat has said, there are many doctors by name but few in reality, especially in the art of surgery by hand. We have, indeed, mentioned something about this in the introduction to this book."ولذلك لم نزل نحن نفقد من صناعتنا ونحتاج فى بلدنا إلى الماكنين لصناعة الأدوات وإلى الخياطين للرباط.
For this reason, we have always lacked in our profession and needed artisans to make instruments and surgeons for sutures in our country."This is because one who lacks knowledge of anatomy as mentioned above is sure to make mistakes which may cost lives, as I have seen many so-called experts in this science behave without knowledge or skill.
This is because I saw an ignorant doctor who made an incision on a pig's tumor on a woman's neck, and he cut some of the neck's arteries so that the woman bled to death in his hands.
I also saw another doctor who was experienced in removing a stone from an elderly man, and the stone was large. He was reckless and removed it with a piece of bladder stone. The man died about three days later, and I was called to remove the stone. I saw the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, and I knew that this was the cause of his death.
I also saw another doctor who used to make a living by practicing medicine for some of the town's pimps."وكان لا يحسن شيئا فاستدعاه رجل من أصحابنا لامرأته وكانت م
One day, a black slave of one our companions had a broken leg near the heel with an open wound. The doctor, out of his ignorance, quickly wrapped the fracture tightly with bandages and splints, covering the wound completely and not leaving any room for breath."فسارت فيه المادة الخبيثة الى موضع الجرح وخرجت من أسفل قدميه فماتا.
The evil matter then flowed into the wound and out from under his foot, causing his death."He then left him to his desires and did not remove the bandages for several days, until his leg and foot became swollen and he was on the brink of death."فجاء يعالجه وأنا حاضر، فلما حلّ الرباط وجدنا الرجل قد انفتق ساقه وقدمه ورأينا من الجرح ما لم
I was called to him, and when I removed the bandages, we found that his leg and foot had burst open, and we saw the wound, which had not been treated and had become worse."I was unable to save him."فدعوت الله على ذلك الطبيب لعنه فمات فى الحال، وذلك أنّى رأيت طبيبا جاهلا قد شقّ على ورم خنزيرىّ فى عنق امرأة، فأبرى بعض شريانات
I called upon God to curse that doctor, and he died on the spot."This happened because I saw an ignorant doctor who made an incision on a pig' tumor on a woman's neck, and he cut some
I also saw another doctor who treated a cancerous tumor, and it ulcerated after a few days, causing great suffering to its owner."This is because if the tumor is purely made up of black bile, one must not treat it with iron at all."فان عالجته بالحديد فانه يهيج ويشحط ويزيد ضرره.
except that it is in a member who can bear to have all of it removed.
And for this, my son, you should know that the work of the hand is divided into two parts: work which is accompanied by safety, and work which in most cases results in injury.
I have warned you throughout this book about the work that is risky and dangerous, so you should be cautious of it and avoid it.
So that the ignorant may not find a way to criticism and blame, take care of yourselves with vigilance and caution, and be gentle and thorough in caring for your patients.
Use the best method leading to safety and a favorable outcome, and avoid dangerous and difficult-to-cure diseases.وعليكم بالرأى الصحيح فى علاج الامراض ومداواتها وأسبابها واستصحبوا معكم الخبرة والتجربة واعرفوا أعراض المرض ودلالاته وعلاماته فإنّها تعلمكم الحفظ
And you shall rely on correct judgment in treating and curing diseases, their causes, symptoms, and signs; for they instruct you how to preserve health. And keep yourselves away from what you fear may bring suspicion upon your religion and worldly affairs; for that is more lasting for your honor and higher in this world and the hereafter for your ranks.
Galen, in one of his sayings, said: "Do not treat an evil disease and become evil doctors."وإنّما المراد بهذا الكلام أن يدخل فى الطب من ليس له فيه معرفة فيفسد به ويضلّ به ويكون سبباً لعداوة الناس إياه
The purpose of this discussion is to keep people without medical knowledge from entering the field of medicine, which would lead to corruption and error, and cause enm
CHAPTER I.
On cauterization with fire and sharp medicine, arranged in alphabetical order from the head to the foot, also including pictures of cauterization instruments, iron instruments for cauterization, and everything needed for manual surgery.الباب الثانى.
CHAPTER II.On bandages, arranged in alphabetical order, with pictures of every kind
On incisions, opening and closing wounds, blood-letting, cupping, surgery, and removing arrows, with pictures of all instruments needed for these procedures.الباب الثالث.
The third chapter.
In the treatment of fractures and dislocations, and in the treatment of wounds, and similar matters, arranged and catalogued from head to toe, with diagrams of the instruments.
The first chapter.
On cauterization.
Before we describe the procedure, it is important to understand its benefits and drawbacks, and in what conditions it should be used.
I will say that the discussion of the benefits and drawbacks of cauterization is a lengthy topic, a precise science, and a hidden secret about which several philosophers have spoken.
They disagreed on this, and I have briefly summarized their words to avoid a long discussion.
I say that cauterization in general benefits all disorders of temperament, whether with or without material substance, except for two temperaments: the hot temperament without material substance and the dry temperament without material substance.
As for the dry temperament with material substance, they disagreed on it. Some said that cauterization benefits it, while others said the opposite: that cauterization is not suitable for a disorder resulting from heat and dryness, as the nature of fire is heat and dryness.
It is impossible to be cured of a hot and dry disorder with a hot and dry treatment. Those who disagree say that cauterization with fire can benefit a hot and dry disorder that occurs in people's bodies. Because when you add the moisture of the body to the temperament of fire, you make the body cool.
I agree with him, as experience has revealed this to me many times. However, one should not assume this unless they have received extensive training and practice in cauterization. They should understand the different temperaments of people, the nature of diseases, their causes, symptoms, and duration.
As for the other temperaments, especially the cold and moist disorders, all doctors agree on them and they do not disagree on the benefit of cauterization in them.
And know, my children, that the secret of treatment by cauterization with fire and its superiority over cauterization with burning medication is that fire is a single substance whose effect does not extend beyond the member that was cauterized, and it does not harm another connected member except for slight harm.
And cauterization with burning medication may extend its effect to members beyond [the cauterized area], and it may cause disease in the member that is difficult to treat, and perhaps kill. But fire, due to its nobility and noble substance, does not do this except when it is excessive.
This has become clear to us through experimentation, due to the length of service, care in the profession, and standing on the truth of the matter.
And for this reason, I have dispensed with lengthy speech. If it were not unsuitable for this book, I would have shared with you a profound secret about fire, its effect on bodies, and how it eliminates diseases, all in philosophical and demonstrative speech that would be beyond your comprehension.
And know, my children, that they have differed as to the time when cauterization is appropriate, and they have made the spring the best time for it.
I say that cauterization may be appropriate at any time, because the harm caused by the times is outweighed by the benefit gained by cauterization.And if cauterization is to be performed in the summer, it should not be done in the heat of the day, but rather when the sun has set and the coolness of the evening has come. Especially if the cauterization is for strong, urgent ailments that cannot bear delay, because there is fear that what follows will be greater than the slight harm caused by the time.And let it not be performed in the winter except when necessary, for the harm caused by the cold can be greater than that caused by the summer heat.
And do not let it be in your thoughts, my children, as the commoners and ignorant physicians believe, that cauterization which cures a certain disease will never return.They say this because they are unaware of what is appropriate to cauterize and when, and they apply cauterization to things for which it is unsuitable.
The matter is not as they suppose, for cauterization is like a medicine that alters the temperament and dries the moist humors which are the cause of pains.
However, cauterization is preferred over medicine because of its rapid success, strong effect, and intense authority.
It may be possible for the disease to return after some time, depending on the temperament of the patient, the severity of the disease, and the strength of the patient's constitution, as well as factors such as the accumulation of humors in the body due to poor diet or other causes.
Except for cases where the disease is mild and located in an area with few humors and moisture. For example, cauterizing a tooth for pain and similar cases, the pain may not return in most cases.
And as for the common people's saying that cauterization is the last resort in medicine, it is a correct statement, but not for the reason they believe. They think that after cauterization, no other treatment will work, which is not true.
The meaning of cauterization being the last resort in medicine is that when we have tried various treatments for a disease and they haven't worked, then we use cauterization as a last resort, and it does work. Not in the sense that the common people and many ignorant doctors believe.
The ancient physicians mentioned that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron. They said this because of the moderation and nobility of gold, and they also said that cauterization with gold does not cause inflammation at the site of cauterization, but this is not true in all cases.
This is because I have experimented with this and found that it only works on some bodies, and cauterization with gold is better and superior to iron. However, when you heat the gold in fire to use as a cautery, it is difficult to determine when it has reached the desired temperature due to the red color of gold.
Since it quickly rushes to it cold and if you increased on him in the fever melted in the fire and was poured out, the maker of that is in that occupied, so that became cauterizing by iron at us faster and closer from the correctness for work, God willing.
I have arranged this chapter on cauterization in sections that I have organized from the head to the foot, so that it is easy for the student to find what he wants, God willing.
Chapter One.
In cauterizing the head there is one cautery.
This cautery benefits from the dominance of moisture and coldness in the brain, which are the cause of headaches and frequent colds coming from the head to the eyes and ears, and excessive sleepiness, toothaches and sore throats.وإذا وجدت هذه الاعراض كلها فاعلم ان الدماغ مغلوب على امره، وان الرطوبة والبرودة غالب عليه وقد احدثا فيه آفة تحتاج الى علاج، فان لم تزل الرطوبة والبرودة من الدماغ والاوعية بالكيّة التي ذكرناها، واصلحهما فاعلم ان الافة قد وق And in general, for every disease that occurs due to coldness, such as paralysis, epilepsy, muteness, and other diseases, the cause is coldness in the brain and its vessels. If the moisture and coldness are not removed from the brain and vessels by the cautery we mentioned earlier
The procedure for this cautery is to first order the patient to take a purgative medication to cleanse the head for three or four nights, depending on the strength of the patient, his age and usual habits.وينبغى للطبيب أن يأمر المريض بعد الاستفراغ ان يتعاطى بالبزور المسمّى بالكافور، فان فيه منفعة عظيمة لتسخين الاوعية وطررد الرطوبة وازالة الاذى الذي حدث ف
Then the doctor should order the patient, after purgation, to take a herbal remedy called camphor, as it greatly benefits in warming the vessels, eliminating moisture and removing the harm that has occurred.Then have the patient sit between your hands in a cross-legged position, with his hands placed on his chest.ثمّ تضع
Then place the heel of your palm at the bridge of his nose, between his eyes. Where your middle finger ends, mark that spot with ink.وإذا انتهيت من الكيّة إلى هذا الموضع فاعلم ان قد انتهيت الى الدماغ، وانه لا يجوز لك ان تتجاوز به الى ما بعد الدماغ، وإنما
Then heat the olive-shaped tongs until red hot.
As much bone as a rice grain or as a clove of garlic becomes visible, then raise your hand; otherwise, re-apply the iron itself or another one if it has cooled down. Until you see what I've mentioned to you in the bone, then take some salt and dissolve it in water, dip a cotton ball in it and place it on the area and leave it for three days.
Then apply a cotton ball soaked in clarified butter on it and leave it until the burn is healed, then treat it with the quadruple ointment until it heals, if God wills.
They also said that a wound that remains open and drains pus is better and more beneficial.
Some people mentioned that it is better to brand the skin down to the bone and hold the branding iron until some of the thickness of the bone burns, then strip off what has burned afterwards, and treat it.
Others said that one should brand it aggressively until it affects the bone strongly, so that it falls off the bone in a shape similar to a small diamond or ring, and they claimed that this would release the vapors of the head from that area, leaving the wound open for a long time.
Then treat it until it heals, but I don't see these two types of branding at all except in some people and as a last resort; leaving it is better for me as long as the head remains whole and healthy, as I have observed in other limbs.
Especially when the patient's head is naturally weak, and the first type of branding is safer and better for me, so use it to stay safe, if God wills.
Chapter two.
Also on branding the head.
If a chronic pain occurs in the head, and the patient has been suffering for a long time, and using medications, poultices, snuff, ointments, bandages, especially if he has been branded once as we described but it didn' t help him, then look. If the patient's head is strong by nature and not weak, and he feels intense cold, they should apply another hot compress on top of that one. Then they should apply a hot compress to each horn of his head, until the thickness of the skin goes away and what we described becomes apparent from the bone. And they should apply a hot compress to the back of his head in the place known as the "axe", and lighten your hand in this and do not expose the bone, for the patient finds it very painful unlike the pain of other compresses on the head. I will mention this compress in its place.
The cautery iron used for the horns and back of the head should be gentler than the one used for the center of the head, and this is its picture.
Chapter 3.
On the treatment of non-chronic migraine.
If there is pain in the temple with a headache that extends to the eye, then the patient should be purged with remedies that cleanse the head and the rest of the treatment that I mentioned in the divisions of diseases. If this does not work, then cauterization can be performed in two ways: Either by cauterization with a sharp drug that burns or with iron.وأما الدواء الذى يكوى به فالأولى أن يكون ماء السذاب وقد عجن فيه القار والزرنيخ ويضمد على القرح بم
As for the drug that is cauterized, it is best to use vetiver water in which pitch and arsenic have been kneaded, and it should be applied as a poultice on the sores. But as for cauterization with a burning drug, you take one clove of garlic, peel it, and cut off its ends on both sides, then make an incision in the pained temple with a broad knife so that there is a place under the skin that can fit the clove.فإن وجد فى موضع الكيّ رملا أو صدئا أو عظما فاخرج ذلك واستنزله حتّى لا يبقى فيه شيء ثمّ ادخل السنّ فى الموضع وقد علّ
If you find in the place of cauterization sand, rust or bone, then remove that and get rid of it so that nothing remains there, then insert the clove into the place, which will go under the skin until it disappears. Then tie it tightly with a bandage and leave it for about fifteen hours, then untie it and take out the garlic and leave the wound for two or three days, then dress it.وإن وجد فى موضع الكىّ لحما أبيض رقيقا كأنه جلدة أوزية فاكشطها بمكشطة ح
Place upon it a piece of cotton dipped in lard until the place suppurates, then treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing. Or you may do this with some of the caustic remedies which I have given in the 18th article on caustic remedies.
As for cauterizing it with iron, here is how you do it: Heat the branding iron which has this shape: .
It is called a "nail-like branding iron" because its head is shaped like a nail with some indentation and a small protuberance in the middle.
Then place it on the affected area, hold your hand steady and move the branding iron slightly, little by little. The amount of skin burned should be about half the thickness of the skin itself. Lift your hand so as not to burn the artery underneath and cause bleeding, then dip a piece of cotton in salt water and place it on the affected area, leaving it for three days. Then apply ointment to the affected area until it heals, God willing.
If you wish, you may cauterize this kind of migraine headache with the edge of the branding iron, being careful to avoid cutting the artery in such a non-chronic headache.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of chronic migraines.
If the treatment mentioned earlier for migraines, and what we have discussed about the divisions of diseases, has not been effective and you see that the condition is deteriorating and cannot be treated with either medication or cauterization by fire, then. you should heat the branding iron until it turns white, after you have branded the affected area with a line about half a finger in length. Then lift your hand once while keeping the iron pressed firmly to cut the artery and reach the bone.
However, you should be careful not to touch the jaw which moves when chewing, as you may burn the muscle or the nerve that moves it, causing spasm.وينبغى أن يكون الكّى على المواضع التى ذكرها جالينوس فى كتابه الاول من تقاسيم الامراض، والمواضع التى حدّدها زيناس فى كتابيه الاوّل والثانى من الطبّ، وعلى ما ذكره اسكلياكس فى كتابه ف
Be wary and cautious of the bleeding from the artery which you have cut, for in its cutting there is great danger. Especially for those who do not know what to do and are not experienced and skilled, it is better to leave the task undone.
I will mention the treatment of bleeding from the artery in detail later on in this book, if God wills. If you see that the condition does not respond to this cauterization method,
and you find the patient's body can withstand it, perform the cauterization in the middle of the head as described and treat the wound until it heals, if God wills.
If you wish, you may use the cauterization method mentioned in the section on dividing the artery with a two-bladed instrument. It is a better and more effective method than the previous one.
Chapter Five.
On cauterization for ear pains.
If a pain occurs in the ear due to cold and it is treated with laxatives and other remedies mentioned in the section on division, but the pain persists, then heat the instrument called 'the point', which has this shape.
Then, while it is still hot, apply it all around the ear as it rotates or around both of them if the pain is in both ears. And you should keep the cauterization away from the base of the ear a little, after marking the spot with ink. The cauterization should be about ten dots in each ear or thereabouts, then treat the spots until they heal, if God wills.
Chapter Six.
On cauterization for locked-jaw.وإذا حدث فى اللقوة وجع عن برد
And if a pain occurs in the jaw due to cold,the jaw that is treated with cauterization is of the type that occurs from phlegm, as I mentioned in the sections on diseases.فإذا حدث فيها وجع عن برد عالجتها بالمسهلات والمراهم والأدوية الحارة على ما نذكر إن شاء الله فى موضعه
If the pain occurs due to dryness and spasms of the nerve, cauterization should be avoided.فإن الكىّ ينبغى أن يكون فى الأنواع الثلاثة التى ذكرناها ولا سيما النوع
When you have treated this kind of hernia with poultices, fomentations, and clysters, and your treatment has been unsuccessful, then the patient should be cauterized three times. The first cautery is at the root of the ear, the second a little lower down on the cheekbone, and the third at the junction of the lips.
Make the cautery opposite to the affected side, as it is in the sound side that the relaxation occurs.
The shape of the cautery is as follows: cauterize him with one cautery at the upper tip of the ear under the horn of the head, and another on the cheekbone, its length being that of a thumb."وإن كان فى الجهة التى تظهر مريضة فاكوِ فوق الموضع الذى تراه متورما.
If it is on the affected side, cauterize above the spot where you see the swelling." "When using the cautery, go down with your hand until you burn through half the thickness of the skin. This is what the cautery looks like - it is a type of small knife as depicted earlier but slightly finer as you can see. The blade of the knife should be a little thicker, and then treat the area as already mentioned until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 7.
On cauterization for chronic apoplexy.وصفة الكىّ للسكتة المزمنة أخلط مسحوق
If the apoplexy has become chronic and you have treated it as mentioned without success, and if the patient does not have a fever, cauterize him four times."وإن كان به حمى فأرّخ الكىّ حتى تذهب الحمّى وتبرأ السكتة. Cauterize him on each horn of his head, and one cautery in the middle of his head as mentioned, and another at the back of his head, as described."وإن عولجت السكتة بأحد هذه العلاجات الأربعة ولم تنجع فاعمد إلى موضع تورمها فاكوِه كيّاً واحداً.
If any of these four treatments are unsuccessful, cauterize the affected area once." "Use a cautery as mentioned above, and you may also cauterize the stomach entrance which is even better, then treat it as mentioned."وإن عولجت السكتة بكلّ هذه العلاجات ولم تنجع فاعمد إلى موضع تورمها فاكوِه كيّا
Chapter VIII.
On Forgetting.
A patient suffering from catarrh should first be given large doses of astringents and purifying blood-cleansing pills.
Then his head should be shaved completely, and a mustard plaster from the article on plasters should be applied to his nape several times; this is a form of cauterization.
Do this in the same way as mentioned there; if he recovers from that, then do not cauterize him three times on his nape, which should be extended from the top of the head to the nape of the neck.وإنّما يكون الكىّ هناك عند انقطاع البصيرة والغشية والنسيان وعظم النوم وضعف الدماغ.
Cauterization should only be done there when there is loss of sight, dizziness, forgetfulness, excessive sleepiness and weakness in the brain. Make each cautery the thickness of a finger apart; then treat the cauterized area as mentioned before. If you wish to increase it and the patient can tolerate it, cauterize the middle one.وإنّما يكون الكىّ فى الصدغ الايمن لوجع السن وآفات الدماغ والصداع الحادّ ووجع الاذ
Cauterization should be done on the right temple for toothache, and sharp headaches, and acute migraine and ear pain. If you wish to increase it, cauterize on the corners of the eyes, then treat it until it heals; the cautery instrument should be olive-shaped as mentioned before.وإنّما يكون الكىّ فى الصدغ الايسر للوجع الناشئ من وجع السن والاذ
Chapter IX.فىكىّ اللقوة.
On Causalgia and Paralysis of the Entire Body.
You should start by purifying the head with astringents and what we have mentioned, then shave the patient's head; then cauterize in the middle of the head, one cautery on each temple, and one on the nape.ثمّ اكوه ثلاث كيّات فى مؤخّر الرأس على الصورة التى تقدّمت فإن برىء وإلّا فاكوه ثلاث كيّات تحت الذقن فإنّه من أجل الشرايين التى هناك.
Then cauterize three cauteries in the nape of the head as mentioned before, if he recovers; otherwise, cauterize three cauteries under the chin because of the arteries there. And three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck; if you need more for paralysis of the entire body and the patient can tolerate it, cauterize four cauteries on the vertebrae of his back.واجعل الكيّة الاولى تحت العجز والثانية فوقها بمنكب اليد واجعل الثالثة تحت الإبط والرابعة على الكتف، ومكاوات مؤخّر And you shall apply the cautery until it burns most of the skin and then lift your hand, then treat it as mentioned earlier until it heals, God willing, and the cautery should be olive-shaped.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment of epilepsy.
Only those who have epilepsy due to phlegm should be cauterized, first by cleansing the brain with large yarrows and other remedies that we mentioned in the taxonomy if the patient is an adult and can tolerate the medications.
However, if it is a child who cannot tolerate medications, use the nasal and mouthwash that purifies the brain for several days with good nutrition.
Then shave his head, then cauterize one spot in the center of the scalp as mentioned in the description and another spot at the back.وأمّا الذى صرعه من قبل الدم فينبغى أن يكوت على ما تقدّم ذكره فى مواضع الدم، ثمّ يطلى بالزئبق الأحمر مع شرب مسحوقه بماء الكافور أو مرهم الزئبق As for those who have epilepsy due to blood, they should be cauterized as mentioned earlier in the section on blood disorders, then apply mercury ointment and drink its powder with camphor water or mercury ointment, and on each horn of his head there should be a cautery, if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, cauterize him with the cauteries mentioned for the paralytic and body relaxation on the vertebrae of the neck and back; the cautery instrument should be olive-shaped as described earlier.
If the patient is a child, make the cautery instrument gentle in this shape.ويكوى الصرعى الذى يكون صرعه من قبل البلغم أيضا بالكيّات التى ذكرناها للمفلوج فى
And those who have epilepsy due to phlegm can also be cauterized with the
cauteries mentioned for paralysis in chapter 11,
If the cause of melancholia is due to corrupt humors and thick phlegm, cauterize them with the cauteries mentioned for paralysis.وإن كان من الهيام والوسوسة والخيالات التى ترد على القلب فينبغى أن يكوت فى مؤخّرة الرأس عند منبت الشعر، وأمّا إن كانت الوسوسة والكآ
If the cause of melancholy is a surplus of black bile and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something that will cleanse his brain as mentioned previously in the division.
Then shave the patient's head, then make a firm cake of flax like a disc and place it in the middle of his head while he is sitting cross-legged, holding on to both sides. Then take a pound of old mutton suet.
Then heat it on the fire at a moderate temperature to the extent that a finger can be inserted, then pour it into the middle of his head in the disc and leave it until it cools. Do this for the patient every week with other good treatment until he recovers, if God wills.
And if you wish to brand him, do so in small spots without holding your hand to the branding iron; rather, let it be a light branding as this type of branding moderates the brain.
Then lay on him a cotton pad soaked in suet or chicken fat.
Chapter Twelve.
On cauterizing water that has entered the eye.
If you see the signs of water in the eye as mentioned in the division, then quickly give the patient something to cleanse his head and sweat him in the bath on an empty stomach for several days.ثمّ احلق رأسه واجعل عليه قطنة مشرّبة فى زيت الارز أو فى الزيت الجيّد، ثمّ ضع عليه الكىّ بالرصاص أو بالحجر الصابونى.
Then shave his head and place on it a pad soaked in rice bran oil or good oil, then cauterize him with lead or soapstone. Then have him shaved and cauterized in the middle of the head; if water comes down in both eyes or one eye, cauterize two spots on the temples.
Then cut with the branding iron all the veins and arteries under the skin; let the cauteries be long and thin in the area of the temples, and beware of bleeding.وإن تبيّن لك أن الماء نازل فى العينين جميعا أو فى واحدة فاكوه كيّة فى وسط الرأس ثمّ اكوه كيّتين على الصدغين، فإن كان ابتداء الماء فى عين واحدة أكوه كيّة ف
If you see any of this, cut it off in the position with any treatment you can do, and we will come to wisdom in cutting and tying arteries and preventing bleeding.
And he may be burned on the back under the two bones with severe burns.
Chapter 13.
On burning chronic tears.
If the tears of the eye are chronic and continuous, and they come from the veins and arteries in the front of the head , outside the head , and you are sure that this is due to cold, viscous humors which have reached the lacrimal gland , then do the cauterization as described in the section on tear water . Cauterize in the middle of the head, cauterize two on the temples and cauterize two in the back under the bones. If you need to increase it, cauterize one on each side of the tail of the eye at the edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
On cauterizing a foul-smelling nose.وإن احتجت الى زيادة فاكوه كيّ
If you have treated it with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment did not work, then hurry up and give the patient clysters three nights in a row, then shave his head and cauterize the middle cautery with the olive-shaped cautery. Then cauterize two above the eyebrows under the hair a little and be careful not to cut the artery, this is the picture of the pin-shaped one.
Chapter 15.
On cauterizing ptosis of the eyelid.وإن كان من قبل الوريد الذى فى الحاجب اكوه كيّة على
If it is caused by the vein in the eyebrow, cauterize one on
If you like, cauterize two above the eyebrows a little on each side, and space them out from the temples, and the length of each cautery should be the length of the eyebrow.
Do not overdo the cauterization with your hand, but only to the extent that it burns one-third of the skin. The image of the branding iron should be in this form.
Chapter XVI.
In cauterizing the eyelid.
When the eyelids turn inward and press upon the eyeball, there are two ways of cauterizing them. Either by fire or by a burning drug. If the eyelids are to be cauterized with fire, the patient must first be directed to leave his eyelids alone, if he is one who plucks them, so that they may grow long and straight.
If he plucks them when they grow, so that they may become longer and straighter, then the patient should put his head in your lap, and you should mark on the eyelid with ink a sign in the shape of a fig leaf.
The mark should begin near the lashes, and you should place under the eyelid a piece of cotton soaked in egg white or saliva of the wild cat mint, then heat a branding iron thus:
Then you cauterize it in several places, a little at a time, until the skin surface all around the fig leaf shape is burned; the sign of your successful operation is that the eyelid has turned inside out and the hair has moved away from the eyeball.
Then take your hand away and leave it for three days, then hold a cotton ball soaked in butter on the eyelid until the scabs come off, then treat it with ointment until it heals, if God wills. If any of the hair returns after some time and the eyelid sags,
then cauterize that spot again as you did at first; if the hair is in the lower eyelid, then cauterize it until it returns to its natural position and does not press on the eyeball. As for cauterizing with a burning drug, you should direct the patient to leave his lashes alone so that they may grow long and straight.
Then make a sheet of paper into the shape of a walnut leaf, then take from the usual soap and from unslaked lime, from each one dirham or thereabouts, and crush them both together thoroughly, doing so with a mortar so that they do not dry out. Then you spread it on the paper which you have made into the shape of a walnut leaf, and place it on one or both eyelids, and put under the eye a cotton pad soaked in egg white, and the patient's head in your lap.
And place your index finger over the medicine and squeeze it slightly while you move it around, as the patient will feel a burning sensation from the medicine; as long as he feels this burning, leave the medicine in place and move your finger around it. Once the burning subsides, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And look, for if you see the eyelid lifted up as it is when blinking with fire or cutting, then do not re-apply the medicine on that spot where it did not take effect and did not turn black; instead, continue your treatment and blink the eye, then place cotton soaked in fat over it until the burning sensation goes away.
Then treat it with the palm oil ointment or another ointment until it heals; when performing the operation, be extremely careful that no medicine falls into the eye; if after a few days the eyelid becomes slack and you see some hair in the eye,
re-apply the medicine to that spot where the eyelid is slack, especially as you did at first, then treat it until it heals; this is the shape of the walnut leaf.
Know that people's eyes may differ in size, so your blinking should be according to this; there is no doubt that the way of truth is not hidden from those who have experience in this craft.
Chapter 17.
On treating an eye booger which occurs in the corner of the eye.
If you have treated the fistula as we mentioned in the divisions of diseases and your treatment has not been effective, then you should cauterize it according to this description.
You should order the patient to put his head in your lap, and a servant should hold his head firmly between their hands so that it does not move or jostle.
Then place a cotton pad moistened with egg white or with the saliva of the "barzakhatona" plant on his eyes, and heat the iron in this shape.
It should be hollow like the shape of a goose feather from one end, which is where the cauterization will take place. If you prefer, the other end can also be perforated, or it can be solid like a pestle; however, the hollow option is better for your work, God willing.
Then you should squeeze the fistula if it is open to extract the pus and clean it, or if it is closed, you should open it and remove its content before placing the hot iron on it and holding it firmly until you reach the bone.
When cauterizing, move your hand slightly away from the eye towards the nose to avoid mistakes or causing discomfort to the patient, so that the iron does not accidentally fall into the eyeball and damage it. If you reach the bone on the first attempt, well and good; otherwise, reapply the iron as needed.
Leave it for three days, then apply a poultice of butter and treat it with the astringent ointment until it heals. If it has not healed within 40 days, apply the sharp, caustic medication to expose the bone and proceed as mentioned in its respective chapter, God willing.
There is another method for cauterizing a fistula mentioned by some predecessors. You should make an incision at the site of the fistula and place a thin, narrow tube in the incision as shown in the illustration.
And pour into it as much lead as a dirham in weight, melted, and hold your hand on the funnel tightly, so that it does not move at all, lest the molten lead flows into the eye of the patient. It is proper to put a cotton pad moistened with egg white or water over the eye of the patient.
The lead burns the site of the polyp and heals it miraculously. If the polyp is healed with what we have mentioned of cauterization and treatment, otherwise it is necessary to use nose piercing and return the polyp to the course of the nose as will be mentioned in its most specific place.
Chapter 18.
On cauterizing lip fissures.
It is very common for a fissure to occur on the lip, which is called a "shatra", especially on the lips of children, as it often occurs. If you treat this fissure as we mentioned in the section, and the treatment does not work, then heat up a small scalpel with this picture.
Its inside is on the thinness of the scalpel, then place it hot with the wheel in the same crack until cauterization reaches the depth of the crack, then treat it with cerium until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 19.
On cauterizing polyps that occur in the mouth.وأمّا إن كان الناصور فى الفم وحده ولم يكن فى مجرى
However, if the polyp is in the mouth alone and not in the course of the nose or on the gums or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth and there was a tumor that then suppurated and exploded, and from the pus there became a polyp, and you treated it but the treatment did not work, then you should heat up an iron on the size that fits into the polyp.
Then insert it hot into the hole of the polyp and hold your hand so that the iron reaches the depth and bottom of the polyp, and do this once or twice, then treat it afterwards as we mentioned until it heals, God willing.
If the material is removed and he recovers, well and good; if not, it will be necessary to examine the spot, and remove the diseased bone in accordance with what will appear later in its proper place, God willing.
Chapter Twenty.
On loose teeth and gums.
If the gums are loose due to moisture and the teeth move, and you have treated them with remedies without success, then place the patient's head in your lap, then heat the instrument whose image is shown below, after placing the tube on the tooth.
And you shall insert the hot instrument with your hand, and hold it for a little while until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth, then remove your hand, and reapply the instrument as many times as needed, then the patient should fill his mouth with salt water.
And he should hold it for an hour and spit it out, for the loose tooth will be stabilized, and the loose gums will tighten, and the corrupt moisture will dry up.
Chapter Twenty-One.
On treating a toothache.وإذا وجعتك ضرس فاك شربت عليه ماء بارد
If a toothache is caused by cold, or there is a worm in it and remedies have not been effective, then there are two ways to treat it: either with a cautery using fat, or with fire.وأما الكىّ بالسمن فإنه يطلى سناً ناراً بحضن النار حتى يسيل ويدخن ثم يطلى على الضرس ويستريح ساعة حتّى يتحرك فيه السمن فيذهب الألم.
As for cautery with fat, you boil beef tallow in an iron spoon or a seashell, then take a piece of cotton and wind it around the end of the probe, then dip it in the hot tallow and place it on the aching tooth quickly and hold it until it cools down.وأما الكىّ بالنار فأخذ أُنبوب حديد وأوقدته فى النار ثمّ وضعه على السنّ الوجعة بالعجلة حتى تشتدّ.
As for cautery with fire, you take an iron tube and heat it in the fire, then place it on the aching tooth quickly until it feels hot. If you like, you can also dip a piece of cotton in cold tallow and place it on the aching tooth, then put the hot iron over it until the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And as for cauterization with fire, it is that you take a copper tube or an iron tube and let it have some thickness in its body so that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient. Then heat the hot iron which comes in the form you want and place it on the same tooth and hold your hand until the hot iron cools down. You do this several times.
After that cauterization, the pain either goes away on that very day or the next day. Then the patient should fill his mouth with good fat and hold it for an hour, then spit it out. This is how the hot iron should look.
You can cauterize using any end you want and to whatever extent possible. This is what the tube looks like.
Chapter 22.
On cauterization of pigs.
If the pigs are suffering from phlegm and cold moisture and are not responding to drugs, and you want quick relief, heat the hollow hot iron which has perforated ends in this form.
Let the smoke come out of the other end when cauterizing, and place it on the same lump over and over again if necessary until you reach the depth of the lump. If the lump is small, make the hot iron the size of the lump.وإن كان كبيرا فاجعل المكواة أكبر منه قليلا، ولا يحتاج مع ذلك أن تجعل المكواة ساخنة جدا بل تجعلها ساخنة على قدر ما يمكن للعليل أن يطيق، فإن أزعجه السخونة فأبرد عن ذلك موضع الكىّ لئلا يبطل
If it is large, make the hot iron a little larger than it. You don't need to make the hot iron very hot, but as hot as the patient can bear. If it is too hot for the patient, cool down the place that was cauterized so that the cauterization doesn't become ineffective.Then leave it for three days and apply cotton soaked in fat on it until what was burnt by the fire goes away, then treat it with ointment and wicks until it heals if God wills.
Chapter 23.
On cauterization for hoarseness and shortness of breath.وذلك أن تحمى المكواة المجوفة التى ذكرن
If moist humors prevail in the bronchi, especially if this is accompanied by a cold constitution, the patient should first be purged with laxatives, then he should be cauterized with a cautery in the hollow of the neck at the base of the larynx in the lower position.
Beware of reaching the larynx with cautery, and do not burn more than half a grain of the skin; then cauterize him again at the joint of the neck in its last pearl with a powerful cautery, and let the instrument be nail-like as described above.
Then treat him as already mentioned until he recovers, God willing.
Chapter XXIV.
On cauterization for diseases of the lung and cough.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold humors, and the patient has no fever or tuberculosis, and if the disease is chronic, cauterize him with two cauteries above the collarbones in the low, soft, hollow places, and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
Let the instrument be nail-like as already described, and if you prefer, your cautery may be by way of drops with the instrument called "the dropper," and its image has already been described in the treatment of earache; let the number of drops be from thirty to that amount or more.
Then treat him as already mentioned until he recovers; you may also make a cautery with three prongs in this way, and hasten the cautery because with it you cauterize three cauteries at once in one action; this is the image of the cautery:
Chapter XXV.On cauterization for the cough of children.اذا كان
If it is for cauterization of the armpit.
If the head of the humerus has dislocated because of slippery humors, or has not been set in place when reduced so that it becomes habitual and dislocates again with the slightest movement as we have seen, then the jaw should be reduced first. Then the patient lies on his back or on the right side, and the skin inside the armpit is lifted upwards with the fingers of the left hand if the joint has been dislocated inwards.
Then the two-pronged probe is heated up like this.
Then it is used to brand the skin, penetration to the other side, and the branding pattern should be four brands; a three-pronged probe can also be used, resulting in a six-brand pattern, with the prongs on the thin part of the joint.
This is an image of the three-pronged probe.
The number of brands can be increased to eight, then apply powdered charcoal with salt and let the patient rest and not move the limb for some time; dislocations upwards are rare though.
For a dislocation above the shoulder, apply one large brand or several small brands; this will strengthen the joint and reduce moisture, resulting in a speedy recovery for the patient.
Chapter 26:
On branding the stomach.
If there is excessive cold and moisture in the stomach, resulting in a disturbance of its natural balance, and despite various treatments, there is no improvement; then the patient should lie on his back, extend his legs and arms, and receive three brands. One brand under the tip of the breast, as thick as a finger, using a nail-like probe; two brands below the sides of the first brand so that the brands form a triangle, with some distance between them to prevent them from joining and forming a single wound when they become infected; the depth of branding should be two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
This is the method and extent of branding, without adding anything else.
If you prefer, you can brand him with a single large brand in the center of his stomach using this method:
And the shape of the branding iron used for this single brand is circular in this way.
And the stomach may be branded with spots for those who are frightened of this branding, that is to mark the stomach with the number of spots you want with ink and then brand it with a spotty branding iron and then treat it with the treatment that was mentioned until it heals.
Chapter XXVII.
On branding the cold liver.
If there is pain in the liver due to cold and moisture, or due to a strong wind which has caused it to deviate from its natural temperament to an excessive degree, and the patient has been treated as mentioned in the taxonomy, but the treatment was not effective. Then it is appropriate for the patient to lie on his back, and three brands of this shape and exact size are marked on the liver below the ribs where the human elbow reaches.ويكوى ذلك فى اليوم الثالث ويكرّر الكىّ فى اليوم الرابع والخامس واليوم السادس إن احتاج إلى ذلك ثم يعالج باحتقان المرة الصفراء ويؤكل بالملطفات وينشل بالعلوج الناشلة ويشرب بالملطفات،.
And it is branded on the third day, and the branding is repeated on the fourth, fifth, and sixth day if necessary. Then treat by restoring the yellow bile, feed with mild food, use laxatives, drink mild beverages,
The amount you burn of the thickness of the skin should be half of it, no more. The patient should be standing while being branded. If he cannot stand, then he should lie down with his legs stretched out and his arms raised. This is the shape of the branding iron.
You can also brand these brands with a knife-shaped branding iron if you are gentle and skilled in the craft and careful not to overdo it and burn all the skin, which would burn the abdomen and reach the intestines. The skin there is thin, so be aware of that.ويكوى فى اليوم الثالث على الحاجب ويكون الكىّ على قدر أصبعين ويستقيم الكىّ مع الجبهة، ويكرّر الكىّ فى اليوم الرابع على الحاجبين جميعا فإن احتاج إلى كيّة خامسة ففى اليوم الخامس.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the cauterization of liver tumors.
If a patient has an abscess in the liver, and you want to know whether the tumor is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will feel heaviness and pain but not acute pain.
If it is in the membrane of the liver, there will be acute pain along with the heaviness, and you will find that it has defied the treatment of physicians. The patient should lie on his back, and you should mark the swollen area with ink.ثمّ تقدّم الكيّ إلى الموضع الذى أشرت به فأوقده حتى يتجلّى الورم فإذا احترق استخرجته.
Then you should go ahead and cauterize the area you have marked, until the tumor is revealed. Once it is burned, you can extract it. Then heat the cautery over the fire - this is the cautery that resembles a needle; this is its image: You should cauterize it with a single application of the cautery, burning through the skin completely until you reach the membrane and expel all the pus. Then treat it as you would any other abscess until it heals.وإن كان الورم فى الكبد نفسه فليكن الكىّ على الموضع الذى أشرت به كيّة واحدة حتّى تصل الى الورم فتوقده ثمّ استخرجه.
If the tumor is in the liver itself, then cauterize the area you have marked with a single application until you reach the tumor and burn it, then extract it. This type of cautery should not be used by anyone except those who are experienced in medicine, having treated many patients with these diseases through experimentation.
Chapter XXIX.فى بطّ ورم الطحال بالكىّ.
On the cauterization of spleen tumors. On cauterizing the hernia.وإن كان ورم
If a tumor is located in the spleen, the ancient physicians recommended cauterization with the roots of wild garlic (Allium vineale), as follows: take one root that is as long and thick as your finger from the dry, long roots of wild garlic, then soak it in oil and heat it in the fire.وإذا احترق استخرجه وأمر العليل أن يستقبل الشمس فى أول نهار وآخره ويستنشق دخان الزيتون وأمرّ له بالشرب الدافئ والماء البارد وأن يضمد الكىّ بدهن الأجاص وبماء الورد. Then he cauterizes it with one large cautery between the place where the collar bone joins the neck, and two small cauteries below the jaw slightly inclined towards the side under the beard, and two very large cauteries above the breasts between the third and fourth ribs.
He also cauterizes two between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining backwards a little, and another in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach, and three behind, one between the shoulders and two on the sides of the spine below the level of the cautery which is between the hands.
Your hand should not go deep into the cautery, but it should be in the surface of the skin, sniffing. Some of the ancients said that some people used to heat an iron like a needle and insert it between the ribs until they reached the very tumor.
And the string is removed as we mentioned in the liver tumor, and in this case of cauterization there is a risk that the patient will die at once or that an fistula will occur in the site which has no cure.
Chapter 30.
On cauterizing the spleen.
If you treated the spleen disease as mentioned in the division of treatment and your treatment did not work, then cauterizing it is done in three ways, all of which are correct: one is to cauterize it with three or four cauteries aligned along the length of the spleen.
In the shape of the cauteries of the liver, which was mentioned earlier in terms of shape, and there should be between each cautery and cautery a distance as thick as a finger or more, slightly, and the shape of the cautery should be as we mentioned in the cauterization of the liver. Your hand should not go deep into the cautery, and the patient's picture is thrown on his back.
The other way is in the elbow, and you lift the skin that faces the spleen where the end of the left elbow of the patient ends, and you lift the skin that faces the spleen where the end of the left elbow of the patient ends, and you lift the skin that faces the spleen so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.رفع الجلدة التى قبالة الطحال حيث تنتهى مرفق العليل اليسرى ويكون رفعك الجلد على عرض البدن لتقع الكيّات على طول البدن.
Then the two spatulas, very well protected, are inserted until they penetrate the skin on the other side; then the cautery is removed, so that there are four cauteries. If you wish to cauterize with the other spatula which has three prongs...
Then, after leaving it to discharge pus for many days, the site of cautery is treated; this is more effective than all the treatments mentioned earlier.
Chapter 31.
On cauterization for ascites.
Cauterization is only beneficial in ascites specifically due to a hydrocoele; if you have treated the ascites patient with all the treatments mentioned in the previous chapter and your treatment was not effective, then you should cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach.
Another cautery on the liver, one cautery on the spleen, two cauteries behind his back between the ribs - one facing his chest and the other facing his stomach; the depth of the cautery should be close to the thickness of the skin, then leave the cautery open to discharge pus for a long time.
And do not leave the patient untreated after cauterization, but rather use what is appropriate to bring him relief so that he may recover quickly; and the shape of the cautery iron used for the back should be nail-like, as previously described, while the one used for the stomach should be olive-shaped.
Chapter 32.
On cauterization of the feet and legs.ثمّ تدخل السفودين محميّة جدّا ح
If they swell up in the ascites and fill with yellow water, then it is appropriate to cauterize on the back of the foot at the point between the little toe and the ring finger.
Hold your hand steady with the cautery iron and do not move it; then lift your hand and do not return it at all, for the yellow water will run out, and the cautery iron should be in this shape:
Then cauterize two cauteries on each leg, the cautery to be with the point of the blade of the cautery instrument, and the cautery is along the leg, one below the knee and another beneath it towards the middle of the leg; and on each thigh are two cauteries.
And leave the cautery open without treatment for a long time, and from it water will flow out; then treat it with all that we have mentioned.
CHAPTER XXXIII
ON CAUTERIZING FOR DIARRHOEA.
If the diarrhoea be from cold and moistures, until it weakens the retaining and digesting powers which are in the stomach and intestines; and if this is treated with various remedies, and does not get well, and you see the patient able to bear cautery and of sufficient strength, then cauterize him a large cautery on his abdomen. As mentioned above, in cauterizing the abdomen with a circular cautery and four cauteries around the navel, gently with the nail-shaped cautery instrument; and one large cautery on the cotton above the coccyx or two cauteries.واقطعه تحت الشقّة بمنشار ناعم اللحام واخرج الذكران وأفرغ مثانة البول والغائط واخرج ما فى المعي من البراز ثمّ اقطعه بالمقصّ فى موضع الكىّ واعطته
Then cut it under the navel with a smooth-welded saw and bring out the testicles, and empty the bladder and rectum, and remove what is in the intestines; then cut it with scissors at the place of cauterization, and give him
CHAPTER XXXIVon cauterizing the navel.واترك الكىّ مفتوح
ON CAUTERIZING THE PILES OF THE RECTUM.And leave the cautery open
If there are chronic piles in the rectum, many or one; and if they are from thick humours which are cold, or corrupt moistures, and are treated as mentioned in the division, but the treatment is not effective, then cauterize the patient with three cauteries on the lower part of the spine, just below the table.
And if you think that his stomach has become cold and his food does not digest, and you see that his face is swollen, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cautery as mentioned before, and also cauterize his liver. And another cautery on his spleen with a nail-like cautery, and leave the cauterization open for a while, then treat him until he heals, if God wills.
Chapter Thirty Five.
On cauterizing warts.
After cutting the wart, heat the cautery which resembles a nail, then insert it hot into the cut wart and press hard with your hand until the cautery reaches the mouth of the vein from which the blood flows. Do this once or twice.
If there are many warts, cauterize each one as we described above, then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals. If you also cauterize it with a large cautery on the cotton, it will be even more beneficial.
Chapter Thirty Six.
On cauterizing an anal fistula.وأما الكىّ فإذا كان الناصور قد استحكم وامتنع فأصبه بناره ثمّ أكوِه كيّة كبيرة على ما
However, if the fistula has become established and resistant, pierce it with fire, then cauterize it with a large cautery as we
have described in its place and he is reluctant to do so, then perhaps it can be healed by cauterization. If a fistula occurs and persists for a long time, pus and corrupt fluids flow from it. First, you should measure its depth with a thin probe, then heat the cautery which resembles a nail, insert it hot into the fistula in a straight line to the depth of the fistula and the capacity that the probe entered, and repeat the cauterization until you burn all the corrupt bodies, once, twice or three times as needed.
Be careful not to burn a nerve or a large vein. If the fistula leads to the bladder or the intestine.
Be careful of all these places, and only do this if the fistula is in a fleshy place and you estimate that it is not permeable, then treat the area until it heals. If the area is sealed and the discharge stops and remains like that for a long time, then know that it has healed completely.
If the discharge does not stop, then know that it is permeable or that there is a rotted bone in its depth, or something similar to what will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
On cauterizing the kidneys.
If a person has pain in the kidneys due to cold or strong wind, and this weakens their ability to have sex, then they should be cauterized on both sides of the kidneys, one cautery on each kidney, with the nail-like cautery that was mentioned earlier. Sometimes we cauterize them a third time on the same spot, so there will be three cauteries in a line, which is more beneficial.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
On cauterizing the bladder.وإن كان وجع المثانة من احتقانها فاع
If the pain in the bladder is due to congestion, then cauterize him with a cautery at the bottom of the navel on the bladder where the pubic hair starts, and one cautery to the right of the navel and another to the left.
And after cauterization on each side, it should be the size of a thumb's knuckle, and you can also cauterize him in the lower back or two cauteries if necessary, using the nail-like cautery as mentioned earlier.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
On cauterizing the uterus.وإن كان من وجع فى الرحم عن احتق
If there is pain in the uterus due to congestion from cold and moistness, preventing pregnancy and causing a bad flow, or if there is pain when menstruation comes, then cauterize three cauteries around the navel as mentioned in cauterizing the bladder. We will pass under the spine between the spinous processes of the vertebrae with a blunt instrument in order to break up any adherent matter; then we will cauterize with a cautery that is made of cotton and is placed at the base of the back, or
Chapter 40.
On dislocation of the hip-joint.
When false humors pass into the hip-joint, they may cause it to become dislocated; and its sign is that you will find one leg longer than the other if you measure them, and in the place of the dislocation there will be a void. The patient should then be cauterized with a cautery in the shape of a circle on the actual hip-joint.
After you have marked the joint with ink, so that it may turn and come to a standstill in the middle of the circle, then cauterize with the cautery representing the stomach; but if this cautery is not available, make three cauteries with the large olive-shaped cautery.
Make the cautery as deep as the thickness of the skin all around, and then treat it until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter 41.
On cauterizing sciatica.وإذا أردت الكىّ لعرق النسا ف
If you wish to cauterize sciatica, and if there is pain in the hip-joint due to cold and humid humors which you have treated as mentioned in the previous chapter but without success, and it has become chronic, then the patient should take a mild laxative of hellebore or of aloes or similar.
Then cauterize him, and there are two methods of cauterization: one is cauterization with medicaments that burn; the other is cauterization with fire. Cauterization with fire may be done in various ways, one of which is to cauterize the hip-joint itself with three cauteries in the form of a triangle.
Make the cauteries deep enough and at a distance from each other equal to the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be olive-shaped. Or you may cauterize one in the middle on top of the hip-joint itself, so that there will then be four cauteries; or, if you like, cauterize with the circle mentioned above in the section on dislocation of the hip-joint.
To make the circle surround all of the hip and burn the thickness of the skin all around, this is the description of cauterization for sciatica if the pain clings to the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, do two cauterizations on the thigh at the location where the patient indicates that there is pain and one cauterization above the ankle, four fingers from the lateral side, slightly toward the lateral side. The cautery instrument should be scalpel-like, and the depth of the cauterization should only be the thickness of the skin.
If he indicates that the pain extends to the toes, cauterize where he indicates with a dot cautery, three or four times, or more if necessary. If he indicates pain below the knee toward the leg, cauterize there with one scalpel cautery.
And be cautious in all of your cauterizations that you do not burn a large nerve or artery and thus cause a serious malady or disability for the patient.وإذا أحرقت موضع الكىّ حتى ذهب عنك أن يكون فيه عرق فلا تجاوز به العرق الى عظم ولامفصل ولا تكي فوق المفصل مباشرة بل تحتها شيئا قليلا فإن كان هناك وجع فأحرق الجلد كلّه.
And I have seen one or two people who cauterized above the ankle and exceeded in the cauterization, so that the leg became numb all the way to the foot and developed a gangrenous wound throughout, and the entire leg rotted away. Then diarrhea and death occurred afterwards. If the pain is in both sides, cauterize them in this manner as well.
Some scholars among the physicians have described cauterization of the hip in this manner: Make a cup-like instrument out of iron, with a diameter of half a palm, and at the mouth of that cup make it as thick as an apricot pit or less. Inside that cup, there is another cup, and inside that cup is a third cup.ويكون القضيب الذى يجمع هذه الاوعية من حديد او نحاس ويكون ذلك القضيب فى جوف القدح الاقرب الى المريض ويكون مخرجا من بين تلك الطبق من الجانب الذى يليه قدح آخر، فإذا أراد الكىّ أوقد ن
And it is after the space between each two cups is as much as a thumb joint, and the cups are open on both sides, and their height is about one or two joints, and they are provided with a handle of iron which is firmly attached to the cups, and this is its picture.
Then it is heated in the fire until it turns red and throws sparks, then it is placed on the right hip, and the patient leans on the healthy side, so that he can brand three circular brands at once, then leave it for three days, dress the wound with butter, and leave the wound open for a few days.
Frequent treatment with ointment until it heals, said the author of this book: This type of branding is rarely used because of its ugliness and horror, and because of the small number of people we find who are patient enough to endure it, but it is one of the best brands for those who are patient enough to endure it and hit its place.
As for branding with burning medicines, it is that you make two cups similar to the rings that are placed in the door from brass or iron.
It has a height of about two joints or so on its edge, and the space between them is about the thickness of a finger, and it is open at the bottom and open at the top, and it is held together in this way.
Then you drop it on the right hip, and the patient lies on his healthy side, and you hold your hand comfortably, then pour between the two circles a little hot water, which is slightly heated by fire, and the patient endures its sting and burning, for he feels a sting like fire.
Until the sting subsides, then you raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off the hot water from the hip with fresh water, then leave it for three days, carry butter on it until the darkness of the burn goes away, then leave it for a few days, as pus flows from it, that is more beneficial.
You then treat it with ointments until it heals. If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, you make a mold for it that holds water, just as you did for the hip. This is the description of sharp water, which I have established in the article on the repair of medicines.
You take an equal amount of potash and slaked lime, pound them and put them in a new pot that has a small hole at the bottom the size of the rod. You place another pot glazed on the inside under the bottom of the first pot.
You pour fresh water on the potash and lime, enough to cover them by a finger's width after you have tightly closed the pot with your hand. You then leave the pot until the sharp water collects in the lower pot that is glazed. Then you collect all of this water and pour it over fresh potash and lime.
It is then very sharp and can be used in many medical treatments, including cauterizing various body parts, because it acts like fire itself. There are also drugs that can be cauterized with the hip, such as thapsia, honey of the plantain, lime with soap, all ground together.
Galen reported a story about an ancient man who treated hip pain and sciatica, which he greatly emphasized, claiming that it did not need any other treatment and healed in a single application.
So much so that he might enter the bathhouse carried and exit having been healed, it is that it should be taken from green hellebore, if not available, then take the dry recent one, soften it with something of fat and place it on the hip where the pain is, or in the leg or thigh.
You then tighten it and leave it for three hours, or as long as the patient feels the heat subsiding, then enter the bathhouse, if his body perspires, enter the bathtub, for the pain will go away and heal by God's permission. If not healed, re-apply the dressing after ten days again.
But he will recover, God willing. Know that no one should apply cauterization with these remedies except after evacuating the body. Dioscorides mentions that if goat dung is cauterized on sciatica, it will be beneficial.
The cauterization should be done in this way: take some wool and soak it in old oil, then place it on the deep spot between the thumb of the hand and the radius, closer to the radius. Then take a dry goat droppings and put it on top.
Ignite it with fire until it becomes a hot coal, then place it on the wool and leave it until it goes out. Then take another one and keep doing this until the sensation reaches the middle of the arm to the hip, and the pain subsides by God's permission. This type of cauterization is called "buntan cautery.
Chapter Forty-Two.
On cauterizing back pain.
Pain in the back may occur for many reasons, such as a fall, a blow, excessive vomiting, and so on. It is caused by the 흘 of cold, moist matter, and cauterization is appropriate only in this case.
When the pain is caused by the 흘 of cold matter, after evacuating the patient with hellebore or similar, one should cauterize his back where the pain is, in three rows across the width of a table. Mark the spot with ink in each row, then cauterize five or more times according to the patient's tolerance and strength.
The cauterization should be done with a spot cautery, or if you prefer, three or four times with a medium-sized nail cautery in this way:
Chapter Forty-Three.
On cauterizing the beginning of a hump.وأمّا إذا عرضت الحدبة او الحبلة من
Sometimes, hunchbacks or bumps occur in young children. The sign of its beginning in a child is the occurrence of shortness of breath when moving and standing. You will find at the end of his vertebrae a bead that has protruded beyond the other beads.
And if you see this and want to stop it, cover it with an iron disk shaped in this way. Take the cautery on all sides of the vertebra evenly, or if you prefer, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two or three rows, and let the points be close to each other. Then treat the area until it heals as mentioned before.
Beware of using cautery on a hump caused by nerve spasms,.
Chapter 44
On the cauterization of gout and joint pains.
If the joint pains are caused by cold humors that flow to any part of the body, then when these pains occur in the legs in particular, physicians usually call it gout specifically.
If gout caused by cold humors is treated with the various treatments mentioned in the book, and the pains remain, cauterization will remove them. This is done by cauterizing around the joints of the leg with many cauteries using a medium-sized olive-shaped cautery as illustrated.
And if you need to place dots on the face, do so with a pointed cautery. If the pains rise to the knees or to any other joints, and this often happens, cauterize each knee with three or four cauteries on each side using this same olive-shaped cautery.
If you need to cauterize more than this, do so without going too deep with the cautery, just to the thickness of the skin. If the pains rise to the hips or back, use the cauterization method mentioned before in its appropriate section.
If the pains are only in the hands, place dots around the radius bones in two rows; if the pains remain in the fingers, dot each joint and the palm of the hand. If the pains rise after a few days to the elbows or shoulders,.
Fruit them from all sides, and let the patient not lack good management and medication. For if he improves his diet and expels the phlegm, he will recover with this cautery, God willing.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On cauterization for hernias.
If a hernia occurs in the groin, and some of the intestine and membrane descend into the scrotum, and this is a recent occurrence, then you should instruct the patient to abstain from food for the day and use laxatives to ensure that his bowels are empty.
Then have him lie down on his back, and order him to hold himself still while you expose the hernia. Then use your finger to feel for the intestine or membrane, then mark with ink below the hernia, on the pubic bone, a mark in the shape of a half-circle, with its ends pointing upwards towards the body.
Then heat an iron that looks like this: [A drawing is included here, showing a half-circle with a tail-like extension at
until it is white hot and throwing sparks, then return the intestine or membrane to its place, while a servant holds the patient's leg apart and another servant puts a pillow under his buttocks."ثمّ تأخذ المكواة باليمين وتوضع على العلامة التى رسمتها مدّة ثلاثين ومائة جزء من النبض حتّى يظهر مكان الكىّ كالخندق.
Then take the iron in your right hand and place it on the mark you made for 30 to 120 parts of a pulse, until the cautery site appears like a trench. Another person should be on the patient's chest, holding his hands, while you bring the iron down on the mark, keeping the iron upright and holding it still until it reaches the bone, or if it does not reach the bone by the first attempt, lift it up and try again."ثمّ ترفع المكواة من على العلامة وتوضع تحتها على الجلد ثلاث مرّات.
Then lift the iron off the mark and place it under the skin three times."Be very careful to prevent the intestine from slipping out while you cauterize, otherwise you might cause either death or a great misfortune for the patient. Know that if you do not reach the bone with your cautery, your treatment will not be successful. The irons for children should be smaller in proportion to their size and those for adults larger."وينبغى أن يكون الكيّ في الفتق رقيقًا لا يتسع ولا يتعمق، حتّى يلتئم من غير فصد ولا يترك فيه أثرًا، وأما الحجامة فينبغي ان تكون على وفق ما قدمناه فيها.
Then treat the site of cauterization after three days with fat until the fire's roughness goes away, then treat it with other ointments until it heals. Let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is closed.
You should give him food that softens his stomach so that the intestines do not protrude when he belches and defecates. When he wants to get up after forty days, use a tight bandage and hold it for another forty days, and reduce exertion, overeating, overdrinking, and loud shouting.
If you follow this treatment, he will heal completely, God willing. I will mention the treatment of hernias by incision in its chapter, God willing. As for a hernia that occurs elsewhere in the abdomen and is new, if you want it to not increase in size, cauterize it with a round scar the size of the hernia. Let the skin you burn be like two-thirds of it, then treat it as we mentioned; it will not increase, God willing. Some of the ancients mentioned that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular iron in this way.وإن كان الفتق فى الموضع الذى لا يمكن استعمال الكىّ فيه فإنّه يخبّأ ويبنى عليه ويضمد بخرق من الصوف أو الكتان وتوضع تحت الخرق عشبة تمنع الفتاق وذلك أن يتمكن المرهم من موضع الفتق فيشفى
If the hernia is in a place where cautery cannot be used, it should be hidden and built upon, and dressed with a piece of wool or linen, and under the dressing, put some herb that prevents hernias. That is so that the ointment can affect the hernia site and heal after you have marked the hernia with ink and made a horizontal line on the upper side of the hernia and another vertical line below it, then cauterize in the middle with one nail-like burn. The first cautery is easier and better, God willing.وإذا أراد أن يبرأ الفتق فليكن علاجه بعد الكيّ بالمراهم ويكون علاج المرهم فى أوّل
If the hernia wants to heal, its treatment after cautery should be with
cicatrization of the scrotum.
If pain occurs in some organs due to a fall or a blow, and that pain persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medication, then one should cauterize with a cautery point. The cauterization of each organ should be according to its size, smallness, weakness, or strength.
If the pain is not relieved by the first cauterization, then you should repeat it, because these pains often travel from one organ to another nearby; therefore, you must follow them with cauterization until the patient recovers.
Chapter 47
On cauterization for leprosy.
As for lepers, they may greatly benefit from cauterization, especially those with leprosy caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.وأفضل الكىّ لهم ما كان فى أوّل الداء لأنّه إذا استحكم واستفحل الداء لم ينفع الكىّ شيئا بل يزيد عللهم ويشتدّ بهم الألم وربّما أفضى بهم ال
If you want to cauterize them, consider the following: if leprosy is in its early stages and you have treated it as mentioned in the classification without it being delayed or stopped, and you are afraid that the corruption will overcome the entire temperament of the patient, then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries.وإن كان قد استحكم واستفحل واستولى على مزاجه فلا تكيّه على الرأس لأنّه لا ينفعه بل يهلكه فإن الكىّ على الرأس يضطرب به المزاج ويؤدّى الى الموت ولهذا نهينا عن كيّ الرأس بعد استحكام الد If it has become entrenched and prevalent, and has overcome his temperament, then do not cauterize him on the head, as it will not help but kill him; for cauterization on the head disturbs his temperament and leads to death. Therefore, we have forbidden cauterization of the head after the disease has become established. The first cautery should be in the middle of the head as usual, the second below that towards the forehead at the end of the hair, two cauteries on the temples, and one from behind on the nape of the neck; press your hand with cauterization a little until it affects the bone
and remove the scabs so that he can breathe the thick vapors more easily, and you should also cauterize him on the same spleen as mentioned before. However, if leprosy has continued with the patient and manifested itself clearly, then you should cauterize him with these cauteries which we have mentioned in the head And one on the tip of the nose, two on each cheek, two on the vertebrae of the neck, six on the vertebrae of the back, a large one on the tailbone at the base of the spine, another above it on the same plane, and two on the hips, one on each hip. And two on the knees, one on each knee, two on the shoulders, two on the elbows, two on the breasts, and a burn on each joint of his fingers and toes, and on each heel and wrist.
And beware of the nerve on the back of the heels, lest you burn them. You can also burn one on the pubic bone, one on the stomach, and one on the liver. Know that the more burns you make, the more beneficial and effective it will be.
Know that the sick person does not feel the pain of burning as much as a healthy person does, because his body is numbed. The size of the burn should be according to the size of the member or joint, as mentioned earlier in the description of the iron bars.
Then treat the burn with ground cinnamon and honey, along with other treatments, until it heals, if God wills it.
Chapter 48.
In the case of numbness in a member, when it is treated with medications, ointments, and bandages but does not heal, then burn the numb member with burns according to the size of the member, whether large or small. Make the burns deep enough to penetrate through the skin into the flesh.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals. Sometimes, burns may be applied to some numbness that occurs in the hand or leg due to a nerve in the vertebrae of the back, from which the nerve that moves that member originates. This will relieve the numbness.And you can also burn the tailbone at the base of the spine and the hip joints for numbness in the legs.
Only those who are knowledgeable about the anatomy of the body and the çıkış points of nerves that move the body should attempt this.
Chapter Forty-nine.
On the treatment of vitiligo.
If vitiligo has persisted and no medical treatment has been effective, then apply cauterization to it, making the incision slightly deep, to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with lentil flour mixed with rose oil, and violets, and pigeon's blood, or mackerel's blood, each in equal parts. Mix everything together and apply it to a cloth which is then applied to the affected area until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
On the treatment of cancer.وأمّا السرطان الاخضر فلتكشط
If the cancer is in its initial stage and you want to stop it, cauterize it with a circular iron around it as it rotates. Some scholars have mentioned that it should be cauterized vigorously in its center, but I do not agree with this method because I anticipate that it will cause an ulcer, and I have seen this happen several times.وإن كان قد تقادم فلتكشط موضعه وتكشط حوله ولا بأس أن يكشط على قدر ما يتناول دون أن يتجاوز الموضع بل يبقى الكيّ فيه وحده فإن لم يبد ذلك فليكيّ فيه وحوله، وقد زعمت طائفة من الحكماء أنّ السرطان إن كوى أوّل ما
If the cancer has persisted, then scrape off the affected area and scrape around it without damaging the surrounding skin. It is permissible to cauterize within the affected area itself, but not beyond it. Some scholars have maintained that when cancer is first detected
Chapter Fifty-one.On the treatment of tumors.وأما الورم فلتكشط مو
If a tumor is detected, scrape off its surface and treat it with cauterization.
When an abscess occurs and is slow to mature, either due to the nature of its cause, or because the patient is elderly with poor blood circulation, or due to the passage of time, if you want to hasten its maturity, apply small cauterizations around it in a dotted pattern.وإن أردت أن تمنعها من النضج والانتشار فلتكشط موضعها وتحرق بالمكواة حرقا بليغا وتردم موضع الكيّ بالملح وحده أو مع التراب المدبوغ حتى ينقطع القيح ولا يعد.
If you want to prevent it from maturing and spreading, scrape off the affected area and cauterize it vigorously with an iron heated to this specific temperature. Then leave it, as it will hasten maturity. If you want to stop it with cauterization, heat the iron to this precise temperature.
And lower it in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the skin, and let the cauterization be from below so that pus can flow easily. Then treat it as appropriate until it heals.
Chapter 52.
On cauterizing an ulcer.
An ulcer is a form of decay that affects an organ, consuming it as a fire consumes dry wood. If you observe an ulcer in a location suitable for cauterization with fire, heat up small and large iron branding irons according to what is appropriate for the location of the ulcer.
Then heat them from every side until all the decay is completely removed, and nothing remains. Then leave it for three days and apply powdered sulfur with oil to the cauterized area, until all the scabs and decay are removed.
Then treat it with ointments that promote the growth of flesh. If after three days, you see that the flesh is growing healthily without decay, and if not, cauterize again whatever remains of the affected areas. Ulcers can also be treated with sharp remedies.
It serves the same purpose as fire, and is even more effective. I have discussed the treatment of ulcers with sharp remedies in the section on classification; you can find it there if you need it.
Chapter 53.
On cauterizing ingrown and non-ingrown nails.وإن كان المسمار معكوسا فامسحه بزيت الاراك ثمّ كاوه على ما ذ
If the nail is ingrown, first rub it with oil of alder, then cauterize it. This condition often occurs on the soles of the feet; it is a rough and painful condition. There are two methods for cauterizing it: with fire or with sharp water.وإن كان غير معكوس فامسحه بالزيت واكوه من فوق حتى يشتدّ الكىّ على موضع النعل ولا تبال ان سقطت الاظافر كلها أو بعضها فإنّها إن لم تسقط اليوم سقطت غدا وإذا
However, if it is not ingrown, rub the area with oil and cauterize only the top of the nail, making sure to apply enough heat to reach the base of the nail. Do not worry if all or part of the nail falls off; if it does not fall off today, it will tomorrow. As for cauterization with fire, this is how it is done: heat a hollow branding iron made of iron and shaped like an eagle's feather. It should be about the same size as the nail on all sides and have a thin edge. Then lower the hot branding iron onto the nail and move your hand around the nail so that the branding iron reaches the base of the nail.وإنّما سمعت أنّه ينبغى ان يدار بالمكواة حول المسمار لأنّ النعل إنّما تكون تحت المسمار من كلّ جهة فتقطع عن مجرى النفس
And leave it for three days until it is filled with pus, then dress the wound with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the dressing in place overnight; this will draw out the roots of the nails. Then treat the wound with a flesh-growing ointment until it heals. If the nails are not inverted, do the same.
And often occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet; it is advisable to take a tube of copper or iron or eagle feather and lower it over the nail or wart, then pour into the tube a little sharp water.
Hold your hand and move it slightly so that the rim of the tube affects the root of the nail; the sharp water will find a way to penetrate to the root of the nail, and the patient must be patient for a short time when he feels the sting of the sharp water.
Then leave it, for the nail will come out by its roots. Do this one at a time until you have removed them all from the body; then treat the wounds after they have been pulled out with flesh-growing ointments.
Chapter 54.
On cauterizing the shivers.وصفة النافض وهو الشقاق الذى يطر
If a shiver occurs in someone due to cold affecting the nerve, or from a fever or anything else, it is advisable to cauterize him four or five times on the spine between each vertebra and once in the chest.وصفة النافض. And a cautery on his abdomen with an olive-shaped branding iron; this will soothe the shiver and hasten the healing of the cold disease.The remedy for shivers.وصفة النافض وهى الشقّة التى تحدث فى العصب من برد او من حمى ربع او غير ذلك
Chapter 55.فيما يعتلّ به الشقاق ويوجب ان
On cauterizing the blisters that occur in the body.وصفة البثر الحادث فى الظهر او فى الصدر او فى
Bitter and ugly blisters may occur in the body due to cold, thick, and rotten materials; it is advisable, at the first appearance of these blisters, to cauterize each one gently with burning wormwood or with the end of a long zaraondee or with an optical branding iron.وصفة البثر الحادث فى الظهر او الصدر او البدن وكلّ مكان كان.
And the blood blisters may be cauterized in their first appearance on this description, so that they do not increase and dissipate the cause of them, and the sick person recovers from them; except that it should be done after the sick person has been bled by phlebotomy.
Chapter 56.
On cauterizing bleeding from an artery after it is cut.
Blood often bleeds from an artery that has been cut by a wound from the outside, or by incising a tumor or burning an organ and so on, making it difficult to cut it.وإن كان الشريان قد انقطع تحت الجلد فلا بدّ من ايقاف النزف بقطبته وقطبه ثم كيه، فإن ابى إلّا الانفجار فهو آمن.
If the artery has been cut under the skin, then stop the bleeding by constricting it and ligating it, and if it still resists then cauterize it, for it is safe to do so.So when this happens to anyone, quickly put your hand over the mouth of the artery, place your index finger on it and gently tighten it until the blood is held under your finger and does not come out. Then prepare in fire small and large olive-sized cauteries several times, until they are very hot.ثمّ اكشف الموضع الّذى تريد الكىّ به فتدخل فيه القضيب الّذي تراه صالحا لذلك، فإن وجدت الموضع باردا فاكو ثانية وإن كان دافئا فأكثر من النفخ حتّى يحمرّ ويصير كأنه جمرة نار.
Then uncover the place where you want to cauterize, and insert into it the rod that you consider suitable for that, and if you find the site cold, then heat up again, and if it is warm, then blow more until it turns red and becomes like a coal of fire.Then take one, either small or large, according to the wound and the place where the artery has burst, and lower the cautery onto the vein after removing your finger quickly and hold the cautery in place until the bleeding stops.وإن ابى الشريان إلّا ان يسيل الدم لم تقدر على ايقافه بالكيّ الّذي ذكرن
However, if the artery still resists and lets blood out when you lift your finger from the mouth of the artery and extinguishes the cautery, then take another cautery in a hurry from the cauteries that are in the fire ready for use, and keep doing this with one after another until the bleeding stops.وإن كان النزف شديدا فلا تزال ترفع الأصبع من فم الشريان و تنفخ على المكواة حتّى يحمرّ ويتمكن الكيّ فينقطع الدم وإن كان ضعيفا رفعت الاصبع وحبست النفس وجذبت
And be cautious not to burn a nerve that is there, and speak of the patient in terms of another ailment. Know that if blood flows from an artery, it cannot be cut off, especially if the artery is large, except in one of four ways: either by cauterization as we have said, or by amputation if it has not already been amputated. If it is amputated, its ends will contract and the blood flow will cease; either by tying it tightly with threads, or by applying remedies which stop the blood flow and binding it firmly with bandages.
As for those who attempt to cut it with a ligature, or by compression with cloth, or by placing burning objects and the like, it will not be stopped by that at all, except in rare cases. If someone experiences this and neither a doctor nor medicine is available, they should quickly place their index finger over the mouth of the wound as described.
And they should compress it tightly until the blood is restricted and flows out above the wound, and on the artery and finger, and the finger should not be removed from it even with very cold water to solidify the blood and thicken it and cut it off; during this time, you should consider what is needed for cauterization or medicine.
Chapter 2.
In incisions, punctures, phlebotomy and other similar procedures.
Khalf said: We have mentioned in Chapter 1 all the diseases that are suitable for cauterization with fire and burning remedies, their causes, reasons, tools, and images of the cauteries from the horn to the foot.
And I will follow that path in this chapter so that it is easy for the student to find what they need...
Before I begin, you should know, my sons, that this chapter contains more pitfalls than the first chapter on cauterization...
For that reason, the warning in this chapter should be stronger because action in this chapter is very likely to result in loss of blood which sustains life, whether through opening a vein, puncturing an abscess, treating a wound, removing an arrow, or splitting a stone and similar procedures, all of which carry significant risks and often result in death.
I caution you against falling into suspicion, for in this profession you will encounter various types of people with different illnesses. Some are weary of their disease and find death insignificant.
Some may offer you their wealth in exchange for a promise of health, even though their illness is deadly. In such cases, it is not appropriate for you to assist them at all.
Be more cautious than eager or greedy, and do not proceed with anything unless you are absolutely certain of a positive outcome. Use all your treatments after informing your patients and warning them of the potential consequences of their actions.
By doing so, you will earn praise, glory, and a good reputation. May Allah guide you, my children, to the right path and grant you wisdom and success, for He alone holds the power to do so.
I have organized this chapter, from the horn to the foot, in accordance with what has been presented in the previous chapter on cauterization, to make it easier for you to find what you are looking for, God willing.
Chapter 1:
On the treatment of fluid accumulation in infants' heads.
This illness often occurs in infants during birth when the midwife applies too much pressure on the infant's head, but it can also occur due to an unknown cause.
I have not seen this condition in anyone other than infants, and most of those affected by it met a quick death. Therefore, I believe that it is best to refrain from treating it. Once, I saw an infant whose head was filled with fluid, and the head grew larger each day.فلمّا كشفناه رأينا الماء كله دمّا عبيطا ورأيت تحت جلدة الرأس عروقا حمراء مشرئبة نحو الماء كأنّها قساط الأوتاد وقد احتوشته وأحاطت به ووراءه عروق بيضاء ش When we examined him, we found that the fluid was actually bloody and there were red veins stretching towards it, as if they were cords of a tent peg, surrounding and enclosing it. Behind them were white veins. The infant was unable to sit up due to the size of his head, and the fluid continued to increase until he died.
This moisture may accumulate between the skin and the bone, or it may accumulate under the bone on the peritoneum. The procedure is as follows: if the moisture is between the skin and the bone and the tumor is small, a single horizontal incision should be made in the middle of the head, about two fingers in length, so that the moisture can flow out. This is the shape of the blade.
If the moisture is more and the tumor is larger, make two intersecting incisions in this shape:.
If the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head open from all sides, and the water decreases when you press it with your hand into the inside, and this is not hidden from you, then you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this shape.
After the incision, all the moisture should come out, then tighten the incisions with cloth and bandages, then anoint it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day, then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and do not leave the head tightly bound, and feed the patient with any dry food with little moisture.
until the member becomes strong and heals. Another prescription for incision is to look where the tumor's bone appears and where the water collects, because it may be in the back of the head, or in front, or on the right or left.وإن كان فى مؤخّر الرأس فشقّ من مقدّم الرأس الى مؤخره وإن كان فى مقدّمه فمن مؤخره الى مقدّمه وإن كان فى اليمين او فى الشمال فقم بما يقابله واجعل الشقّ على قدر الورم فإن كان صغيراً فشقّ واحد وإن
If it is at the back of the head, then make an incision from the front to the back; if it is in front, then from back to front; if it is on the right or left, then do what corresponds to that and make the incision according to the size of the tumor. If it is small, then one incision;
Chapter 2.في المدّة التى يصحّ فيها الرأس
On the duration of head healingCutting the two arteries behind the ears, known as the carotid arteries.الرابع فى المداواة ان تطبب الرأس بما يحتاج اليه
When a person suffers from acute attacks of pain in the eyes or chest, and this has persisted for a long time without response to medication, the best treatment is to cut these two arteries.
You should shave the patient's head with a razor, then rub the area with a rough cloth to make the artery appear. Then you should tighten the patient's neck with a cloth, and look for the pulsating vein in one of the two low-lying locations behind the ears; they are rarely hidden, except in some people.
Then mark them with ink, and cut them with a scalpel all the way to the bone; the cut should be about two finger-widths long, when the fingers are closed together.
If the vein is not sensed, you should estimate three finger-widths from the ear and mark with ink, then cut to the bone. You should.
send six ounces of blood, although it may be more or less depending on the strength of the patient and the fullness of their arteries; then look at the wound. If there is any peritoneum remaining on the bone, cut it away.
This is to prevent a hot swelling; then tie the wound with a thread made from linen, and treat it with ointments until it heals,.and.
Chapter 3.
On cutting the arteries in the temples.
If a person has chronic migraines, acute attacks from intense heat and humidity, or severe chronic headaches, and has been treated with various medical remedies to no avail, we have found that cutting or cauterizing the arteries in the temples as described is effective.
The procedure for cutting them is to shave the hair in the temples and identify the visible artery in the temple; it can usually be seen pulsating, although it may be hidden in some individuals.ثمّ تشقّ عنه بالمبضّع حتى تصل الى العظم ثمّ تقطعه بحدّ المدية الرّقاق كلّ ذلك على التّوخّى والتحذير من أن يجري الدم فيبادر المنزف الى سدّه بفتيلة أو نحوه كما قدمناه فى سلّ شريانى العينين.
Or, if it happens during a cold spell, let the sick person cover his neck with the edge of his garment; then you rub the area with a cloth or apply a hot compress until the artery becomes clearly visible and prominent. Then take a scalpel that looks like this. Then carefully strip off the skin until you reach the artery, then insert a hook into it and pull it upwards until you extract it from the skin and free it of the adhesions underneath it on all sides. If the artery is thin, twist it with the tip of the hook. Then cut off a portion of it, as much as its ends can be pulled apart and constricted without causing bleeding. For if it is not severed or cut, the blood will not flow at all. Then expel six to three drachms of blood.
If the artery is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong double thread, and the thread should be either silk or violin string so that putrefaction does not quickly affect it before the wound heals and cause bleeding.
Then cut off the excess between the ties; do this at that moment or after some time has passed. Or, if you prefer, sear it to the bone with a red-hot spatular iron so that its ends are cauterized and it performs the same function as described, or better as we have said.
However, if the patient has a fever or is of a fiery disposition, cauterization is especially beneficial as it helps to eliminate moisture; after cutting the arteries, the wound should be packed with old cotton and tightly bandaged. After healing, it should be treated with dry remedies that promote flesh growth and with twisting until it heals, God willing.
If bleeding occurs during the procedure, cut off the artery either by cauterization or fill the wound with alum and press your hand until the bleeding stops. If you don't have access to alum, place your finger over the wound until the blood clots.
And moisten the spot with very cold water until the sharpness subsides, and tighten it as appropriate; and what is lighter and easier than cutting the artery is to cauterize the vein with this double-bladed instrument after marking the two spots with ink.
And heat it very hot until it reaches the bone and the vein stops at two places so that its ends are separated, for it will not fuse with this cautery. And this is the image of the instrument.
The two blades should be like small chisels, except they should be much less sharp than a knife, because if they are as sharp as a knife, the cold will reach them more quickly and the flesh will not cut through quickly. If they are somewhat thick, the heat of the fire will adhere to them.
And cut the flesh quickly, and this action is better than any other action, and it is lighter and easier. And let there be a distance between the blades equal to the thickness of a finger.
Chapter 4.
On the treatment of hot, constant tears flowing into the eyes.
If the tears are constant, and their flow is from the veins on the skull from the outside, and no medicine of medicine has benefited it, and you see that the patient's face has turned red.وكان لا ينفكّ يمسحها بيده، وقد زادت حتى هلكت عيناه، واخضرّ لونه وظهرت فيه علامات المرض، فاعلم أنّه سيلان الدم من العروق التى على قحف الرأس، والعلاج له إن شاء الله تعالى أن And he feels in his forehead a crawling like that of ants, and his eyes are wasted and watery, and his eyelashes have been eaten away and his eyelids have become stuck due to the sharpness of the tears, so they have resorted to this action, which they call treatment with the sword. It is that you order the patient to shave the hair on his forehead.فإذا حلق فليصبّ عليه ماء بارد حتى يسكن حرّه، ثمّ يأخذ المكواة التى وصفناها فيكويه بالكيفية التى ذكرناها الا أنّه يكويه على أصول الشعر.
Then make three incisions parallel to the length of the forehead, the length of each incision being about two finger-breadths. The first incision is parallel to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second a little distant from the movement of the muscle in the temple, and the third on the other side.
Be careful not to cut the two arteries in the sides, and keep your hand away from the connection of the jaws. After each incision, leave a gap of about three clenched fingers, and have with you some sponge or dry rags to soak up the blood.
Then insert the sharp-pointed scalpel, which has this appearance: From the incision near the temple to the middle incision, you strip off all the skin between the incisions, along with the peritoneum on the bone. Then you do the same from the middle incision to the third incision, and then withdraw the scalpel. You also insert into the first incision another instrument called a skalioniya, which is sharp on one side and smooth on the other. This is its appearance:
Its sharp side is turned upwards towards the flesh attached to the skin, and its smooth side is turned towards the bone. You push it until it reaches the middle incision, and with it you cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes, without cutting into the surface of the skin.And when you have cut away all the vessels and membrane, you insert your finger under the membrane that is next to the bone, and lift it up, and so separate the eye from the bone beneath it.
Then you do the same in the middle incision to the other incision. After a moderate amount of blood has flowed, you squeeze the areas where the clotted blood is, and then in each incision you place a wisp of cotton that has been moistened with a poultice of wine and oil or vinegar and oil.And when you have bound up these wounds, you put on a bandage to hold it in its place, and keep the patient quiet for two days until the blood is coagulated. Then you apply another bandage, leaving an opening between the eyes to allow urine and other fluids to flow out.
So that a hot swelling does not occur, and on the third day loosen the bandage and use copious poultices of lukewarm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment made from rosewater, and all that is used to treat wounds, until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Five.
On the treatment of tears and discharges into the eyes from the head.
When one experiences copious, sharp, and persistent discharges, with the eyes appearing sunken and small, and weak vision, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the eyelashes have fallen out. And there is a sharp, painful headache and continuous sneezing, then you should know from these symptoms that the discharges come from deep and large blood vessels; the best treatment for this is as follows: have the patient shave his forehead, then make one incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there is a sharp, painful headache and continuous sneezing, then you should know from these symptoms that the discharges come from deep and large blood vessels; the best treatment for this is as follows: have the patient shave his forehead, then make one incision in the middle of the forehead. Or raise slightly across and begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, cutting to the bone and keeping your hand away from the moving muscles of the cheeks when chewing, so that when the bone is exposed all blood is absorbed with a sponge.ثمّ افتح فى القحف فتحة قدر حلّة القصب وأسكن فيها اسفنجة مبلولة بالماء البارد أو المثلج حتّى تمتصّ ما يخرج من العروق والدماغ يبرأ ان شاء الله وعلّمه أن يأكل الطعام المبطل للدمّ.
Then open a hole in the skull as large as a reed and place a sponge soaked in cold or iced water in it to absorb what comes from the vessels and the brain will heal, God willing. Teach him to eat blood-thinning food. When you release it and see that the hot swelling has returned, you should scrape the bone until the growth of flesh begins again.وعليك بالتنزيل بالماء البارد فى موضع الورم وعلّمه أن يستنشق البخور ولا يقاربه لأنّ الورم لا يزال حتّى يبرأ الجرح ان شاء الله.
Then treat it with cold water in the area of the swelling; teach him to inhale steam and not to approach it, because the swelling will not go away until the wound heals, God willing. Then treat it with the astringent treatment that encourages the growth of flesh, such as taking two parts wheat flour and four parts calamin and preparing an ointment from them, which is used in cases like this wound.وعليك بالمرهم الباسليقون الى أن يبرأ الجرح ان شاء الله والرباط بالكربس وأنت تعالج بماء الورد والبصل ودهن الورد ومرهم الفجل وبذور الفجل الم
Chapter VI.
Treatment for objects falling into the ear.
All objects which fall into the ear are one of four types: either a mineral stone, or a semi-stone like iron and glass, or a vegetable seed such as broad beans and nuts and the like, or something liquid, such as water and vinegar and the like.
And sometimes an animal falls into the ear; when this happens, if a pebble or something similar to it which does not increase in size inside the ear has fallen in there, face the sun with the ear, and if you see the pebble, drop some oil of violet or of poplar into the ear, then try to remove it by moving your head or by using a cotton swab. Close the nostrils when you sneeze, while placing a band of cloth or wool around your ear and pulling out the ear upwards; this treatment often works to remove the object. If it does not work, try removing it with a thin probe, which should be shaped as follows:
If it does not come out with the probe, try removing it with a thin, flexible wire; if that does not work, make a tube of brass and insert one end of the tube into the ear canal.
Seal the area around the tube with soft pitch mixed with oil, so that there is no other path for the wind except through the tube; then blow hard, and it will often come out this way. If it does not come out with our method, take some gum mastic or prepared resin which is used to capture birds, and put a small amount in the tip of the rod.
After winding a cotton bandage tightly around it, insert it gently into the ear canal, after drying the ear from any moisture. If it does not come out with all that we have described, take prompt action to incise before hot swelling or cramping occurs.
The prescription for incision is to bleed the patient first in the scalp, then draw out some blood according to his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear, at its lowest point near the tragus.
The incision should be crescent-shaped until you reach the stone, then remove it with any tool you can, then sew up the incision quickly and treat it until it heals.
If the object that has fallen into the ear is one of the grains that grow and swell, then try to remove it as we have mentioned. If it does not come out, then take a thin, smooth blade in this shape.
Try to cut that type of grain that has fallen into the ear with it, but you should only do this if you are sure that the grain has been moistened by the vapor of the ear so that it becomes many small pieces, then remove them with a blind hook, or with a soft probe, or with suction.
As we mentioned, it is easier to remove water that has entered the ear by having the patient sneeze with a feather first, while he fills his ear with something made of old cotton while lying on his side, with the affected ear uppermost. If this causes the water to come out, then well and good; if not, proceed as follows: take some warm oil and pour it gently into the ear until you feel that the water has risen, then tilt your head so that the water comes out.
If not, take some small, smooth pebbles about the size of a finger, heat them gently in fire and have the patient insert one of these into his ear canal while jogging on one leg, and hitting the pebble inside with another one.
He should keep doing this with a pebble after another until all the water is out. The water may also be removed by taking a reed or a feather, inserting one end in his ear and burning the other end with fire until most of it is burnt, then he inserts another reed.
Do this several times until all the water is out, or you can extract it with a tube as mentioned in the case of a stone. If the creature inside is small like a flea or similar, then treat it as mentioned in the division above. But if
If the body is large and palpable, try to extract it with forceps and probes; its removal is easier than that of any other object embedded in the ear. If, however, you have treated the ear as described in the section on otitis media in the article on catarrh, and your treatment has been ineffective,
You should examine the ear in sunlight; if you see any traces of worms, extract them with forceps or fine probes. If nothing is visible, use a probe like this:
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, insert the thin end into the ear to a depth that the patient can tolerate, then suck hard on the probe several times until all the worms are extracted. If they do not come out, seal around the probe with wax as I described for a foreign body.
If the methods described above are ineffective, try using aural medications as mentioned earlier. You will find these in the article on aural medications. The device used for applying these medications should look like this:
As you can see, it is made of silver or brass, narrow at the bottom with a small hole, and wide at the top. If you prefer, the applicator inside the tube can be solid brass. Alternatively, you can take a rod, wrap cotton tightly around its end, and insert it into the ear.
Then pour the oil, ointment, or other medication into the tube while it is in the ear, and then insert the rod with the cotton into the ear and squeeze your hand gently to deliver the medication into the ear canal. The patient should feel a sensation of pressure.
Let the patient tilt their head back slightly to allow the medication to flow into the ear canal. Be sure that the medication is neither too cold nor too hot, as this can be uncomfortable for the patient.
Chapter 7.
In the treatment of ear obstruction.
Some children may come out of their mothers' wombs with their ears unpierced.
People may also be affected by an obstruction in the ear canal due to an injury or a flesh wound, and this obstruction may be deep inside the ear hole, beyond the reach of the eye.And when you see this, you should split it open with a sharp blade and clean out any blood or pus that has collected there.
And when you see this, you should split it open with a sharp blade and clean out any blood or pus that has collected there.If the obstruction is just inside the ear canal and visible to the eye, then it will usually be easy to treat; but if it is deep within the ear and invisible, then treatment will be more challenging. Examine the ear canal. If you see the obstruction, open it with a sharp blade, as shown here:The blade should be held at an angle so that its point pierces the obstruction and then can be gently pried open.And if the obstruction is deep in the
The blade should be inserted at an angle so that its tip pierces the obstruction, and then it can be gently pried open.If the obstruction is due to flesh growing in the ear canal, hold it with a delicate probe and cut it off gently until all the flesh is removed.And if there is pus or blood collected behind the obstruction,.
if the obstruction is deep in the ear, take a thin, smooth wire, heat it gently in the fire, and then insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the obstruction, and the patient experiences improved hearing, then slowly withdraw the wire.And if there is pus or blood collected behind the obstruction,.
be careful not to damage the ear drum. Then insert a wick into the ear canal, sized according to the width of the opening, which you have moistened in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are sure the wound will not close up again; or take a wick and soak it in water, then sprinkle powdered rosin on it.And if there is pus or blood collected behind the obstruction,.
use it. If you see that the ear is swollen and hot, remove the wick and replace it with another one that has been moistened in cerate made with rose oil, until the hot swelling subsides; then treat it as before until it heals.And if there is pus or blood collected behind the obstruction,.
If bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other remedies that stop bleeding as mentioned in the article on catheters.
Chapter 8.
On the treatment of warts that appear on the eyelids.
These warts that appear on the eyelids may be moist or dry; you should grasp them with a probe or forceps and cut them at their base with a scalpel, then apply powdered resin to the site.
If it bleeds, cauterize it with a mild lenticular iron after cutting; the warts often return if any of their roots remain, and if you burn them with fire, those roots are scorched and they do not return.
Chapter 9.
On the treatment of cold sores on the eyelids.وأما البرد الذى يعرض فى الأجفان ويشبه النتوء الأحمرّ وال
And as for the cold sores that appear on the eyelids, they are similar to red bumps and often appear on the eyelids as hard protuberances.وينبغى أن تعرف أن هذا البرد يختلف عن الثآليل التى قد تسبق الساقية والتى ذ
And it should be known that this cold sore differs from warts, which may precede the scabies, and thus it is called "cold" because it is a thick fluid that gathers in the upper and lower eyelids; its treatment is as follows: examine the cold sore, and if it protrudes on the outer side of the eyelid and moves to either side, then it is easy to treat; make an incision across it.وإن كانت فى باطن الجفن فشقّ عليها شقا طوليا واعصر البردة واقطع جذورها الى أن تعرف أنك أزلتها كلها واستعمل عليها العلق الذى يسمونه بالعلوق ليك
And if it is on the inner side of the eyelid, make a lengthwise incision and squeeze out the cold sore and cut its roots until you are sure that you have removed it all; then use leeches, as they are called, to suck it out, and if you cannot remove it except by cutting through the entire eyelid, it will not harm the patient. If the incision is large, gather it with stitches and treat it until it heals.وإن كانت البردة فى وسط الجفن الأعلى او الأسفل وليس لها بروز على الجفن الا مقدار حبّة الخردل فإن أمكنك أن تجمع عليها أصابعك اليمنى واليسرى معا فأزحها عن موضعها إلى أعلى أو أسفل، وأمسكها بقطعة شاش وحرّكها، فتقع في يدك، وإن لم يمكنك ذلك فأدخل عليها من الشقّ الذى ذكرن
If it is small, there is no harm from it because the ointment will heal and join it. If the edge of the membrane is inclined towards the inside of the eyelid towards the inner surface, turn the eyelid over and attach the membrane with a hook without needing to make an incision and cut it off all around.
If you have cut through the eyelid, it does no harm, then wash the eye after cutting off the membrane with salt water and treat the site with something that heals until the patient recovers.
Chapter Ten
In the treatment of a hernia that occurs in the eyelid.
A hernia is a piece of fat that forms in the layers of the upper eyelid, and this most commonly occurs in boys, weighing down their eyes and causing catarrh in the mornings, and they are unable to look at the sunlight. Because tears flow quickly for them.وأبوال البزور علة ذلك وهو شحمة تكون بين الطبقات فتفسد
The cause of this is the fat that forms between the layers and rots, and for this reason you will see them leaning on their faces all the time and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are moist with inflammation and the hernia is visible, and when you press on the area with your fingers, you can feel the hernia between them. The patient should rest his head in your lap
Then take a linen cloth and prepare a wick from it and make a circle with the wick to the size that surrounds the hernia on all sides, then place it on the hernia and press with your fingers on all sides to gather the hernia in the middle of the circle.ثمّ تأخذ خيطا من الكتان أو الصوف فتعقد عليه عقدا صغيرة على قدر ما يحيط بالدائرة من كلّ جهة فتكون كأنها مرساة ثمّ ترفع الخيط الى فوق فتحدق العين اليه وترفع الدائرة بالشرناق وتشدّ الخيط الى فوق فتضغط على الشرناق لتجتذ
Then take a thread of linen or wool and tie it with small knots to the size that surrounds the circle on all sides, so it is as if it were an anchor, then lift the thread up, look at the eye towards it, and lift the circle with the hernia and tighten the thread upwards to press on the hernia to attract.Then split in the middle of that moisture with a scalpel split across, and the split should not be larger than the split that is in phlebotomy, and as for depth, you should split the skin all the way until you reach the hernia.وإذا فعلت ذلك فقد أفسدت الجفن وأهلكته، فإنّ الجلد رقيق جدا لا يح
In most cases, the hernia protrudes through the incision in the form of a white lump of fat, so you attract it with a cloth that you have wrapped between your fingers to the outside while turning your hand right and left until it is cured. Be careful not to increase the incision so that the scalpel does not slip into the eye and harm it.
If the hernia does not appear at the beginning of the incision, you should increase the incision slightly gently until the hernia protrudes, then attract it as we said, then immerse a cloth in vinegar and water and place it on the site and tie it with a bandage. Some people crush salt.
And put it in the cavity of the incision to dissolve what remains of that moisture, then treat it until it heals. If a hot swelling occurs at the site, treat it with soothing bandages until it heals,.
Chapter 11.
On the types of eye surgery.
If growths appear on the eyelid in addition to the normal course under the natural eyelids, and they persist, they harm the eye and cause various diseases such as constant tearing, relaxation of the eyelids, whiteness, and thickness, so that this is a cause of the invalidity of the eye.فى قطع الشفة الأرنبية.
And eye surgery is in four ways, either by cauterization with fire or with a sharp drug as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, or the incision and stitching method, or the splint method as I will mention it.فى قطع الشفة الأرنبية.
You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it turns over, do not do so, but insert a needle with a thread from under the eyelid, and the needle passes through the thread above, close to the hair itself, and you pull the thread up with the eyelid.فى قطع الشفة الأرنبية.
And you turn it with the roller, then make an incision in the underside of the eyelid, without the excess hair, with the scalpel, from the larger punctum to the smaller punctum, then thread the thread and place a small wadding of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, then mark on the eyelid with ink.
Like the shape of the ace leaf, except that the shape should be according to what you want to lift the eyelid, because people may differ in this regard, some of them need to cut from the eyelid an amount that is valid for the degree to which the eyelid has relaxed.
And some of them need less cutting, all of this according to the relaxation of the eyelid, then you cut with the scalpel on the two lines that you marked and start from the larger punctum to the smaller punctum, and the incision should be close to the natural hair as thick as the roller.
Then insert the hook in one of the skin corners, then strip it all, then gather the two lips with a thin woolen thread stitch and needle, wipe the blood and stick what remains of the threads on the eyebrows with some adhesive materials.
You can do that if you want, or you don't have to, then the stitches and threads remain for about three or four days, then treat it, or you can leave the wound without stitches and treat it with something that dries and constricts, as the eyelid rises when the wound heals and comes together, but stitching is better.
This method of lifting was mentioned by the early generations, except that it requires more effort from the patient and is considered a good and safe method. There is another method of lifting that you can also use, which is to mark on the eyelid in the shape of an ace leaf as we described before. Then lift the eyelid with three hooks, they can be separate or gathered in this shape:.
Then cut the excess of the eyelid with a small pair of scissors in this way, cutting evenly:.
If you cannot tie the ligature, and it does not suit you, take a needle with thread and pierce through the center of the hernia; then pierce another thread near the larger opening and a third thread near the smaller opening, and bring together your fingers on the threads evenly, then lift your hand up evenly.
Then lift up the skin marked all around as we have described, then bring together the lips of the wound with sutures and treat it until it heals. If a hot tumor occurs when you cut or incise, calm that tumor with ceroti and similar soothing ointments.
It may also happen that the lower eyelid turns inward; in this case, you should use what we have mentioned of cutting and suturing and cauterization with fire or with a sharp medication. Cauterization with fire or sharp medication is faster and easier on the patient than cutting and suturing.
Cauterization with a reed is done in this way: You turn the eyelid inside out and make an incision on the inner side as I described before, then you prepare two thin reeds or wooden sticks whose length is equal to the length of the eyelid and whose width is less than that of a scalpel."ثمّ تخيط أحد طرفى القصبة بالجلدة المقابلة لها من الجفن ثمّ تعقد وتدخل الطرف الآخر في الشقّ الذى جعلته فتبسطه حتى ينبغى له أن يستوى مع الجفن ثمّ تغرسه في داخل الجفن وت
Then you sew one end of the reed to the skin facing it, then tie a knot and insert the other end into the incision you made, straightening it so that it aligns with the eyelid. Then you insert it into the inside of the eyelid and
until it falls off on its own. If you are slow, cut it with a pair of scissors and then treat it until it heals. Once it has healed, the eyelid will rise and the lashes will not irritate the eye. This is how you should make the reeds in terms of shape and size: in terms of length and width, exactly like this:
Chapter Twelve.
On removing ingrown hairs from the eye with a needle.
Take a thin needle, thread it with a fine silk thread that is smooth, then tie the ends together to make a small knot. The length of the thread should be about an inch.
Then thread another thin thread through the loop, shorter than the first, and tie its ends if you like. Then have the patient rest his head on your lap, facing the sun to illuminate the area, as this is a delicate procedure. Insert the needle at the base of the ingrown hair.وأنت تعلم أنّ الشعرة الناخسة إنّما تكون تحت الجفن فى الجلد الرقيق ولها لحم كأنّه لحم حبة تحت الجلد، فإن أدخلت الإبرة تحتها وأمعنت فيها حتى تأخذ منها الشعرة بلامزيد على قدر مايراها العين صحيحة غير معيبة فأمسك الإبرة من فوق الأنشوطة بملقط رفيع فى يدك اليسرى وحرّ
You will find that the ingrown hair is under the eyelid, in the thin skin, and has flesh around it, like a blotch under the skin. If you insert the needle under it and probe gently until you grab the hair without damaging it, then hold the needle above the loop with a pair of fine tweezers in your left hand and quickly push the needle through the eyelid to remove it above the natural hair, then pull the thread up through the loop and insert that hair - whether one, two or three hairs, no more.فإن كانت أكثر من ثلاث شَعرات فإنّى أرى أن تجمعها
If there are more than three hairs, I recommend gathering them all together and pulling the thread up through the loop until the hair is removed with the natural hair. If you pull the loop and the hair doesn't come out, pull the loop down by the thread you threaded it with until the loop comes out from the upper incision.وإن أدخلت الإبرة فى الحاجب ولم تجدها تحت الجفن فإنّها تكون قد دخلت بين لحم الجفن واللحم الأعلى الذى فوقه، فعند ذلك تأخذ ملقطا رفيعا فأمسك به طرفى الأنشوطة من فوق وتحت الجفن وتسحبهما الى أسفل ويديك على جانبيّ الجفن حتّى يظهر لك لحم الجفن الذى تحت الجلد ثمّ
If you insert the needle in the eyebrow and don't find it under the eyelid, it means it has gone between the flesh of the eyelid and the flesh above it. In this case, take a fine pair of tweezers and grab the loop from above and below the eyelid and pull them down until the flesh of the eyelid becomes visible. Then re-insert the hair and pull the tweezers up through the incision until you can see it clearly. Then release the loop and the thread and leave the area for two or three days to heal, until the hair settles in its place and the flesh grows over it.وإن وجدت فى موضع الزيادة رقة وورما فإنّك تخرج الشعرة وتدعها حتّى تلتئم، ثمّ تأخذ خيطا من حرير
If the hair is short, either add to it a long hair from natural hair so that it rises with it, or leave it until it becomes longer after a while, then raise it.
Chapter 13.
On the treatment of ptosis that occurs in the upper eyelid.
The condition that this ptosis is subjected to is called "arnabiyah", and this ptosis can be either natural or accidental, the accidental one is due to a wound, incision, cauterization, or similar.
The procedure for this is to cut that scar and separate its edges and place a flax thread between them, and tie it until it heals; it is not advisable to use things that dry and contract in its treatment.وإن كانت طبيعيّة فلا بدّ من أن يكون سببها ضعف العضلة التى ترفع الجفن أو عصبها، فيجب معالجتها حسبما ذكرناه فى علاج الشقاق.
If it is natural, then the cause must be weakness in the muscle that raises the eyelid or its nerve; so you should treat it as we mentioned in the treatment of fissures. If you do that, the ptosis will return worse than it was, but use things that relax, such as camphor and anointing with water that has been cooked with poplar buds and flax seeds, and liniment of diaulion dissolved with something of the oils, and smeared on the thread, and treated.وإن استدعى الأمر إلى الكىّ فعلت ذلك حتّى ترتفع، وتكون الكية من أعلى الجفن إلى أسفل، وذلك بأن ترخى الجفن وترفعه بيدك اليسرى وتحجب الضوء عن عين المريض بيده اليمنى ثمّ
If it is necessary to cauterize, do so in order to rise, and the cautery is from the upper eyelid to the lower one; that is, you relax the eyelid and lift it with your left hand and shield the light from the patient's eye with your right hand, then
Chapter 14.On the treatment of entropion.
On the treatment of ptosis that occurs in the lower eyelid.ووجهه أن تعالجها بما ذكرناه من الأدوية المرخية، وتستعمل فيها
The way to treat it is with the medicines we mentioned for relaxing, and you use them in
The operation is performed by taking a doubled thread and piercing the flesh with it from the left to the right canthus, so that the thread hangs at both ends of the flesh; then you draw the flesh up with the needle and cut it with a broad scalpel.
If the shape of the eyelid is as it should be, well and good; otherwise you take a speculum and place it on the site of the incision and turn back the eyelid with it and make two incisions in the inner side of the eyelid, the end points of these incisions being at the corners of the cut you have made so that they form an angle. When they come together, their shape should resemble this one:
This is the Greek letter Lambda, then you remove that flesh to the extent that its acute side is lower than the eyelid; then you bring together the separated parts with two sutures using a woollen thread, and then treat it as we have mentioned, with soothing remedies and compression until it heals.
If the ptosis has resulted from an incision, a suture or cauterization, you should make a simple incision below the lash line as mentioned earlier and then separate the lips with compression as described.
In summary, the treatment of ptosis, whether it is from above or below, is to perform the operation according to what you observe of its condition; for it may vary greatly in appearance, and a clever surgeon will find a way to treat it.
until you return its shape to the natural or a close approximation, and the nature of the disease will guide you in most cases to the appropriate course of action and instrument,.
Chapter XVINo notes, comments or explanations were added by the translator
On Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or Cornea.
It happens frequently that the upper eyelid becomes attached to the white of the eye, preventing it from moving easily and impeding its natural functions. In such a case you should slide the end of a speculum under the eyelid.
And lift it up or extend it with a hook, then cut the adhesion with a gentle scalpel that is not as sharp as other scalpels, but rather slightly blunt so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation. The scalpel should slip into the adhesion and cut it as if you were skinning it.
And expect that when the eyelid returns to its natural state and all the adhesion has healed, you should then pour into the eye a saline solution to wash it or instill in it from the syringe a solution of vitriol dissolved in water. Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a piece of linen thread.
And place over the eye a pad moistened with egg white, and after three days you should use compresses to heal it.
Chapter 16.
On cutting the blepharoplasty and incising the conjunctiva.
The blepharoplasty can be of two types: either nerveous, which resembles a thin, hard membrane, or non-nerveous, which resembles a solid white and rigid moisture. If iron touches it or it is pierced with a hook, it will split.وإنّ العصبيّة تكون رقيقة كالورقة وتكون بغير عروق ويكون لونها مائلا الى الصفرة فى أكثر الاحوال، ويصحبها ألم شديد اذا مسّها الحديد او رمت، ويكون قطعها كقطع الورق الرقيق، والغير العصبيّة تكون كثيفة وعروقها واضحة ويكون لونها أبيض مائلا ال
The nerveous type is thin like paper and has no blood vessels, and its color is usually yellowish, and it is very painful when touched by iron or pierced with a hook, and it can be cut like thin paper. The non-nerveous type is dense, its blood vessels are visible, its color is white tending to yellow, and it does not adhere to the hook. Both types begin from the larger canthus and gradually spread until they cover the eyeball and prevent light and eye movement. The procedure for cutting them is to have the patient's head resting on your lap.وأنت جالس والعليل منتصب الرأس فتمدّ يدك اليسرى وتتّبعها بيمناك فتقبض على الظف
While you are sitting and the patient is standing, extend your left hand and follow it with your right hand to grip the eyelid. Then open his eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand, then grasp the blepharoplasty with a slightly curved hook and extend it upwards. Then take a needle, insert a hair from a horse or cow and a strong thread, bend the tip of the needle slightly, and pierce it in the middle of the blepharoplasty.وإذا تمّت فى الظفرة ووجدت موضعا للخيط فأدخله من تحت الظفرة الى فوقها وتشدّه حتى يتماسك الجفن فلا يرتدّ الى أن يبرأ، وان احتجت الى خيطين فاثنين وان احتج
And you perform it with a needle and tie the thread to the edge of the eyelid and extend it upwards, and peel off the margin of the eyelid next to the pupil as if you were spreading it with a hair to its end; then cut what remains at the root of the eye socket with a delicate scalpel or a small pair of scissors, leaving the natural flesh of the eye socket.
So that there will not be from it a permanent flow of tears, and you can extend the eyelid with a probe alone or with thread as we have said; then peel off the end with a smooth scalpel whose shape is like this: .
And beware of the scalpel touching the corneal membrane and causing a hernia in it, then after cutting you throw into the eye some powdered salt or a little alum and leave it until the next day, then treat it as appropriate until it heals..
If the eyelid is not nerve-like and you cannot get a needle into it or fix a probe in it, this type of eyelid is often treated with medication and heals as described in the division; if you want to cut it, open the patient's eye..
And take a delicate, smooth scalpel with a weak edge in this shape:  . And shave the eyelid with it gently from above; if you see that it is loosening and flaking off, and the shaving is taking effect, then drop into the eye from your watch some alum or red ointment, or powdered salt, and bind up the eye until the next day..وإن وجدت أنّ الجرد لا يتأثر فى الظفرة شيئا فاشدد على الشدق ما استطعت، وقوّم اليد الى فوق واثبت الصنّارة ثمّ اسحب الظفرة الى تحت لعلّك تصل الى الموضع الذى أرادته، فإن وصلت اليه فأمسك الصنّارة بيدك الاُخرى ومدد الظف
And if you find that the shaving is not having an effect on the eyelid, hold down on the cheek as hard as you can, and straighten the hand upwards and fix the probe then pull the eyelid underneath so that perhaps you will reach the place you want; when you reach it, hold the probe with your other hand and extend the eyelid upwards so that perhaps you will reach the place you want; when you reach it, hold the probe with your other hand and extend the eyelid upwards so that perhaps you will reach the place you want; when you reach it.then re-do the work on it until it is all gone, except if you are obstructed in the eye by a hot, mild swelling, then leave it and treat the hot swelling until it heals, then redo the work on
If the lump causes a great deal of pain in the eye, then attach it to the hook and cut off some of it, but do not overdo the cutting so that the flow of tears does not occur. Then pour into the eyes the red or zinc-based salve until it heals.
Chapter 17.
On cutting warts and flesh that grows in the eye.
Some people's eyes may develop red meat which piles up and covers the eyeball, or approaches it, or overflows onto the eyelids; sometimes the eyelids turn outward like a rosebud.
The treatment for this is for the patient to rest his head in your lap, then open his eyes wide and pick off all the red meat with appropriate forceps.
Or hold it with tweezers or forceps, then cut the meat, one piece at a time until you have removed it all and take care not to injure the eye while doing so. You can cut it either with the scalpel described in the section on cutting the membrane or with small scissors. Like those used to pick out splinters, as will be shown in the following chapter.وإن كان اللحم ينبت تحت الجفن من فوق العين فقطعه بالمبضع، فليكن قطعك له على طول ما ينبغى ان يقطع لا غير
If the meat grows under the eyelid, above the eye, and you cut it with a scalpel, then cut it along its entire length, but no more. When you have finished cutting and all of the wart has been removed, fill the eye with powdered salt or drop in red vitriol or another corrosive medicine, and place cotton on the outside of the eye, soaked in egg white, to guard against inflammation.
If any of the wart remains and you are unable to finish the job because of bleeding, and fear inflammation, then leave the eye and treat it with something that soothes inflammation, then return to it and finish the job until it heals. This is how you should deal with excess flesh that appears in the eye from this type.
You should, however, avoid treating any weak eye by stamping or by working with iron and you should not put your hand into anything of these operations until you see that the member is tolerable for that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the extraction of foreign bodies from the eye.
The vessels are red veins that grow over the eye, preventing sight and weakening the eye if left untreated for long periods. Therefore, you should first examine the eye to ensure it is strong and does not have any other disease besides the foreign body. If it is strong, you may proceed with extraction.
The extraction process involves the patient reclining his head in your lap, and then you gently hook the vessels with a probe, using one or two probes depending on your skill. The probes should be flexible and bent in this manner:
Or use two probes that are double-ended and connected at the base as shown below:or a single probe with a hook at one end and a straight edge at the other as shown.The hooked end is
Then, with a delicate pair of forceps, gently grab those vessels and wipe away the blood from time to time until you see that the vessels have been removed and the blood has subsided. Be careful not to damage the eye with the forceps, and perform this in the morning when the sun is overhead.
Be very steady in your work so as not to cut anything other than the vessels. Once you're finished, rinse the eye with green or red vitriol to eat away any remaining vessels with its sharpness. If you cannot extract all of it at once, dress the eye with something to soothe the pain.
Leave it for several days until the pain subsides and any swelling goes down, then repeat the process as before until it is healed. This is the image of the forceps which should be used.
[The patient's head should be supported by the student, while another wipes away tears and watches for any signs of strain or pressure in both the front and back of the eye] The ideal way to perform this operation is to have the patient's eyes wide open using a speculum or a forceps held by a student.
In this operation, the patient's head should be in the student's lap and one assistant should dry the tears and examine the front and back of the eye carefully; you may choose to begin by using the forceps at the top or bottom of the eye, but it is preferable to use two forceps on the upper lid, one at the end of the eyelashes and the other at the beginning.
Hold the eyelid between your index and middle fingers, then place forceps underneath them. Hold the eyelid gently and lift it slightly until you can see all of the eyelashes. Cut the smaller, western eyelash with scissors or a gentle scalpel.
Insert the threader into an eye needle and probe the entire lash line until it lifts away from the lid. Do not cut the mucous membrane, as this will cause tears and blood to flow onto your face.
Then cut the excess lash above and below with scissors, so that nothing remains embedded in the cornea. If you can lift it from the cornea with the threader, do so; this is preferable. Sometimes, however, this is not possible in some people.
After cutting it, there will be pain and swelling in its socket for a few days; return to treating it.
Chapter 19.
On returning the eyebrow to the nose.
The doctors call the eyebrow a nassor if it is treated with cauterization or with sharp, burning medication as described above and does not heal; there is no remedy for it except to open up the swelling when it has matured and to extract all of the fluid within, or the pus.
Until the bone is exposed; if the bone is exposed and you see damage or darkness in it, then remove it with an instrument that looks like this:..
You call the rough-headed instrument, made of Indian iron with a rounded head like a button that has been carved with a file or a chisel, carved very finely; you place it on the damaged area of the bone and then turn it between your fingers while tightly clenching your hand until you see that the damage has been removed.
And you do that several times, then brace the area with drying astringent medications. If the site is sealed and flesh grows and heals over time and remains for forty days without any recurrence or swelling or other incident.
If you know that it has healed, otherwise there is no remedy but to return the fistula to the nostril hole in this way, and that is to expose the bone again with iron or with a sharp medicine. And when the bone is exposed, take a split instrument in this shape: .
The tip of the iron should be triangular and its shaft should be tapered and bent towards the tip as you see, then place it on the bone itself. This should be done near the tear duct and keep your hand away from the eye a little, then turn your hand with the split instrument until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it.
By the patient feeling air coming out of it when he covers his nose with his hand. At that point, brace the area with drying astringent medications as I have told you. When flesh grows and the area hardens, the matter which was flowing outward will return to the nose, which is better for the patient, if God wills it.
Chapter Twenty.
The treatment of a prolapsed eyelid.
If the entire eye protrudes and no defect or deficiency occurs in the vision, one should ease the patient then cupping him on the back of his head without a mark, then place a leech on the back of the head gently sucking.
Then, you put an ointment on the eye made from myrrh, gum arabic, frankincense and aloes, then you tie the eye above the bandage with many ligatures. The description of the ligatures is to take a soft lamb's wool, fold each piece into four folds to make many of them.
Then you place them one on top of the other as needed by the eye, then tie it tightly with a stiff cloth, and repeat the leeching without marking, then remove the leech and leave the eye tied for a day and a night.وصفة اللفيف أن تأخذ قطعة حديد ملساء مستديرة على قدر العين وتكون أطرافها مدببة فإذا وضعتها على العين ورجعت الى داخل وجعلت مكانها مكانا أعطيت عين العليل فرجة من الهواء فتدخل الهواء فيقوى به بصره وينفتح له البصر وذلك اذا لم
If the ligament relaxes during this period, it should be tightened again. Then, remove the bandage after a day and a night as we said. If you see that the eye has recovered, otherwise, re-apply the bandages, compresses, tightening, and cupping until it recovers.
Chapter 21.
On the cutting of the vitreous humor.
If a hernia occurs in the vitreous layer, then it is protruded and bulges outside the eyelids, resembling a grape, and disfiguring the person's appearance because of it, and you want to cut it, then the procedure is as I describe.
This is done by inserting a needle at the base of the grape from below to above, then insert another needle with a doubled thread from the side of the eye and pass it through, leaving the first needle as it is.فإن لم تأت بسهولة فزدها فى ذلك إلى أن تخرجها كلّها ثمّ ارفع الخيطين جميعاً وجدّد الكيّة من موضع الخيطين ومدّ الخيطين الى أسفل وشدّهما مع
If it does not come out easily, increase the pressure until it comes out completely, then lift both threads and renew the cauterization from where the doubled thread is, and extend the threads downward and tighten them gently. Then cut at the bend of the doubled thread and tie some of the grape around the needle, tighten it gently, then remove the needle and apply a damp wool pad on the eye, leaving it until the threads and grape fall out, then treat the eye with what strengthens it.وإن عرضت العنبة فى العين من غير أن يظهر لها فتق وأردت قطعها فأدخل فيها إبرة وشدّ عليها خيطاً ومدّه الى أسفل وشدّه حتى يسحبها الى فوق ثمّ تعالجها كما ذكرنا
If the grape appears in the eye without protruding, and you want to cut it, insert a needle into it, pull it up with a thread extended downward and tightened until it pulls the grape upward, then treat it as mentioned until the wound heals. You may also tighten the grape from all sides with a circle of cloth so that the eye protrudes more, then insert a thin knife to reach the depth of the eye and release the watery humor, and let the eye droop for some time, then tighten it until it heals.وإن عرضت العنبة فى العين مع انقلاشها وأردت قطعها فأدخل فيها إبرة وشدّ خيطاً على قدر مايكفى لقطع العنبة فى الموضع الذى أدخلت فيه الإبرة ثمّ شدّ الخيط من أسفل الى فوق حتى تسحبها وترفعها الى مو
Chapter XXII.
Treatment of Inguinal Hernia.
This ailment, which is called hernia, is a swelling that gathers in the groin, resembling water but not actually containing any. The treatment for this condition involves having the patient sit upright on a chair, and then taking his head in your hands from both sides.
You should move him until you see the swelling go down in your line of sight, and then have him hold still so that it doesn't go away and the light shines through; then the patient can see things as he used to. If the swelling does not go down as described, then we know it is water.
If not, then have the patient sit in front of you, and with a thin blade, make an incision above the membranous layer, slightly at the point where the conjunctiva attaches to the corneal stroma in the limbus, so that the content is released.
When it is released, instil into the eye hot water that has been mixed with honey, or water in which you have boiled linseed and honey; then treat with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter XXIII.
We have already mentioned the types of watery discharge in the eye, and which ones are suitable for irrigation with clear explanation; so you should take that information from there as being correct. Then you should have the patient sit in front of you, cross-legged, facing towards the light source, close to the sun.
You should then tie and tightly constrict the healthy eye, and lift the eyelid of that eye with your left hand if the affected eye is the left one, or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
Then, you should place the tip of the irrigation tool close to the limbus, with thick rod inserted into the white part of the eye, from the side of the smaller palpebral aperture; then push the tool firmly while rotating it with your hand until it penetrates into the white part of the eye, and you feel that the tool has reached an empty space.
And the depth of the incision should be equal to the distance from the pupil to the outer edge of the iris, which is the crown of the eye; for the brass can be seen in the eye of the beholder as clearly as the cornea, and then the incision should be made upward to the place where the water is.
Then press it downward repeatedly, and if the water comes out immediately, then the patient can see with his own eyes what has been opened before him, and the incision is still in his eye; then let him rest for a while, and if the water rises again, lower it again without removing the incision.
When it is stable and does not rise, remove the incision gently while twisting your hand slightly, then dissolve some pure salt in water and wash the inside of the eye with it, then put on a bandage or a piece of damp wool around the outside of the eye.
We use a mixture of rose oil and egg white, and tie the eye that is to be operated on; but we, and the people of our time, use ground cumin mixed with egg white. If the incision does not enter the eye because of its hardness - for there are some people whose eyes are very hard - you should not force it. You should take a scalpel called "Bardo", which has this shape:.
You should only pierce the conjunctiva with it, and not go too deep; just make a slight incision for the scalpel to enter easily as we have mentioned. When you have finished, prepare a comfortable bed for the patient to lie on his back in a dark room.
He should abstain from all movements and coughing, and his food should be something that softens his nature; he should not move his head to the right or left at all, and the bandage should remain in place until the third day, then you can remove it in that dark room and test his eyesight.
Show him things, then replace the bandage until the seventh day; you should not do this during treatment or immediately after making the incision, but you should avoid doing this before the water rises quickly with strong eye movement.
If a hot tumor appears, then the eye should be treated before the seventh day and the tumor should be relieved until it is calm, then when it is calm, release his sight and put on his face a veil that trains his sight from underneath for a few days while he is in that dark house. Then,
he should leave the house gradually and act according to his circumstances. Know that in this case, a learner cannot do without observing again and again, so then he can proceed with the operation. I have heard from some Iraqi people that they make a piercing instrument in Iraq with which water is sucked out.
I have not seen anyone in our country make it, nor have I read about it in any book by the ancients. It may be a modern invention. Here are the images of different types of instruments so that those who do not know them can understand them: .
They are made especially from copper, and their tips should be as thin as this, with a triangular shape and sharp edges:.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of flesh growing in the nose.وأمّا إذا كان لحما نابتا أو ورم حارّا، فإن
And if it is a growth or a hot tumor, then there are different types of growths that may appear in the nose, some of which resemble scorpions with many legs, while others are hard and dark-colored cancerous growths, and still others are soft and light-colored.وكلّها إن أزيلت قبل أن تتصرّف فى الأنف، كان ذلك أفضل وأيسر.
For all of these soft growths that are not malignant or cancerous, it is best to remove them before they affect the nose. While the patient is facing the sun, open one nostril and insert a hook into the growth, then pull it out gently and cut off whatever you can reach with a sharp, thin blade from one side only.وإن استصعب ذلك، فامسح على لحم النابت بخرقة مبلولة بماء السذاب أو الخلّ ثمّ ارفعها بعد أن تنزع الخرقة، فإنّ ذلك يسهّل أمرها إن شاء اللّه تعالى.
Until you know that all the growth is gone; if some of it remains and you cannot cut it off, then pierce it with a thin, sharp instrument gently so that no trace of it remains. If blood appears or there is a hot tumor,.فامسح موضع الورم بخرقة مبلولة بماء السذاب أو الخلّ، فإنّ ذلك يسهّل أمره، ثمّ ضع على الورم خرقة مبلولة بخلّ وشيء من زيت الورد.
If you find something that should be, or if it is one of the malignant tumors, then cut it out until the bleeding stops and all the flesh is gone. Then put vinegar, water, or drink in the nose after the cutting, for if the nose opens and moisture flows into the throat.
If the moisture does not flow as it should, then know that there is still some flesh inside which has grown on top of the hollow bones and the instrument has not reached it by cutting. In this case, you should take a linen thread of some thickness...
...and tie many knots in it, with the distance between each knot being about a finger width or less. The patient should then push one end of the thread into his nose with a stick or whatever he can find that is shaped like a button, and pull it towards his nose until it reaches the back of his throat.
He should then pull on the thread, and often boys in school do this trick; it is easy for anyone who wants to do it. Then he should gather the two ends of the thread together, one end coming out of the mouth and the other remaining in the nose.
Then he should use the meat spreader on the knots of the thread, until he knows that the flesh has been cut by the thread knots; then he should take out the thread and put a bandage in the nose after wiping away the blood, using a bandage which has been soaked in the Egyptian ointment. He should do this for three days or more.
Until the ointment has eaten away all the remaining flesh, then a lead tube should be put in the nose for a few days until he is healed; if he needs to dry it out again, that treatment can be used.
This is an image of the instrument used to drip oils and medications into the nose:..
It has a silver or bronze tube, like a small lamp, with an open end and a hole in it.
If you prefer, the tube can be made closed like a reed, and the end of the applicator should be flat.
It has a handle at its end, as you can see, which is held when the fat or any of the juices, or flowing things that one wishes are heated in it.
Chapter 25.
On warts growing at the tip of the nose.
A wart often grows at the tip of the nose, increasing in size over time until its appearance becomes unsightly.
And therefore you should cut it in its first appearance and remove all of it, then treat the site with cauterization or a burning medication that serves the same purpose as cauterization. If you fail to cut it off until it becomes large, then examine it: if it is hardened, solid, discolored, and insensitive to touch,
do not treat it with iron, for it is a carcinogenic growth, and I have often seen that this growth has returned as a great misfortune to its owner after cutting it off; but if the growth is soft and sensitive to touch and not discolored, and you see that complete removal by cutting is possible, then treat the patient and cut it without fear or hesitation and treat the site with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
Chapter 26.
On stitching the nose, lip, and ear.وأفضل الخياطة فى الأنف وما جرى مجرى الأنف And the best stitching for the nose and what runs in the line of the nose: If a separation occurs in one of these cartilage structures due to an injury or something similar, know that rarely does treatment succeed with it, except in some people.فإن كان الجرح متّسعا وذو قوّة فى اتّصاله فإنّه لا ينجع فيه العمل إلّا بالقسطرة، وإن كان الجرح ضعيفا ذا تراخ فى الاتّصال والانضمام فانقله إلى موضع آخر يقبل
If the wound is wide and strong in its connection, then it will not be effective unless cauterized; if the wound is weak and relaxed in its connection, then you should transfer it to another location that accepts treatment. It is fitting, therefore, when one of these things occurs, to examine whether the wound is still soft with its blood: you should bring together the lips of the wound with stitching and then treat it until it heals. If the separation has split the lips so that each lip is intact, you should strip away the thick outer skin of each lip until it bleeds.ثمّ تحمل عليه الكيّ أو الدواء المحرّق وتخيطه، وإن لم ينجع فيه فى أول مرّة حتّى عاوده من بعد ذلك.
Then bring the two lips together and stitch them, tightening them and sprinkling over them ground myrrh and frankincense. Place a bandage of balsam or any other healing ointment over the stitches and leave it tight for two or three days then loosen it.
And change the dressing and leave it until the stitches drop out by themselves, then treat it with ointment until it heals. The method of stitching is to bring together the separated edges either with needles as we have described in stitching up an abdomen or with thread as I told you before.
Chapter XXVII
On removing bumps that occur on the lips
Many people may experience small, hard bumps inside their lips which resemble pomegranate seeds or are smaller and larger. You should turn the lip inside out, cut at each bump with a pair of forceps, and pull it out with the hook.
Cut from both sides, then stuff the wound with powdered astringent to stop the bleeding and gargle with vinegar or salt water, treating the area with an astringent until it heals..
Chapter XXVIII
On cutting away excess gum tissue.وإن عرضت فى اللثة عقدة أو لحم زائد فالبس عليها خات
If a bump or excess tissue appears on the gums, you should grab it with forceps or hold it with tweezers and cut it at its base, then leave the area to bleed or ooze blood, after which you should place powdered astringent on the wound.
Or use one of the astringent or drying ointments for this purpose. If this excess tissue returns after treatment, it often does, so cut it out again and brand it with a hot iron - this will prevent its return..وإن كان لحم زائد على الشفة من الأسفل أو أعلى فى الموضع الذى يظهر في
Chapter XXIXOn removing bumps that appear on the sides of the lips.وإن
And if there is excess tissue on the bottom or top lip in the place where it meets the gum, you should grab
There may gather on the surfaces of the teeth, from within and without, and between the gums, rough, unsightly scales which become black, yellow, and green, until this decay extends to the gum and disfigures the teeth thereby.
It is fitting that you should have the patient sit before you, with his head in your lap, and that you strip away the tooth or teeth in which you see these scales and this sand-like substance until nothing remains of it; likewise, you must deal with blackness, greenness, yellowness, and anything else until you have purified them.
If, after the first filing, there still remains something in it, you must repeat the filing on another day, and a second time, and a third, until you have reached your goal; know that a tooth needs files of different shapes and many forms, according to what suits your work.وإن استخرجت شيئا من الصدغ والسّن فحذار حذار أن تعود إلى ما استخرجته بعد ثلاث ليال، فإنّه لابدّ أن يعود ويجتمع ويصير مثلما كان وأكثر ولا يذهب عنه ذلك أبدا إلّا بالكيّ.
If you extract something from the gums and teeth, beware of returning to what has been extracted after three nights; for it is certain that it will return and collect again, and become even worse than before, and nothing will remove it permanently except cauterization.This is because the file used to file a tooth from within is different from the file used to file it from without, and the file used to file between the teeth has another form; these are several forms of files which you must have all prepared:.
Chapter Thirty.في تجفيف الدم والورم والجروح الق
In stopping bleeding, tumors, and wounds.In tooth extraction.وإذا استخرج
If you should treat a tooth for its pain by every possible means and be reluctant to extract it, for there is no alternative if it is extracted, since it is a noble substance; and if there is no alternative,.
it is fitting that, if the patient has made up his mind to have it extracted, you should be sure that the aching tooth is sound.وإذا استخرجته فجردته من وجعه، فقد ينحلّ ويذهب ألمه ويصير كالذى كان قبل استخراجه، ولربما يبقى وجعه بعد And if, after you have extracted it, you have filed away its pain, it may yet dissolve and its pain go away and become like it was before its extraction; but sometimes its pain remains even after the sick tooth has been extracted - for the pain often deceives the sick person and he thinks that it is in the sound tooth, so he extracts it, then the pain remains until the sick tooth is extracted - we have seen this happen many times with cuppers.فإن لم يذهب وجعه حتّى بعد قلعه فاعلم أنّه فى اللثة أو فى عظم الضرس،
If you are certain that the aching tooth is the culprit, then you should make an incision around the tooth with a sharp instrument to loosen the gum on all sides, and then wiggle it with your fingers or with fine forceps, a little at a time, until you dislodge it.
Then take hold of it firmly with the large forceps, with the patient's head bent forward so that it does not move, and then pull the tooth straight out to avoid breaking it. If it does not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it under the tooth on all sides, gently levering it up as you did before, until it comes out.
If the tooth is cracked or worn down, you should fill the hole with a piece of cloth and hold it in place with a thin rod so that it does not crumble when you apply pressure with the forceps. You should also make an incision all around the gum very carefully.
Be careful not to break it, for if you do and leave some of it behind, it will cause the patient even more pain than before. Avoid the practices of ignorant tooth-pullers who rush into pulling a tooth without following the methods we have described.
They often cause great harm to people, and the least of it is that the tooth breaks and all or part of its root remains. Sometimes they dislodge some of the jawbone, as we have seen happen many times. After pulling a tooth, the patient should gargle with a drink or vinegar and salt. If there is bleeding from the site, that is common, so crush some alum and pack it into the wound.
If that does not help, try cow's lard if the alum does not work. The fine forceps used to wiggle the tooth should have long points and a short handle so they do not bend when you grip the tooth with them. This is what the large forceps look like: .
The handles should be thick so that when you grip them they do not yield or bend, and the tips short; they should be made of solid Indian iron or steel, with teeth at the end which interlock to form a firm grip.
The tips may also be made like a file, in which case they will also be strong and firm.
Chapter XXXI.
On the Extraction of the Roots of Teeth, and the Removal of Bones from the Jaws when Fractured.
If, when a tooth is extracted, any of the root remains behind and is broken, you should apply on the spot a piece of cotton soaked in oil for one or two days, until the part becomes loose, and then introduce into it the forceps or hooks. which resemble the beak of a bird called Balirga; and this is the figure of the hooks:
If these hooks do not extract the root, you should incise around the root and strip off all the gum with a scalpel, and then introduce an instrument resembling a small lever, which is like this:
short at the tip, rather thick but not hollow lest it break. If the root is extracted by this instrument, well and good; if not, have recourse to other instruments, such as these, the first of which has a three-pronged tip and is rather thick:
a second delicate tri-pronged figure:
We may also employ this instrument with two prongs, which is thus figured:
With other instruments and iron tools previously mentioned in the extraction of teeth; we may also employ this instrument, resembling a large hook, which is thus figured:
with three curved prongs, rather thick but not hollow lest they break and non-hollow; know that instruments for teeth are many and diverse, likewise other instruments, hardly to be numbered; the experienced practitioner of this art may invent for himself instruments according to what his work and the diseases themselves indicate.
Since some diseases have not been mentioned by the ancients because of their different types, if a bone in the jaw or one of the mouth bones is broken or rotted away, then examine it in its place with one of these tools and hooks that are mentioned in removing roots.
We will use this instrument, which is illustrated below:
It should be slightly thick so that it can hold the bone and prevent it from slipping while removing the bone. Then treat the area with appropriate remedies. If there is a slight amount of rot in the bone, then remove the rot and blackness until it is clean, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Two
On the Extraction of Molars that Overlap.
Molars that grow in an abnormal position are unsightly, especially if this happens in women and slaves. You should examine the mouth to see if the molar has grown behind another tooth.
If it cannot be pulled or wiggled free, then extract it. If it is attached to another tooth, use this instrument, which is illustrated below:
It should be made of Indian iron, sharp-tipped and small like a beak. Use it for several days to cut through the molar, as molars are hard and you don't want to dislodge other teeth. If the molar is in a good position but not yet fully grown, use this file, which is illustrated below:
It should be made entirely of Indian iron, with a thin, intricately carved shaft that resembles the file used to make needles. Use it to gently file down the molar, a little bit at a time over several days, so as not to dislodge the tooth and cause it to fall out. Then smooth it over and strip away any remaining rot using some scrapers.
If a molar has broken and is irritating the tongue when speaking, you should also smooth it over to remove any roughness from the break and prevent irritation or disruption of speech.
Chapter XXXIII.
In binding of the loose molars with silver wire or gold wire.
If a front tooth becomes loose and moves about as a result of a blow or fall, and the patient is unable to chew anything without the tooth falling out, and if treatment with astringents does not work, then:
The trick is to tie it with a gold or silver wire, and gold is preferable because silver will eventually tarnish and rot after a few days, whereas gold will remain unchanged forever; the wire should be of intermediate thickness, thin enough to fit between the teeth.فإنّه يجمع بين الطرفين فيربط الحجرة من فوق ومن تحت الخلع ويستقيم
The method of binding is to take the thread and push its bend between two healthy molars, then weave the two ends of the thread between the loose molars, one or more, until you reach the healthy molar on the other side with your weaving.وإذا احتجت الى شدّ الخيط من تحت الأضراس فلا بأس عليك ان تغرزه تحت اللثة بالملقط ثمّ تشدّه الى موضعه من تحت الضرس المخلّع حتّى يشدّه ويستقيم، وإن استصعب عليك ذلك فاغرز الخيط من فوق اللثة فقط و
If you need to tighten the wire under the molars, it is permissible to insert it under the gums with a pair of tweezers and then tighten it into place under the loose molar so that it is straight and secure; if this proves difficult, then simply insert the wire over the gums and then resume your weaving back to where you started, tightening your grip gently and skillfully until it does not move at all. Your tightening of the wire should be at the base of the molars so that it does not slip; then cut off the excess wire with scissors and bring the two ends together, twist them with a piece of string, and hide them between the healthy molar and the loose molar.
So as not to irritate the tongue, and then leave it tight like that forever; if it comes undone or breaks, tie it with another wire and enjoy it like that forever. This is a picture of the molars and how they are bound, in two healthy molars and two loose molars, as you see:.
One or two teeth that have fallen out may return to their place and lock into position as described, but only a skilled practitioner can achieve this. Alternatively, a piece of cow bone may be carved into the shape of a tooth and placed in the empty socket. It is tightened as mentioned and remains in place, and he enjoys it.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the cutting of the ligament that occurs under the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament, which is found under the tongue, may be natural with which a person is born or it may be accidental from a healed wound.وإن كان طبيعيّا فلا بأس به، وإن كان عرضيّا فإذا قطعته وجدت تحت الجلد عروقا حمراء تشبه الحبل فيقطعه ويزيله بالموسى أو المشرط، وينزف الدم ف
If it is natural, there is no harm in it, but if it is accidental, then when you cut it, you will find under the skin red veins that resemble a rope, so cut it and remove it with a razor or a scalpel, and the blood will flow. The procedure is to open the mouth of the patient and place his head on your lap, then lift his tongue, and cut that neural ligament across until the tongue is released from its grip. If there is some stiffness and complexity, and this is due to a healed wound, insert a pin into it and slit it across to sever the ligament and release the knots.فإن أبى إلّا أن يعود كما كان فافعل به كما فعلت أوّل مرّة، وذلك بأن تفتح فمه ورأسه فى حجرك وتجذبه إلى أعلى وترفعه و
If it refuses to stay open, do as you did the first time by opening his mouth and pulling up his head while tilting it backward and holding it firmly, then cut across the ligament with a sharp instrument, taking care not to cut too deeply into the flesh so as not to sever an artery and cause excessive bleeding. After cutting, have the patient gargle with rose water or a mixture of vinegar and cold water, and then place a piece of linen under his tongue for him to bite on every night.وإن كان ذلك الرباط من عرض جرح فاندمى وترك فيه أثرا فافعل به كما فعلت أوّل مرّة، وإذا لم تجده أعطاه ماء الورد أو الخل والماء البارد وفت
If the ligament is due to a healed wound that has left a scar, do as you did the first time. If bleeding occurs, apply powdered alum to the area. If the blood continues to flow uncontrollably, cauterize the wound with a hot iron instrument suitable for this purpose.وإن غلبك الدم وعجزت عن إيقافه وكان الجرح واسعا فافتحه بموسى حادّ حتى ينزف الدم ثم أكو مكانه، فإن لم يمكنك Then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On the extraction of a frogborn under the tongue.
A swelling may occur under the tongue, resembling a small frog, which prevents the tongue from functioning normally, and it may grow until it fills the mouth. The procedure is to open the patient's mouth facing the sun and examine the swelling.
If you find it dark-hued or black and solid, with no sensation for the patient, do not attempt to treat it, as it is a cancer. If it is Inclining toward white and contains moisture, insert a probe into it, and make an incision with a sharp knife, and free it from all sides.
If you are overwhelmed by bleeding during the procedure, put powdered alum on it to stop the bleeding, then return to your work until you completely remove it. Then the patient should gargle with vinegar and salt.وإن وجدت تحت اللسان حجرا فى صورة الضفدع فأخرجه بصنّارة وأدخل المبضع من فوقه واخرج الحجر وقد يخرج معه لحم كثير أو عظم فإن خرج الحجر وبقي اللحم والعظم فأزله بالمبضع ولا تترك منه شيئا.
If you find a stone under the tongue in the shape of a frog, remove it with forceps and insert a knife from above it and remove the stone. It may come out with a lot of meat or bone; if the
Chapter Thirty-Six.
On the treatment of tonsillar swelling.إذا تورّمت إحدى اللوزتين وألمت فاعتق
When one of the tonsils swells and is painful, it is called a gland, which resembles the glands that appear on the outside of the throat; this can occur within the throat. If you treat it with what was mentioned in the classification and it does not heal, then:
Examine the swelling: if it is dark-hued and solid with little sensation, do not treat it with iron; but if it is red and its base is thick, do not treat it with iron either for fear of bleeding, but leave it until it ripens, and either the puss will drain or it will burst by itself.
If it is white, round, and has a thin origin, then this is what should be cut, and the method of doing so is to look before you operate, if it has completely settled or its hot swelling has diminished somewhat.
Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with his head in your lap, open his mouth and take a servant who holds between his hands an instrument of this shape: .
Make a silver or copper instrument that is as thin as a knife. When you press the tongue with it and see the swelling, bring your sight upon it and then take a probe and pierce through the tonsil and pull it outwards as much as possible without pulling any of the surrounding tissues.
Then cut it with an instrument that looks like this, resembling a pair of scissors except that its tips are curved towards each other and very sharp. It is made from Indian steel or Damascus steel: .
If this instrument is not available, then cut it with a scalpel that looks like this:  .
A scalpel that is sharp on one side and blunt on the other. After cutting through one tonsil, cut through the other in the same way. Then, after the cutting, have the patient gargle with cold water or vinegar and water.وإن لم يبق فى الفم أثر من الورم فحينئذ تضع تحت لسان العليل قطعة حرير طولها شبر وعرضها أصبعان وتجعل عليه رطبة باردة وتربط هذه القطعة على فمه ربطا رفيقا الى أن يشفى الجرح ويمتنع
If there is no trace of swelling left in the mouth, then place under the patient's tongue a piece of silk that is about a foot long and two fingers wide, and put on it a cool compress and tie this piece gently over his mouth until the wound heals and stops bleeding. If bleeding occurs, have him gargle with water in which pomegranate peels or bay leaves, or something similar, have been boiled, until the bleeding stops, then treat it as you would the tonsils until it heals. There may be other swellings in the throat besides the tonsils, which you should cut in the same way as you would the tonsils.
I treated a woman for a tumor that had grown inside her throat, reaching up to the larynx and causing slight hoarseness. It almost blocked the throat, leaving the woman able to breathe through only a narrow passageway and preventing her from eating or drinking water.
She had been close to death, for the tumor had sent out two branches that protruded through her nostrils. I quickly inserted a hook into one of them and pulled it out, extracting a sizable piece.
I then cut it where I could reach it from the nostril, and did the same for what protruded from the other nostril. I opened her mouth, pressed her tongue down, inserted the hook into the tumor itself, and cut away some of it. Only a little blood flowed from it.
The woman's throat was cleared, and she immediately began to drink water and eat food. We continued cutting away at the tumor for a long time, as it kept regrowing, until finally we were done.
I cauterized the tumor inside the throat, which stopped it from growing any further. Then I left that place, and I don't know what happened to her afterward.
Chapter 37.
On cutting out a uvula tumor.
What is called a grape if it descends and swells in the uvula, and is white and elongated, then it is called a pillar; but if it is thick at the bottom and round, then it is called a grape. If it is treated as mentioned in the section on division and the treatment does not work.
And I have seen a hot tumor that has subsided, and it was thin; in such a case, you should cut it off. But if it is a rounded mass with no length to it, and it is red or purple or black, or if it has no sensation, then you should avoid cutting it.
This carries a risk for the patient, so when you see it in the condition described, with its whiteness and length, you should have the patient sit facing the sun and press his tongue down with the instrument described earlier, then insert the hook into the grape.
And attract it downwards and cut it with one of the two tools mentioned in cutting the tonsils, and it should not be cut except for what has increased beyond the natural without increase, because if you cut more from it, you will harm the voice and speech.
After cutting, you should use what we described in cutting the tonsils and treat them until they heal. If the patient is hesitant about cutting them, you should use cunning to cauterize them without fear or caution. The face of cautery in them is that you put the patient's head in your lap.
Then press his tongue with the tool we mentioned, then take the sharp water that I mentioned in the chapter on cautery and knead with it a gypsum not extinguished, and make it neither thick nor thin, and fill it from this tool. This is its image: .
The end of it, which you place in the medication, has a hollow like the hollow of a spatula. You place the tool with the medication on the uvula itself, and the patient lies on his side so that the saliva flows out of his mouth from inside his throat so that nothing goes down to his throat to hurt him.
Then hold your hand with the medication and press it on the uvula for about half an hour until you see it turn black and the sting of the medicine subsides. If you like, take a cotton pad, wrap it around the end of a spatula, moisten the cotton in the medicine.
And insert the spatula with the cotton into a tube from above until the cotton sticks to the uvula. Do this repeatedly until you get what you want from cauterizing the grape, then leave it, it will wilt and fall off after three or four days. If you need to reuse the medication, you can.
After cautery, wipe around the grape with a cotton pad soaked in butter and dry what is around it with the medicine, then gargle with cold water and treat from the outside with paints and from the inside with gargles until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and further from fear.
The uvula may also be treated with something gentler than cauterization or cutting. It is treated with fumigation in the following manner: take the roots of verbena, savoury, thyme, southernwood, chamomile, and wormwood, and similar plants. Collect them all or some of them in a pot and immerse them in vinegar.
And boil the pot over a fire made from the dung of the cow and there should be a hole in the lid, through which you fit the hollow instrument, which is made of silver or brass, in this manner:
And you insert the end which has the pomegranate into the mouth of the patient until the smoke rises to the uvula on the tube, until it becomes swollen with heat. Then repeat this several times until it shrivels up. But beware of using this treatment at the very beginning of the swelling.
For often the swelling will increase, and you should only do this when the heat of the swelling has subsided. But if this instrument is not available to you, take a reed and at its end attach an egg-shell so that the mouth of the patient is not burnt.
For the egg-shell prevents the heat of the smoke from burning the mouth, and this is an excellent treatment which does no harm.
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
ON THE REMOVAL OF THORNS AND ANYTHING ELSE THAT GETS STUCK IN THE THROAT.
It is often the case that a fish bone, thorn or something similar gets stuck in the throat. You should remove whatever is visible by pressing the tongue with an instrument in the sunlight.وإن كان غائبا ولم تظهر منه علامة وجب أن تعالج به البخور على ما ذكرناه فى علاج اللهاة، فإن لم ينجح ذلك فاعمل له حقنة واملأها ماء باردا واجعل فيه ورقا من الخيار وحرّ
If there is no sign of it and it is hidden in the throat, you should then fumigate him as we have described for treating the uvula. But if this does not work, make an enema and fill it with cold water and put cucumber leaves in it, so that you can see what is in the throat. If there is no sign of it and it remains hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before his food digests in his stomach, for perhaps the thing that is stuck will come out with the vomiting or else the patient will swallow a lump of radish or cabbage leaves.فإن خرج فى القئ او البلع لم يبق إلاّ أن ينهضم طعامه فينبغى أن تعالج ذلك بالكيّ
Or he may swallow a piece of dry bread, or take a piece of soft sea sponge and tie it to a string, then swallow it, and when it reaches the location of the thorn, he quickly pulls the string. He does this several times.
Often the thorn or bone will adhere to it and come out. If it does not come out with what we have mentioned, then use a lead instrument in this way: .
It should be slightly thicker than an astringent, and at its tip there is a bend which the patient inserts into his throat gently while tilting his head upward and being careful not to touch his larynx so as not to cause coughing, or the doctor inserts it by hand,.
And it is better for the patient to insert it because he knows the location of the embedded object, and he pushes it down or pulls the instrument up by his hand, all according to what he can do until it comes out,.وإذا كان موضع الناشب عظيما فمركب الصّبغ على الرّصاص، او يطلى بالزيت فيدخل به ويحركه حتّى يتعلق به ثم يسحبه،.
Chapter 39.فإن لم ينزل فليأخذ الطبيب آلة من ر
If it does not go down, then the physician should take an instrument for removing leeches stuck in the throat.
If you have treated the leech with the medicines we mentioned in the division of treatments and it was not effective, then look at the throat of the patient when the sun is down after you depress his tongue with the instrument I described to you.وإن رأيت فى حلق العليل احمرارا وورما فاعلم انّه لم ينزل العرق بعد، فإن أمكنك أن تؤدى الى أن تصل إلى موضعه آلة وتسحبها من أصلها ومد
If you see redness and swelling in the throat of the patient, then know that the puss has not come down yet. If it is possible for you to reach the location of the object with an instrument and pull it out from its root, then if you can see the leech, pull it out with a small hook or a thin, strong rod. If you cannot do this, take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat of the patient near the leech, then insert a hot iron into the tube.
This is done several times, and the patient abstains from water all day. Then he takes a bowl filled with cold water, opens his mouth over it, gargles, and does not swallow a drop; he moves the water around in his mouth from time to time with his hand.
If the blood clot does not come out with what we have described, then vaporize the throat with urine and myrrh using the instrument that was described for the pharyngeal fume. Do this several times, for it will certainly fall out.
The method of the fume is to take a vessel with burning embers, the vessel being covered by a lid with a hole in its center. Then you fix the tip of the instrument in that hole, drop the incense, and the patient puts his mouth over the end of the tube and closes it so that the smoke does not escape until he feels that the smoke has reached his throat.
If it does not fall, then the fume should be repeated several times. The patient should also abstain from water and eat salty and garlic food; by this method it will certainly come out. This is an image of the instrument with which you attract the blood clot in the throat when it is seen.
It is similar to claws, as you see, except that it has this bend which enters the throat. Its two ends are like the mouth of a bird, with a roughness like that of a whetstone when it clasps something and does not let go:
And another instrument with which the tongue is pressed: it is an iron ring, as wide as the mouth, placed over the tongue inside the mouth and kept upright on its side. The mouth remains open against its will, and the patient cannot remove it at all, until you take it off:
The description of the instrument with which the mouth is opened to this exact measurement.
Chapter 40.
In it, he makes the case for incising tumors and splitting them open.
There are many types of tumors, each with its own unique characteristics, as they will be mentioned one by one in this book. They differ in their appearance and incisions from two points of view: the first is the type of tumor itself and what it contains of humors.
The second type is due to the locations in which they occur in the body, because a tumor that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the buttocks, and a tumor that occurs in a muscular location is different from one that occurs in a joint; each has its own specific treatment approach.
There are tumors that should not be incised unless the pus within them has matured and is complete, and there are tumors that should be incised while they are still immature, such as tumors that are close to joints.ومن الأورام ما يختلف طبقا لاختلاف المواضع التى هى فيها ومنها ما يختلف باختلاف أحوالها من حيث الطبائع والهيئات والموادّ التى تحدث منها.
Because if a tumor occurs near a joint and its condition persists until it putrifies the surrounding area, it can corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, leading to the incapacity of that limb, or the tumor may be located near a vital organ.ومن الأورام ما يكون سببا لزمانة العضو ومنها ما يكون سببا للموت ومنها ما يكون من غير ذلك ومنها ما يكون خفيفا فى بدء أمره ثمّ يغلب ويشتدّ شيئا فشيئا حتّى يفسد البدن كله.
Because if you delay its incision until it matures, you will harm that vital organ, or it may be located near the anus; in such a case, it is imperative to incise the tumor while it is still immature so as not to allow putrefaction to spread to the interior of the anus and cause a fistula.
This will result in a condition that may not heal, and you should know the time for incising tumors that have fully matured; this is when the pain of the tumor subsides, the fever decreases, the redness and throbbing diminish, and the head of the tumor becomes depressed, along with other indicators.ومن الأورام ما ينبغى أن يبطّ من أوله حتّى لا يتقدّم الى موضع آخر ويضرّ به مثل الورم الذى يكون فى الحلق وأسفل الصدر.
The incision should be made at the lowest part of the tumor, if possible, so that the flow of pus is directed downward, or in the thinnest and most prominent part of the tumor. If the tumors are near the hands or feet, the incision should run along the length of the body.
Incisions should be made in the locations of muscles, tendons, nerves, and arteries, and generally in all flat areas without any bending. If there is bending, the incision should follow the contour of that area. As for tumors in fleshy areas, it is preferable to avoid making an incision.
Until it is fully ripe, as we have said, because if you make an incision before that, the flow of pus will continue for a long time and it will be more damaging and dirty, and sometimes the lips and interior of the wound may become hardened. Some tumors may be incised across the width of the body when necessary or according to what is needed for the affected member.
In small tumors, a single incision should be used, and in large tumors, a wider incision or multiple incisions should be made according to the size of the tumor. In some tumors, it is appropriate to cut out the skin if it has become like a rag.
It has become as thin as it might die, like what happens in many hydroceles and cysts. Some are cut with a three-angled incision, and some are cut in the shape of a laurel leaf, like an inguinal hernia.
In some, a circular incision or a crescent-shaped incision and similar incisions are used. If it does not have a head like smooth, flat tumors, then a simple incision should be made. If the tumor is large and has collected a lot of pus and you make an incision, you should not immediately remove all the pus at that time.
Instead, remove some of it, then compress the tumor until the next day and remove some more pus. Repeat this process gradually until all of it is removed.
And especially if the patient is weak or a pregnant woman or a small child or an elderly person, the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus at once, so the patient may die and you do not feel it. So beware of this door greatly.
After you have finished treating these tumors, you should wipe the wound and look at it. If the tumor is small or there is only one simple incision, then use a ligature of linen or old cotton. But if the tumor is large, and the incisions are many,
it is necessary to insert a ligature in each incision so that they reach each other. If some of the tumor has been cut from the skin or hollowed out, then you should fill it with old cotton or with the stubble of flax without moisture and tie it until the third day.وإن كان ذلك فى اليد او الرجل ولم يكن جرحا واحدا بل شقوقا كثيرة فينبغى أن تحشوه بقطعة من القطن البالى أو بهدب الكتان وتشده وتحلّه كلّ يوم حتّى يبرأ، وليكن ذلك بعد غسل الورم وإن كان فى الوجه ولم يكن جرحا واحدا بل شقوقا متفرقة فينبغى أن
If it is on the hand or the foot and there are not one but many incisions, then you should fill it with a piece of old cotton or with the stubble of flax and tie it and loosen it every day until it heals; this should be after washing the tumor. If it is in the face and there are not one but several cuts, then you should treat it with ointments as appropriate until it heals. If bleeding occurs while you are working, then use cold water and vinegar after soaking a flaxen cloth in them and hold it to the bleeding spot several times.
If the bleeding persists, then you should use the remedies and treatments that we have described in many places in this book and from the division. If you are in winter time and the tumor site is abundant in nerves, then you should moisten the bandages with hot drink and oil.وإن كنت فى زمن الصيف وكان موضع الورم قريبا من العصب فينبغى أن تبل الرفائد بماء بارد وخلّ وأن تلصقه على الموضع وتشدّه وتربطه بالرباط أو الفتل، فإن أمكنك أن تشدّه بالرصاص أو الحديد فافعل فإن شدّه بهما أقوى، وإن كان الورم فى
And put it in the place, and if you are in the summer and the places are fleshy, you should carry the bandages soaked in water and oil or in a drink and oil, all of that cold, until if it is the third day as we said, you should dissolve the swelling and wipe it.
And you use in its treatment what resembles it until it heals, so this is what you need to know about the treatment of tumors in general. As for the detailed method, I have mentioned each tumor and how to treat it in a summarized way.
Chapter Forty-One.
On incision for tumors that occur on the scalp.
Small tumors occur on the scalp, and they are types of cysts that have capsules like a chicken egg, and their types are many. Some are fatty, and some contain moisture that resembles mud.وأعراضها وجع رأس مع تورّم وأكثر ما يعرض ذلك للنساء ويؤلم عند الضغط عليه، ويكون فوق الورم عروق متفرعة.
And some contain moisture that resembles porridge and the like, and some are calcified and hard. All of these pose no danger when incised and removed, unless you encounter an artery while incising them.وإن رأيت أنّ الورم كبيرا محجورا فافتح عليه من ناحية واحدة، وإن كان ماءً أزبه فيسيل الماء فيخرج الورم، وإن كان متحجراً فأثبته بلصقة.
And if you see that the tumor is large and calcified, open it from one side. If it contains water, a cut will be made on it, causing the water to flow out and removing the tumor. If it is calcified, use a plaster to hold it in place.The procedure for incising them is to probe it first with the instrument whose image will appear after this, called a probe, so that you know what it contains. If it contains moisture, make an incision along its length, a simple incision, as follows:.
Begin the incision from line 'a' to line 'b', and when the moisture is released, peel off the sac that contained that moisture and cut it all off without leaving anything behind, for if something remains, it will often return.وإن كان شحميّا فافتح عليه من ناحية واحدة وأسلخ ما تحته واقطعه، وإن كان متحجراً فأثبته بلصقة.
Then dip cotton wool in the caustic ointment if available, or in salt water if not, and fill the wound with it and leave it till the next day, for it will eat away what remains of the cyst. Then repeat the application of the caustic ointment a second and third time, if necessary.
until you are certain that nothing of the cyst remains, whereupon treat the wound with ointments until it heals. If, however, the tumour contains a fatty substance, split it in the following manner:.
Make an incision lengthwise and insert the forceps in the lips of the wound and strip it from all sides, and try hard to remove the serous membrane which encloses it. If you encounter an artery, do as has been described to you before. Do likewise with a tumour if it is indurated by the incision.
The treatment is the same as has been described, and making an incision on a tumour which is indurated is easier because it contains less blood and moisture. Indeed, some of these tumours in the head in certain people contain absolutely no moisture at all. This is because I made an incision on a tumour,.
in the head of an elderly woman, and found the tumour as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be broken even if someone were to throw it at something, but which could split others of the tumours which occur in heads, like those which affect children's heads.
At the base of the ears, make an incision all the way round, and make its interior surface smooth so that the discharge can flow easily to the bottom, then treat it with what is suitable for it,.
CHAPTER XLII
ON THE INCISION FOR SWOLLEN LYMPH NODES WHICH OFTEN OCCUR IN THE NECK These tumours often occur in the neck, and under the armpits and in the groins, and they may occur anywhere in the body. That which occurs in the neck is usually solitary, but sometimes several develop from one another.
Each of these hernia sacs is contained within a serous membrane specific to it, as in the scrotum and tumors of the head, as we have described. There are many types of hernias: some are calcified, some contain fluids, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
If you find that the hernia is in good condition on palpation, and its appearance is close to the color of the skin, and it moves in all directions without being attached to the spinal cord, or the great vessels or arteries of the neck, nor is it deep-seated, then you should make a simple incision from top to bottom of the body along this line from Line J to Line B.
You should then detach it from all sides and spread the skin flaps with a hook, or two hooks, or several hooks, as needed, as we said in tumors of the head, and remove it little by little, taking care not to cut any blood vessels or nerves, and use a blunt blade.And if you see an adhesion from the hernia sac to any structure, such as a nerve, artery, or tendon, you should carefully release the adhesion with your fingers or a blunt instrument.
So that your hand does not slip and cut something you don't need to cut, or if you cut an artery or vein and it hinders your work, put into the wound some powdered astringent or some of the hemostatic powders that stop bleeding.And if the hernia sac is large, you may need to make multiple incisions around its perimeter to completely release it from all adhesions before removing it.
Then close the incision and leave it until the inflammation subsides, the wound relaxes, and it starts to rot. At that time, return to your work until you finish, then examine with your index finger if there are any other small hernias remaining; cut them out and clean them.If you see any sign of infection or necrosis around the incision site, you should immediately treat the area with a suitable antiseptic to prevent further complications.
If there is a large blood vessel at the base of the hernia sac, you should not cut it; instead, you should tie it with a strong, doubled ligature and leave it until it falls off on its own without causing any harm. Then pack the wound with old cotton that has been soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it further.If the hernia sac is attached to a vital structure, such as a nerve or artery, you should carefully detach it from the structure using your fingers or a blunt instrument, taking care not to cause any damage.
And if you cut off the entire hymen, then you should bring together the lips of the wound and sew it up immediately after knowing that there is no residue at all. If you see that a residue has remained for the hymen's bone,
It is advisable to cut it back to its origin and foundation, and use the sewing and what we have mentioned. If there are pigs that contain moisture, press them simply where their ripening appears, and make the press from below as we have said.
Then use the fowl after the press by the Egyptian ointment and the like to eat what remains of corruption until you see that the wound is cleaned, then treat it with ointments that promote meat until it heals.
Chapter 43.
On splitting the larynx about a swelling that occurs inside the throat..
The early ones mentioned this split in the larynx and I have not seen anyone in our country do it, and this is the sequence of their words. As for those with a throat, they should avoid splitting the larynx as they will not benefit from that..
Because all the veins and lungs are diseased, and as for those with a hot swelling in the mouth or throat or tonsils if there is no cause in the trachea, then it is necessary to use splitting the larynx to escape the damage that occurs from suffocation..وكلّ من سكنت به الرطوبة باللوزتين والحلق فيجب أن يضغط عليهما ويجعل البطّ على الجانب الأيسر ويستعمل المراهم القابضة والمجففة، وأمّا الورم الطريّ الذى يحدث فى الحلق أو اللوزتين او الفم فينبغى أن يجتنب البطّ ويوقّع بالشفر،
And whoever has moisture in the tonsils and throat should be pressed upon them and make the press on the left side and use ointments that are constrictive and drying, and as for the soft swelling that occurs in the throat or tonsils or mouth, then it is necessary to avoid the press and sign with the spoon, so if we want that, we must split the larynx under three circles of the trachea or four small splits transverse between two circles by the amount that the split is in the peritoneum not in the cartilage, and this place agrees with the split.وأيضا ينبغى أن يجتنب الشقّ من أجل القصبة والوريدين
Because it is fleshless and the blood vessels are distant from it, if the operator is timid he should stretch the skin of the larynx with a probe, then split the skin until he reaches the trachea; if he sees any blood vessels he should avoid them.
Then he should split the peritoneum as we have described, and recognize the slit in the trachea by the phlegm that comes out of it with what is punctured and with the cessation of voice; and the wound should be left open for a while. If the time when he fears asphyxiation has passed, he should gather the lips of the wound from the skin.
He should cut it alone, without the cartilage; then remedies that promote flesh growth should be used until it heals. The author of this book says that the interpretation of all this speech that we have related is that when they see the patient's larynx blocked by one of these tumors they have mentioned.
And when the patient is at the point of death and his soul is ready to depart, they go to split the larynx so that the patient can breathe a little through the wound and escape death. They are commanded to leave the wound open until the fever passes, and the fever lasts three days or so.
At that time they are commanded to sew up the wound and treat it until it heals. What I myself witnessed was that a servant took a knife and struck her on the throat, cutting into part of the lung; I was called to treat her, and found her gasping like a slaughtered animal. So I exposed the wound.
I found that the blood that came out of the wound was slight, so I knew for certain that she had not cut an artery or a vein; the breath was coming out of the wound, so I probed the wound and treated it until it healed, and nothing happened to the servant except a hoarseness in her voice, no more.
And she returned to her best condition after a few days, so from here we say that splitting the larynx is not dangerous.
Chapter Forty-fourth.
In incising a tumor that occurs in the pharynx from the outside and is called an elephant of the pharynx.
This tumor, which is called an elephant of the pharynx, is a large tumor of the color of the body and it is more common in women. It has two types.The first type is like a radish in shape and size and its origin is from the tonsils. When it becomes large, it fills up the whole throat so that the patient cannot swallow anything at
As for the natural type, there is no remedy for it, but as for the accidental type, it has two types: one resembles a fat mass and the other resembles a tumor that occurs due to the entanglement of an artery, and incising it is dangerous.When you see this in a patient, do not cut it from above, as I have mentioned before, because there is no remedy for it except by cutting it from below. Therefore, when you see its position in the throat, cut it with a sharp blade so that it may be separated from its origin without bleeding.If you see a tumor that has originated from the tonsils and resembles a radish, cut it off from above until you have removed all of it, then cut the root below. You should not cut into it at all with an iron instrument, except if it is small. If you probe and examine it with a probe and find that it resembles a fat mass and is not attached to any blood vessels, then incise it as you would incise a fat mass.And if it resembles a tumor that has originated from the tonsils, cut it off from above until you have removed all of it, then cut the root below. If you see a tumor that has originated from the tonsils and resembles a radish, cut it off from above until you have removed all of it, then cut the root below.If it is attached to an artery, cut the artery at its origin and tie it with a thread as I have mentioned And remove it along with the sac if it is contained within a sac, otherwise remove all of its contents and then treat the wound as appropriate.
Chapter Forty-fifth.
In incising various types of tumors.السّلعة الشحميّة التى تكون فى الرأس
There are many types of tumors, and I have mentioned all their types in the classification. However, it is important to distinguish between a tumor and an abscess, as this can be confusing. An abscess is usually accompanied by heat, fever, and severe pains until the inflammation subsides.A tumor, on the other hand, does not cause such symptoms and appears as a solid mass. It may be painful if it presses against nerves or other structures. If you see a tumor that is firm to the touch and does not cause any of the symptoms mentioned above, you should know that it is not an abscess but rather a tumor. Then the mold is completed, the fever and acute symptoms subside, and the tumor is no longer associated with heat, fever, or pain. It is enclosed in a peritoneal sac that acts as a specific container for it, and it assumes the color of the body. Its initial appearance is like that of a broad bean, and it becomes like an egg, varying in size.
There are two types of tumors: fatty and moist. The colors of moist tumors are numerous, as mentioned in the classification. Therefore, when treating a tumor, you should first explore it using the instrument called "madis", the image of which will be provided in the chapter after this one.
Estimate the size of the tumor, then remove the probe and observe what comes out in its path. If flowing moisture of any color comes out, make a simple incision on it as mentioned in other tumors. If no moisture comes out after removing the probe, know that it is fatty.وإن وجدت فى السلعة رطوبة فشقّها شقا واسعًا على قدر ما تحتاج اليه حتّى تتخلّص الرطوبة وتبرح مكانها، فإنّها ان لم تخرج ّأوجاعها ومقاساتها فليس ينبغى أن تجعل شقّها على قدر ما ذكرته لأنّك لم تستوعب علاجها كما ينبغى، فان راجعت السلعة وشقّتها ثانية وجدت الرطوبة قد زادت ف
If you find moisture in the tumor, make a wide incision according to your needs until the moisture is released and leaves its place. If the pain and distress do not subside, you should not make an incision as I have mentioned because you have not properly treated it. If you review the tumor and find that the moisture has increased, make a cross-shaped incision in this manner, as I have informed you. Suspend it with pins, and carefully strip the skin from all sides, trying to preserve the sac if possible, so that it comes out intact with the tumor.
If the sac is ruptured during the operation and you cannot remove it intact, this often occurs. Remove it in pieces, large or small, so that none of it remains. If any part of it remains, no matter how small, the tumor will return with greater severity.وإن كان الورم فى الكوع أو الركبة أو فى أحد المفاصل التى تكون على هذه الصورة وكان لا بدّ من إخراج السلعة فإذا شققت عليها شقا واسعًا فافتح المفصل الذى هو فيه واعمل له فتقًا واسعا فإنّه يسهل عليك اخراج السلعة ولا تخرجه من الموضع الذ
But if you are unable to remove it completely, and some of it remains, then enlarge the wound with sharp instruments that have a corroding effect, and then stitch up the wound and place over it something that soothes inflammation, and treat it with other remedies until it heals. If the ulcer is large, cut its edges and treat it with remedies that promote healing.
If you encounter a pulsating or non-pulsating vein and bleeding occurs, quickly treat the affected area with powdered alum, leave it tied for two or three days until the wound becomes putrid and the flow of blood subsides, then return to cutting away the remaining ulcer..
CHAPTER XXIV
ON THE FORMS OF INSTRUMENTS.
There are three types of probes: large, medium and small.The large ones are used for large incisions, the medium for medium-sized incisions, and the small for small incisions.وأمّا المناشير فهيئتها على ثلاثة أشكال منها ما هو مفلطح ومنها ما هو مستدير، والذى يُشَقُّ
Saws come in three forms: some are flat, some are round. The large probe
is used for large incisions.The medium probe is used for medium-sized incisions
and the small probe for small incisions.The large probe is used for large incisions
are made of steel, with square edges, to facilitate quick entry into tumors. These are the forms of probes, also called "bards," and they come in three types: large, medium, and small.A large probe is used for large incisions:
A medium probe is used for medium-sized incisions:A small probe is used for
small incisions.A large probe is used for large incisions, a medium probe for
medium-sized incisions, and a small probe for small incisions. They are used to explore tumors, wounds, sinuses, and cavities to examine their contents, such as bones. They are made round, polished, and smooth, like scrapers, from brass, bronze, copper, iron, or silver. The best ones are made of bronze.A large probe is used for large incisions:
Lead probes are also made, which are suitable for examining sinuses with curved channels. They come in three types: long, medium, and short.A large probe is used for large incisions:
Make probes to the size of each fistula and make their thickness according to the width and tightness of the fistula, a probe in the form of a large lead bullet.
A probe in the form of a medium-sized lead bullet.
A probe in the form of a small lead bullet.
There are many types of probes, some simple with a single hook, which come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. There are also blind probes, which come in three types, and double-hook probes, which come in two types and have a curved design. There are three types of probes with three hooks, and all of these types are useful for their specific purposes. Here is an image of a simple, large probe: Image of a simple, medium-sized probe: Image of a simple, small probe:
Image of a blind, large probe: Image of a blind, medium-sized probe:
Image of a blind, small probe:
Image of a large, double-hook probe: Image of a medium-sized, double-hook probe. Image of a small, double-hook probe.
Image of a large probe with three hooks:
Image of a medium-sized probe with three hooks. Image of a small probe with three hooks.
These are images of knives used for cutting and slicing tumors. They come in three types: large, medium, and small. Here is an image of a large knife:
Image of a medium-sized knife:
Image of a small knife:
The blades of these knives are limited to cutting, while the other ends are not limited. They are designed this way to aid in peeling tumors while avoiding cutting blood vessels or nerves. This also allows the patient to feel less pain and discomfort during the procedure.
These are the pictures of the tricks, and they are of three types: for there are large ones, medium-sized ones, and small ones. The picture of a large trick:
It is made of brass similar to the rod that is used for eyeliner, and on one end it has a shape resembling a wide spoon with two layers, at the tip of which there is a scalpel blade hidden inside, resembling the tongue of a bird, which can be moved in and out as desired, as you see.
Pictures of the scalpels that are hidden between the fingers when cutting tumors, which the patient does not feel. They are of three types: large, medium and small. The picture of a large scalpel:
Pictures of the hematoma that stops bleeding. They are of three types: large, medium and small. The picture of a large hematoma:
They are made of brass or porcelain, rounded to length as you see, and should be thin. These types of hematoma should be with you in large and small sizes to quickly stop bleeding when necessary and when medicine is not available.
However, they should not be used to stop bleeding in every part of the body, but only in fleshy parts such as the muscles of the leg and thigh, arm, breast, abdomen, groin, and similar fleshy organs.
And they can also be made into other small tools that resemble pistachio shells in this way:
It is used to stop bleeding if it occurs in the place of phlebotomy, or when a vein or artery is cut. They can also be made round like this:
Chapter 47.
In the treatment of men's breasts.
The one who resembles the breast of women, some people's breasts may swell up to the age of puberty until they resemble the breasts of women and remain ugly and warm. So whoever hates that should be split on the breast with a crescent-shaped split in this shape.
From line b to line c: Then strip off all the fat, then fill the wound with the healing drug and then bring together the lips of the wound by sewing and treat it until it heals, if the breast sags down and relaxes to its bone as it happens to women.
It should be split on its upper sides by two splits that resemble a crescent shape, each connected to the other at its end so that the larger line surrounds the smaller one in this way: From line b to line c, then peel the skin between the splits and remove the fat and use what we mentioned from sewing and sutures and whatever treatment is needed until it heals.
If you cannot cut what you should cut for the sake of the patient's anxiety or due to blood loss, you should stuff the wound with cotton soaked in eating ointment and leave it until it eats away at the remaining fat, then treat it until it heals,.
Chapter 48.
On the treatment of tumors that appear under the armpit.
These tumors that appear under the armpit are of the type of pigs, hard, contained in a sac, and some contain fluids. Whatever contains fluids should be split with a crescent-shaped split in this shape.ثمّ يسلخ الكيس ويستخرج الرطوبات ويملأ الجرح من الدواء المالح ويشدّ على الثديين جميعا وينبغى أن يستعمل الخيط الحريرى، فإن لم يزل فبقاؤه أفضل لأنّه يقطع عن النموّ ويوقف الرطوبة، فإن عاودت فشقّ عليه كما ذكرنا.
From line b to line c, if all the tumor's fluid has been discharged for a period of time, stuff it with old cotton and leave it for another day, then remove the cotton.فإن عاودت فاحشها كما ذكرنا مرّة بعد مرّة حتّى تستفرغ جميع ما فيها من الرطوبة، فإن لم تفعل وعاودت فمن الخطأ أن تشقّ عليه كلّ مرّة فتنزع ما فيه وتتركه ف
And treat with the appropriate ointment until it heals, and if the tumor is of the type of hogs' nodules, then cut into it as we mentioned in the cutting of hogs, either way. If the wound persists until pus is discharged, then cauterize it as we mentioned earlier.
Chapter 49.
On incising the tumor which occurs from a artery or vein and is called aneurisma.
If an artery is cut and the skin above it heals, often a tumor results from that, and also a swelling and tumor often result from a vein.
And the signs by which you know whether the tumor and swelling are from an artery or a vein: if the tumor is from an artery, it will be rectangular, deep in the body, and if you press on the tumor with your finger, you will feel as if it has a buzzing sound.
And that which is from a vein, the tumor will be round on the surface of the body, and incising these tumors is dangerous, especially those in the armpit, groin, neck, and many other parts of the body, and especially if they are very large, so one should avoid treating them with iron.وأما إذا كان الورم لينا غير متماسك وكان على الشريان أو الوريد فيعالج بالحديد أو بالكىّ.
But if the tumor is soft and not cohesive, and it is on an artery or vein, it should be treated with iron or cautery. And if it is in the limbs or head, it should be avoided. If it is a swelling at the mouth of an artery, make a long incision in the skin, then open the incision with forceps, then strip the artery and free it from adhesions.فإن اتسع الشقّ فى الجلد ومدّت الشرايين الى ما قبلها من العرق فى موضع الورم فدعه على حاله ولا تخيطن الشقّ بل ترجه إلى موضعه، وأمسك عليه بمرفقتين إلى أن يحكم فإن تمادى القيح وال
If the incision in the skin becomes wide, and the arteries expand to where they are before the tumor, then leave it as it is and do not stitch the incision, but press it back into place, and hold it with elbow splints until it heals. If the pus persists and penetrates through the side of the artery, insert a needle under it and pierce the other side, and tie off the artery with a double thread in two places as I have instructed you in the ligation of the arteries in the temples, then probe the space between the ligatures with a trocar until all the blood is drained.
And the tumor dissolves and then you use treatment that produces pus until the ligaments drop, then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the tumor is due to a vein split, you should hold the tumor with your hand as much as possible along with the skin, then insert a needle under the area that you are holding with your hand and pass it through while holding a doubled thread until you bring it out from the other side. Then tie the tumor tightly according to what I have mentioned to you in tying the grapevine from both sides with the ends of the thread. If you fear that the threads will slip, insert another needle with a thread under the whole tumor at the point where the first needle intersected.
And tighten your threads in four places, then split the tumor in its middle until what is inside comes out, cut off the redundant skin and leave what was tied, then place a dressing that you have dipped in wine and oil. Then use treatment by twisting and ointments until it heals..وإن لم تسكن فلتستعمل المراهم التى تخرج الارتخاء من الجروح ويطبق عليها القربوس، فإنّه ينفع مع ذلك ويقل
And if it does not subside, then use ointments that remove laxity
in the tumor that occurs due to nerve twisting..وإن كان الورم رطبًا فلا بدّ أن ينحل بالفتل والعلاج ويبرأ
And if the tumor is moist, it must dissolve by twisting and treatment and heal..As the tumor occurs in an artery or vein, so too does the tumor occur in a nerve when there is a blow, or due to excessive fatigue, or something similar, and this is more common in the wrist and ankle joints.فإن كان الورم من قبل تواءعصب فلا بدّ أن يكون فى موضع انحطاط وذبول ويكون أسفل منه تورّم ويكون موضعه فى مواضع الأعصاب والمعص
If the tumor is due to a nerve twist, it must be in a place of depression and withering, and there will be swelling below it, and its location will be in places where joints move, and it is a hard tumor, and its color is similar to that of the rest of the body, and in most cases it is painless. And if you press it hard, the patient feels a numbness-like sensation.
It is under the skin and moves in every direction, neither forward nor backward; therefore, one should not use iron on it, for it might cause a permanent scar. This also applies to anything found in the joints or on the head or forehead.
Make an incision in the skin with a scalpel. If the tumor is small, hold it with a pair of forceps and cut it from its base. If it is large, hook it with a hook and peel it off, then stitch the wound closed and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 51.
On cutting warts that appear on the abdomen.
Warts may appear on many people's abdomens and other parts of their bodies; they are called fungal warts because they resemble mushrooms. They have a thin base and a thick head, and their lips may become distorted. Some of them are small, while others can grow very large.
I once saw a man with two warts on his abdomen that looked like mushrooms; there was no difference between them except that the base of one was white and thin, and its lips were distorted and oozing fluid all the time. I cut them off and weighed them; one weighed about eighteen ounces and the other about six ounces.
The procedure for removing them is as follows: examine the patient, and if the wart is moist and its color is white and moist and its base is thin, cut it with a broad scalpel, and have hot irons at hand, for often when you cut them, they bleed profusely.
If you are overwhelmed by the blood, cauterize it; if you see that the patient is frightened and distressed by the cutting with iron, take a tight lead thread and tie it tightly around the wart, which is described as such, and leave it for two days, then increase the tightness of the lead.
Each time it affects the wart until it detaches and falls off on its own without any trouble; however, cutting a thick-based wart is somewhat risky, especially when located in the abdomen, but it can be cut in half or in part.
Then cauterize it so that it does not return, then treat it until the wound heals. Beware of exposing a wart-like growth which is dark in color, has little sensation, and looks unpleasant, for this is a cancerous tumor, and we shall mention cancers after this.
Chapter 52
In the treatment of umbilical hernias.
Umbilical hernias can be caused by many factors, either from a rupture of the peritoneum on the abdomen, through which the omentum or intestine may protrude, as is common in other types of hernia, or from blood leaking from a vein or artery, as previously mentioned, or from gas becoming trapped.
If it is caused by a rupture of the peritoneum and the protrusion of the omentum, then the tumor will be soft and similar in color to the rest of the body, without pain, and its position can vary. If it is caused by the protrusion of the intestine, then its appearance will be even more varied as described above. If you press on it with your fingers, it will disappear and then reappear, and sometimes there may be a gurgling sound. It can become much larger after bathing or with great exertion. If it is caused by moisture, then it will be soft.
It will not disappear when you press on it with your hand, and it will neither increase nor decrease in size. If it is caused by blood, then the tumor will darken in color along with these signs. If it is caused by a growth of flesh, then the tumor will be firm and hard, and it will remain the same size.فإن كان من قبل الريح يكون الورم الى البياض وإلى لين، ويختلف باختلاف حال البدن في الكبر والصغر، فإن زاد الرطوبة والين والبياض فهو من قبل الريح، وإن زادت السوداء والصلابة والوجع فهو الدم، وإن خفّت
If it is caused by gas, then the tumor will be white and soft, and its size will vary depending on the condition of the body. If there is an increase in moisture, softness, and whiteness, then it is caused by gas. If there is an increase in darkness, firmness, and pain, then it is caused by blood. If there is a decrease in these signs, then if it is caused by gas, its texture will be soft when touched. The appropriate course of action is to consider that if the umbilical hernia is caused by blood from an artery or vein, then one should refrain from treating it as there is a risk of harm and deception, as I have informed you in the section on tumors caused by arteries and veins.
If the hernia is from the bowels or the fascia, then you should order the patient to hold himself and stand straight. Then draw with ink around the entire umbilicus. Then order the patient to lie on his back in front of you, then cut with a wide blade around the umbilicus at the mark you made with ink. Then extend the center of the tumor upwards with a large probe, and then tie the area of the incision with a strong thread or silk thread tightly.
The knot of the ligature should be a loop, then open the center of the stretched tumor above the ligature and insert your index finger into it. If you find that the ligature has caught the intestines, release the loop and push the intestines back inside the abdomen. If you find fascia, extend it with a probe.
Then cut off the extra, if you encounter an artery or vein, then tie it tightly and return to your work. Take two needles and insert them into the incision that you made around the tumor straightened, then pull the tumor in four places on the needles.
If you wish, remove the needles and leave the area until the flesh that is stretched rots and falls off on its own, or cut it if it softens and rots, then treat it as needed with ointments until it heals. If the umbilical hernia is from a piece of meat growing in it.
Or due to moisture, then you should open the tumor as we said before and expel the blood or moisture that you find in it, then treat it with something that heals the wound.
Chapter 53.
On treating cancer.
We have already mentioned in the division the types of cancer and how to treat it with medications, and warned against treating it with iron so as not to ulcerate. We also mentioned cancer generated in the womb and warned against treating it.
And the ancients have mentioned that whenever cancer is in a place that can be completely removed, such as cancer in the breast or in the thigh and similar members that can be easily extracted in their entirety, especially if it is small and recently emerged. However, if it has progressed and become large, it should not be approached.
I have not been able to heal anyone from it, nor have I seen anyone else before me achieve that. The treatment for it, when it is well-established as mentioned earlier, is to first ease the patient's pain with black myrrh several times, then bleed him if there is a clear fullness in the veins.
Then, you should raise the patient in a position that facilitates the treatment, then insert the snares that are suitable for the cancer and scrape it from all sides with the skin, ensuring that no part of its roots remain. Let the blood flow and do not stop it quickly.وإنّما يكون ذلك اذا كان السرطان متمكنا فى الموضع الذى لا يمكن استئصاله كلّه، فإن كان فى المواضع التى يمكن استئصالها كلّها ولم تستطع استقصاءه منها كلّه فأدخل فيه الصنانير وأوثقها ثمّ اقطعه واكشطه مع الصنانير حتّى تخرج الصنانير مع السرطان وأصله.
However, if the cancer is in a place where it cannot be completely removed, and you cannot fully extract it from places where removal is possible, insert the snares and tie them tightly, then cut and scrape it along with the snares until they come out with the cancer and its roots.Or squeeze the area and release all the thick blood by hand or any suitable instrument. If, during treatment, a large amount of blood gushes from a severed artery or vein, press the vein until the bleeding stops, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
Chapter 54.وذكرت الأوائل أنّه متى كان السر
And the ancients have mentioned that whenever there is hydrocephalus... [missing text]...
We have already described in the chapter on classification the different types of hydrocephalus, how water accumulation occurs, the characteristics of each type, and their treatment with medication. Only the septic type should be treated with iron; the phlegmatic and the sanguine types should not be treated with iron at all.وأمّا الطبلىّ فيعالج بالعلاجات التى ذكرناها فى كتابنا المسمّى بالكليات، واللّحمى بالعلاجات التى وصفناها فيه أيضا والزقّىّ بالحديد خاصّة.
If this type of hydrocele has not responded to your treatment with medication, then examine the patient to see if he has become very weak or has another disease apart from the hydrocele, such as.
If the patient is strong and has no other disease except hydrocele, and is not a child or an old man, then make him stand in front of you. And have an assistant stand behind him and squeeze his abdomen with his hands, pushing the fluid down towards the groin. Then take a scalpel in this shape:,.
Long and narrow, with a pointed tip, but slightly curved so that it does not pass through the intestine and injure it during the operation. Then look to see if the hydrocele is generated from the intestine,.
You should make the incision three fingers' width below the navel, straight down towards the groin, if the hydrocele is generated from the intestine. If it is generated from a disease of the liver, then make the incision three fingers' width to the left of the navel,.
You should also not make the incision on the side the patient wants to lie on, so that fluids do not flow into that weak spot. Then you pierce the skin with your instrument all the way through, and insert the instrument into the incision,.
As if you were peeling it, and the amount you peel is about the size of a fingernail, then pierce the peritoneum until the scalpel reaches an empty space, which is where the fluid is,.
It is a tube-like instrument made of silver, brass, or smooth copper, with a small hole at the bottom and three holes around the sides, two on one side and one on the other,.
And he may place its tip on a pen in the shape of a wild pig bristle in this way: .
At its upper end there is a ring; so when the instrument reaches water, it will flow down from it at once on to the instrument and the water will flow out in a moderate quantity in the space of time, for if you let more than the right amount flow out at once the sick person might die from loss of his animal spirit.
or it might have a fit approaching death, but you should let out of him as much as his strength will permit and what the condition of the patient indicates to you from the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his colour; then take out the instrument and check the flow of water for it will stop at once.
This is because of the skin that blocks the aperture in the peritoneum, which I have described as being lined in this way; then you reinsert the instrument another day if you think the patient can bear it.وإذا كان الثقب فى الصفاق واسعًا، وكان جلد الباطن قريبًا من الثقب فإنّه يسهل سلوك الآلة إلى ما وراء الجلد، ولكن يكون ذلك فى مثل الحال الذى وصفته لك فيه، وإلا
If the aperture in the peritoneum is wide and the skin of the interior is close to the aperture, it will be easy for the instrument to pass behind the skin but this should only be done in the way I have described to you; otherwise
you should treat the patient with profuse sweating in a hot bath or in the sun, and torture him by thirst and treat him with drying remedies until he is cured; you should also cauterize the stomach, liver and spleen after removing the water as I described above,.وإن كان الثقب فى الصفاق ضيّقا وكان الجلد الباطن متباعدًا عن الثقب، فإنّك إن أردت إدخال الآلة إلى ما وراء الجلد فربّما عسر عليك ذلك، وإن تمّ لك فربّما تمزّق الجلد، ولكن هذا
if the aperture in the peritoneum is narrow and the skin of the interior is distant
in treating children who are born with their urinary passages not punctured, or with a narrow aperture in the wrong place
Some boys may be born with an unpierced navel; you should pierce it as soon as they are born.
With a very thin knife, like this:
Then place a thin lead nail in the hole and tie it, and keep it for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, move it aside and then return it. If you don't use the lead, the urine that goes through the opening may not allow it to close.
Those whose opening is narrow should use the lead as we said for several days until it widens. Some are born with the opening in the wrong place, that is, at the end of the navel, and they cannot urinate forward.
Until he raises the urethra with his hand above it, and this happens when the semen cannot reach the uterus directly, which is a very ugly condition. The treatment for this is for the patient to lie on his back.
Then stretch your navel with your left hand tightly and pierce the head of the urethra with a sharp blade or a sharp knife like a pen, as if you were carving something so that it is concave in the middle and the opening is in the center as it should be.
Be careful when you do this not to let the blood flow, because it often happens that it does; meet it with something that stops the blood and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter 56.
On blisters that occur on the foreskin, navel and scrotum, and on darkness and decay, and adhesion of the foreskin to the navel.
This blister often occurs on the urethra, which is a smooth protuberance and can be benign or malignant. The benign one should be attached with a fine hook.وإن كان خبيثا فبطلعه بموسى رقيق حتّى يسهل فيذهب عنه الداء، وإن خرج منه دم فلا بأس به وعلّق عليه بعد ذلك صنّارة لطيفة.
And cut it until you clean it all, then put on cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it afterwards with date palm ointment until it heals. But if the pustule is malignant and has an ugly color, it is advisable to use cauterization after cutting and peeling it.
If the pustule is in a foreskin that has not been circumcised, and some of the pustule is inside and some outside the foreskin, you should first remove the pustule from inside, and when it heals, then treat it from the outside.
This is because when you treat them both at the same time, you cannot be sure that the foreskin will not be punctured. Darkness and corruption can also occur in both female and male genitals, so you should remove all of what has turned black or has begun to corrupt.
Then pour honey on it with pomegranate peel, crushed and strained, and then treat it with the other remedies until it heals. If bleeding occurs, use cauterization with a crescent-shaped iron in the following way:..
Cauterization is beneficial for both cases of bleeding and injury when it has deteriorated. If the crescent iron has completely corroded away in a certain time, you should insert a lead pipe into the urethra so that the patient can urinate, as for the adhesion of the foreskin to the crescent iron..
This adhesion occurs in those whose foreskin is intact and who have not been circumcised, and it can also occur due to injury or swelling. You should separate the foreskin with a flat blade until the ligament is severed and the crescent iron is released from all sides..
If it is difficult to distinguish them by examination, you should cut off a piece of the crescent iron and a piece of the foreskin; that is because the foreskin is thin, so it may be punctured easily due to its thinness. Then, use a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water to separate the foreskin from the crescent iron so that they do not adhere to each other again..فإن لم يمكن ذلك إلاّ بأن تسلخ الكمرة فافعل، ولتكن الكمرة معلقة بالغلفة وقد أنفذت فيها طولا وعرضا حتّى تحصل على ما تأمن معه من تصاقهما.
Then treat with an astringent drink until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Seven.
On cleansing children and treating their ailments.
Circumcision is not a procedure that differs from other surgeries, except that since it is done by our will and is particularly practiced on children, we should outline the best course of action.
The easiest and safest way is as follows: I say that the early scholars did not mention circumcision in their books because it was not practiced in their religions; rather, it is something we have acquired.وإنّما الشريعة المحمّديّة اقتضت ذلك وشرعت فى استحبابه ولم تجعله فرضًا لئلّا يشقّ على أمّته، إذ كان من الممكن أن يجعل فرضًا فيشاقّوه ويؤذوا به نساءهم ويقدّموه على برّ أبويهم إذ
The Muhammadan religion required this and preferred it, but did not make it obligatory so as not to cause hardship on its followers; for it would have been possible to make it compulsory, in which case they would have found it difficult and harmful to their wives and put it before their parents' kindness. Indeed, through experimentation, I have found that the majority of artisans and doctors practice cleaning with a razor, scissors, thread, and nail clippers. I have experimented with all these methods.والطريق التى آخذ بها هى أنّى أستعمل الموسى وأجعل المولود
The method I prefer is to use a razor, and to have the baby placed...I found that the best method of circumcision is with scissors and threading, for when circumcised with a razor, the skin often slips because the foreskin has two layers, so sometimes only the upper layer is cut and the lower layer remains.وإنّى أستعمل الرباط على أن يكون المولود مقطوعًا إلى أن ينفصل القطع من نفسه فلا يحتاج إلى تطهير، إذ كان من يطهره بالموسى يضعه على المقطوع إلى أن يبرأ، فإن
I use threading to ensure that the baby is cut until it heals by itself, without needing further cleaning. When circumcised with a razor, it is placed on the cut until it heals; if this happens again, there will be another cut and renewed pain. Cleaning with a nail file is not safe because sometimes the glans may enter its hole, and cleaning with a nail file sometimes makes the skin slip and spoils your work, or the baby's skin is naturally short...
Many newborns do not need to be cleansed, and I have seen this. As for cleansing with a scalpel and suturing with thread, experience has revealed its superiority to me, because the scalpel is proportionate in its cutting, since the blade above is like the blade below.
When you squeeze your hand with the blades in proportion, you cut to the same measurement and at the same time, so that the thread becomes like a wall for the urethra's skin from all sides, without any error. The procedure should be done first by fooling the boy.
Especially if he is someone who understands a little, that you are only tying the thread in his urethra, and leave it until another day; then cheer him up and make him happy in every way you can, within what his mind can accept. Then stop him between your hands, standing upright.
Do not let the boy sit, and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot so that he does not see it or any of the tools. Then, put your hand into his urethra, inflate the skin, and lift it up until the head of the urethra comes out.
Then clean it of the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the marked spot with a double thread, and then tie another one just below it. Then hold the lower knot tightly with your thumb and forefinger, and cut between the knots. Then quickly lift the skin up and bring out the head of the urethra, then let the blood flow a little, as it is better for the urethra to swell less. Then dry it with a damp cloth, then sprinkle on it burnt, dry pumpkin seed ash, which is the best thing I have tried, or ground almond meal, which is also good.
Then quickly lift the skin up and bring out the head of the urethra, then let the blood flow a little, as it is better for the urethra to swell less. Then dry it with a damp cloth, then sprinkle on it burnt, dry pumpkin seed ash, which is the best thing I have tried, or ground almond meal, which is also good. Then, put a mixture of ground egg yolk cooked in rosewater and soft rose oil on it with a cloth, and leave it on for another day. Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And this is the image of the scissors suitable for cleansing: .
The blades should be straight and sharp, with a riveted fulcrum, and the length of the blades should be equal to the length of the handles. As for the mistakes that occur during cleansing, sometimes all or part of the inner membrane is overturned when cut, so you should stretch it out from your watch with your nail before swelling occurs.
Cut it evenly, and if you can't hold it with your nail, pull it with a hook and cut it. If it has been three days and the area under the head of the penis is still swollen and inflamed, leave it until the heat swelling subsides and then peel it off gently..
And cut it as you see fit, and be careful of the head of the urethra; if you cut something from the head of the urethra, it will not hurt, so treat it with what heals the wound from the remedies that we described in the article on remedies..
And if too much of the membrane is cut and it shrinks back, that's not very harmful either, so treat it as we mentioned until it heals..وإن أبطأ برءه فافعل به فعل التطويب، وإن استقصيت في تطويل الإحليل فجذبه من فوق بحبل أو بخرقة رطبة واعصر عليه رصاصا وربّطه على قدر ما يمكن أن لا يمن
And if its healing is delayed, do as you would with cauterization. And if
you want to prolong the urethra, pull it from above with a string or a damp cloth and squeeze lead around it and tie it to the extent that
urine is retained in the bladder due to obstruction by a stone, coagulated blood, pus, or overgrowth of tissue, and you treat it with the various remedies mentioned in the classification..وإن كان عن علة معتادة فينبغى أن تبحث عن موضع السدّ فتنقره وتسلخ ما تحت جلدة الإحليل من اللحم النابت على حسب ما نذكر إن شاء الله تعالى فى علاج السدّ، فإن زالت العلة التى هى فيه أزالت السدّ، وإن
If the retention is due to a usual cause, you should search for the location of the obstruction and incise it and peel off any overgrowth of tissue under the urethral membrane as we will mention, God willing, in the treatment of obstructions..And if the urine does not flow and you see that its retention is due to a stone that has damaged the bladder neck, you should have the patient kneel, then ride on his back and stretch his abdomen towards his back as much as possible while he holds himself in place.
Then the neck of the bladder is compelled to push the stone backward, and thus urine flows out. If this does not happen as described above, and the patient's condition becomes more serious, it is advisable to use the instrument called a catheter, which has this form:
It is made of silver, and is thin, smooth, hollow, like the quill of a bird in thinness, about nine inches long, with a gentle funnel at its head. The way to attract urine with it is to take a thread, fold it, and tie it firmly at one end with wool or cotton.
Then insert the thread into the bottom of the catheter, and cut off any excess wool so that it fits inside the tube like a button, then grease the catheter with oil or lard or egg white, and let the patient sit on a chair.
And let his bladder and urethra be distended with moist ointments, or oil and lukewarm water; then insert the catheter gently into the urethra until it reaches the root of the urethra, then bend the urethra upward toward the navel, and then push the catheter in.
Then when the urethra is bent, push the catheter in until it reaches near the anus; then tilt the penis downward while the catheter is inside, and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel that it has reached a hollow place.فإن شعر العليل بوصول القاثاطير الى المثانة ووجع مثانته فقد أحرزت فى اخراج الحصاة.
If the patient feels that the catheter has reached his bladder and it hurts, then you have achieved in expelling the stone.This method is used because the conduit through which urine flows is bent; then extend the thread with the wool tightly, for the urine will follow the wool, then pull out the catheter and the urine will flow out; then reinsert the catheter.
You should keep doing this until the bladder is empty and the patient feels relief.وإن وجدت القاثاطير تمضغ من الإحليل فينبغى أن تجعلها فى كوز الماء حتّى يرقّ جلده ويدخل الإحليل، وإن لم
Chapter Fifty-Nine.
How to inject the bladder with a syringe.
And the instruments that are suitable for this are made of silver or ivory, hollowed out with a long tube on a thin membrane. If you want to drip water or medicines into it, this is done using an instrument called a syringe. This is what it looks like: .
It is made of silver or ivory, hollowed out with a long tube on a thin membrane. It is hollowed out except for the tip, which is solid and has three holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see..ي  .
The hollow space in which the piston is located is just large enough for it, without any excess, so that when you pull it, something moist will be pulled in, and when you push it, it will be pushed out to a distance, just as the oil-firing engine used in naval warfare..و   .
If you want to inject moisture into the bladder, insert the tip of the syringe into the moisture and pull the piston up, then the moisture will be pulled into the hollow of the syringe. Then insert its tip into the urethra as described in the catheterization section, then push the moisture with the piston..و    .
That moisture will reach the bladder, and the patient will feel it. This is also an image of a delicate syringe that can be used to inject the bladder:.والعقد التى يشتدّ بها الجذب هى العقدة التى فوق الأنبوب والغرض منه أن يكون مدفعه أعظم من فتحة الإحليل حتّى إذا أدخلته ليقطر إلى المثانة لم يخرج بل يجب أن تجعل غاية طرف
The knots that are tightened the most are the ones above the tube, and their purpose is to make its piston greater in diameter than the opening of the urethra, so that when you insert it to inject into the bladder, it will not come out. Instead, you should make the end of.the syringe
You should slightly warm that moisture over the fire, then insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra and tightly press your hand on the bladder with the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder..و    .هذا هو المحقن الذى يعلّم به النّاس ويحفظون.
If you do not have a bladder, take a piece of rawhide and make it into a circle, piercing it all around its circumference, then pass through those holes a strong thread as it turns, then gather the circle together as one gathers a tablecloth after putting in it whatever moisture, oils, or water one wants.
Then tie it to the instrument and use it as you used the bladder, squeezing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60
On removing a stone.
We have already mentioned in the classification the types of stones, their treatment with medications, and I have mentioned the difference between the stone generated in the kidneys and that generated in the bladder, and the signs of all this, and I have also mentioned the stone which falls under manual action and incisions.
These are stones generated in the bladder, especially those that lodge in the urethra. I will describe these clearly and concisely.
I say that the stones generated in the bladder are more likely to occur in boys. One of its signs is that urine emerges from the bladder like water in its thinness.وإذا كان مع ذلك عوارض شديدة فإنّ البول لا يخرج أو يخرج قطرات يسيرة ويكون الصبيان كثير البكاء ويتبيّن من تبكيتهم أنّ وجع المثانة قد غلب عليهم ولربّما احتاجوا إلى أن يح
The appearance of sand in the urine is also common, and they often manipulate their penis and play with it, and often it protrudes and spreads from many of them. As for boys, it is easier to cure them until they reach the age of fourteen, but it becomes more difficult in the elderly, while adolescents are somewhere in between.وأمّا علاجهم فبالحمية وتسكين الأوجاع والتداوي بالأدوية المسهلة للأبلغمة وأكل التفاح والشعير والزبيب واستعمال الحمامات الحارّة على موضع المثانة فى أوّل الأمر ثمّ الحجامة على الوركين وباطن الفخذين وعلى الكليتين إن أمكن، والحقن بالكحول والماء الساخن وأكل المشم
As for treatment, it should be done through diet, analgesics, laxatives, eating apples, barley and raisins, using hot baths on the bladder area in the early stages, cupping on the hips, the insides of the thighs and kidneys if possible, enemas with alcohol and hot water, eating dates, and using a catheter to remove any stones.وأمّا إذا كان فى الإحليل فينبغى أن يُمرَّ مرقا دافئا الى موضع الحصاة فإنّه ينفذ الى مكانها وينظر كم هو حجمها وعرضها، فإن كانت عظيمة أعطاه مرقا مالحا ليرقق أطرافها ويفرّقها و
Then the sick man is lifted by his feet and shaken and jolted downward to bring the stone down to the neck of the bladder, or he jumps from a high place several times. Then you sit him upright between your hands with his arms under his thighs so that the whole bladder slopes downward. Then you examine him.
And you feel it from the outside, and if you feel the stone in the open space, you should immediately cut it with a scalpel. If it does not at all fall under your touch, you should smear the index finger of the left hand with grease, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger.
If the patient is a fully grown boy, you should insert it into his anus and look for the stone until it falls under your finger; then transfer it little by little to the neck of the bladder, then press on it with your finger and push it out towards the place where you want to cut.
And you order a servant to squeeze the bladder with his hand, and another servant to extend his right hand above the scrotum, and with his other hand he extends the skin under the scrotum towards the location of the incision, then you take the scalpel in the shape of this picture: .
And you cut between the anus and the scrotum, not in the middle but on the left side of the hip joint; and the incision is made on the stone itself, and your finger is in the anus while you push it outward, oblique so that the incision is wide from the outside and narrow inside to the extent that the stone can be removed.
No larger, for the finger in the anus may press the stone on the incision and it will come out with ease. Know that there are stones with corners and edges that are difficult to pass through.
Some are smooth and rounded, so they are easy to pass through; but if it has corners and edges, you should increase the incision a little, and if it does not come out like this, you should try to manipulate it by grasping it with a tight forceps, the end of which is like a file.
Let him seize the stone so that it does not escape, and if a slender instrument with a hooked end can be introduced under it, and if this cannot be done, then widen the incision slightly; and if you are still obstructed by blood, then cut it with a cautery.
If there is more than one stone, then first push the largest into the mouth of the bladder, and then cut it, and then push in the smaller one afterwards; and if there are more than two, then do likewise. And if they are very large, then it is foolish to make a large incision on them, for the patient will be exposed to one of two evils.
Either he will die, or he will have a permanent discharge of urine because the wound will never heal; but try to push it until it comes out, or devise some means of breaking it with forceps so that you can get it out in pieces.
When you have finished your work, dress the wound with honey and gum and linen, and put a wet bandage of oil and wine or rose-water and cold water to soothe the hot swelling; then let the patient lie on his back, and do not loosen the bandages until the third day.
When the bandages are removed, wash the wound with much water and oil, then treat it with castor oil ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals; but if an excess of hot swelling, like a boil or the like, occurs in the wound, for instance, if blood congeals in the bladder and the urine is retarded, this can be recognized by the fact that blood comes away with the urine.
Insert your finger into the wound and push out that blood, for if it remains, it will cause the rottenness and infection of the bladder; then wash the wound with vinegar and water and salt, and treat each kind with its own like treatment until it heals.
Throughout the time of treatment, you should bind the thighs and draw them together to fix the medications which are put on the wound; but if the stone is small and has got into the urethra and lodged there, preventing the urine from passing out, then treat it as I have described before it gets into the incision.
This treatment is often sufficient to avoid incision. I have tried it myself. Take a pair of forceps made of steel, as follows:
The tip of the forceps should be pointed and sharp, attached to a rod. Then take a string and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder. Then gently insert the iron end of the forceps into the urethra until the forceps reaches the same stone.
You manipulate the forceps with your hand in and around the stone, little by little, with the intention of piercing it until it passes through to the other side. Then the urine will flow out at once. You should then squeeze the remaining part of the stone from outside the penis; it will crumble and come out with the urine, and the patient recovers.
If you cannot perform this treatment due to an obstacle, tie a string below the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the penis itself between the strings and pull out the stone.
Then untie the ligature and clean up the clotted blood that has collected in the wound. Tying a string below the stone is necessary to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and tying another above it ensures that when the string is untied after the stone has been removed, the skin will return to its place and cover the wound.
That is why you should lift the skin upwards when tying the upper string, so that it will return to its place and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter 61.
On removing stones from women.
Stones are rarely generated in women, but if a woman does have one, it is difficult to treat for several reasons: first, the woman may be a virgin; second, you may not find a woman who will allow a doctor to examine her.
If she is chaste or from a family of relatives; third, you may not find a woman who is skilled in this craft, especially when it comes to manual work; and fourth, the incision needed to remove the stone from women is further away from the stone than in men, so it requires a deeper incision.أما علاج الحصاة فإذا وجدت امرأة مريضة بحصاة فأوّل ما يجب أن تعالج به ان تتعرف على موضع الحصاة فإن كان فى المثانة فلا بدّ من شقّ البدن والشقّ تحت القصبة وأمّا إن كان فوق المثانة ف
And in that there is a risk, if it is necessary to do so, then you should take on an experienced female doctor, which is rare to find. If you cannot find one, then seek out a chaste and gentle male doctor or have a skilled midwife assist with women's matters, or a woman who has some knowledge in this field.
Have her examine the stone first by looking to see if the woman is a virgin. She should insert her finger into the anus and feel for the stone, then she should extract it while holding it with her finger.
Then she should order the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina and feel for the stone, after placing her left hand over the bladder and squeezing it firmly.
If she feels it, she should guide it out of the bladder opening towards the bottom as far as she can, until she reaches the root of the thigh, then she should make an incision over the middle of the vagina at the root of the thigh, from whichever side she feels the stone is located.
Her finger should remain pressed over the stone, and the incision should be small at first. Then she should insert the probe into the small incision, and if she feels the stone, she should widen the incision to the extent that she knows the stone will come out. Know that there are many types of stones.
They come in various sizes, both small and large, smooth or rough, long or round, and some have branches. Know their types so that you can understand what you are dealing with. If blood overflows, sprinkle ground alumen on the site and hold it for a while until the bleeding stops, then return to your task.
Until the stone is removed. Know that you should prepare with yourself, from the tools mentioned for removing stones in men, to help you in your work. If blood overflows and you know that it is from a pulsating artery, then apply the theriac to the site.
And bind it with bandages tightly and leave it, and do not repeat the operation, and leave the stone in place and do not extract it, for perhaps you will harm the patient. Then treat the wound; when the bleeding subsides after a few days and the site becomes infected, return to your work until the stone is expelled.
Chapter 62.
On incision for hydrocele.
Hydrocele is an accumulation of fluid in the tunica vaginalis, which is the serous membrane that surrounds the testis and is called the scrotum. It may be contained within a membrane specifically prepared by nature on one side of the testis.
It appears as if it were another testis, and this occurs only rarely. This hydrocele is caused by weakness in the ovaries, and fluid accumulates as a result of a blow to the ovaries.
This fluid can take on many colors: it may be yellowish, reddish-brown, black-sludgy or watery white; the latter is the most common. The signs by which it may be recognized are as follows:
Where there is an accumulation of fluid, if it is in the tunica vaginalis, as mentioned, then the swelling will be oval and slightly elongated, like the shape of an egg, and the testis will not be visible because the fluid surrounds it on all sides.
If the fluid is contained in a separate membrane, then the swelling will be roundish at one end of the testis.
For this reason, a person might mistake it for another testis. If the fluid is between the scrotal skin and the tunica vaginalis, then it can be felt by palpation. To determine the color of the fluid, probe the swelling with the square probe whose image has already been given; whatever comes out after probing will indicate its interior nature.
If we come to the treatment with iron, one should order bleeding if possible and you see that his body is full, then he lies on his back on something slightly high and you put under him a lot of rags, then you sit on his left.
And you order a servant to sit on his right, extending his penis to one side of the scrotum and towards the navel side, then you take a wide scalpel and split the scrotum from the middle lengthwise to near the pubic area.
And you make the incision in a straight line parallel to the line that divides the scrotum in half, until it reaches the white peritoneum housing and strip it off and be careful not to tear it, and your stripping of it from the side which adheres to the testicle more than and the peeling is to the extent possible
Then you press the water-filled peritoneum, a wide pressing and all the water comes out, then you separate the lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the peritoneum up and do not touch the scrotum housing, and cut the peritoneum however you can cut it all at once or in pieces.
Especially its thin side, because if you do not cut it completely, you will not be able to return the water that comes out from there. If the testicle came outside of its skin while working on it, when you finish cutting the peritoneum, turn it over and then collect the lips of the scrotum with sewing.
Then treat it like other wounds until it heals, if you hit the testicle has rotted from another disease, you should tie the vessels in the suspension to prevent bleeding, then cut off the testis from the suspension and remove the testis and then treat it as we mentioned.
If the accumulated water is on both sides, then know that it is two hydrocele, then split the other side as you did in the first one, if it suits you to work once, then do it, then wipe away the blood.
You insert into the incisions a sponge that you have soaked in oil or rose water, and on the outside of it another sponge that has been soaked in syrup and oil, and you spread it over the testicles and the abdomen. You then place a folded piece of cloth on top, which is the bandage. And you tie it at the top with the six-sided bandage in this way:
Then two holes are taken and sewn up, stuffed with fluffy wool in this way, and the ends that are tied are made of cotton or damp wool, gathered in a belt around the trousers. One end is taken to the buttocks to the back.
The second one is taken towards the groin, and the remaining two on the thighs below, and the other two on the groins; all the gatherings are made in the belt of the trousers. This scrotum can also be made by cauterization instead of cutting with iron.
This is done by taking a flat, thin iron and splitting the skin of the testis while it is still hot as described until the white peritoneum that contains water is exposed. Then take another iron on this pattern:
It resembles the Greek eye, and then you cover that peritoneum with it while still hot until all moisture is gone. Then stretch the peritoneum with pins and strip off the membrane containing it by cauterization and cut it as much as possible so that you remove all of it and preserve the testis from the fire.
Know that this work is safer and further from bleeding and better than working with the cut, and if you are confronted by swelling, heat, or bleeding while making the cut or during cauterization, then you should treat whatever confronts you by the treatment that suits it, as previously mentioned.
If the patient is timid and does not have the patience for this work because of its nastiness, then let him use fomentation as I am describing it. And if he is healthy according to the evidence we have presented.
Since hernia is watery, the patient should sit on a high chair, then slit the swelling at the bottom with a broad scalpel and make the incision along the body lengthwise, so that the water can flow out completely. Then place cotton on the site and tie it up.
Let him drain the remaining water, then treat it until the wound heals. If the water does not flow out when you slit it, this is because the white membrane blocks the mouth of the wound and prevents the water from flowing out.
At that time, you should insert a goose feather or the instrument used to extract the water of lovers (as previously pictured) or slightly enlarge the incision.
Know that the water may return and accumulate after six months or so. If it accumulates, slit it in the same way, and the patient must take care of himself.
Chapter 63
On slitting and treating fleshy hernias.
Know that slitting these hernias is dangerous and often leads to death, so we prefer to avoid them. I will describe the procedure and the types of tumors.
I say that many tumors can occur in the bodies of those who are composed of feminine elements, and this happens due to various causes: either from hot fluids flowing into the feminine organs or from a blow. The color of the tumor will match the color of the body, and there will be no water in it.
The tumor will be firm, and sometimes it will be hard with a dark color and no sensation. It could be due to complicated arteries or swollen veins; what is caused by swollen arteries can be identified by the scattered tumor.
If you press it with your fingers, it should not spread at all. As for the type caused by swollen veins, nothing will scatter when pressed with fingers. This type can be cut along with other fleshy parts.
Then you split the skin of the testicle, then you stretch the testis upwards and remove it from the white fascia, and free the spermatic cord from the vessels and tie off the vessels, and cut the spermatic cord after freeing it on all sides of the testis; if the testis has become adherent to those meats.
You should remove the testis and cut it, and if there is adhesion between any of the fascias or between the vessels, you should free all that adhesion and cut it in a round shape.
If the meat growth is in the place of adhesion which is from behind, you should cut it all and remove the testis as we said. When you are finished, irritates the wound with wool dampened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with all the other treatments until it heals.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of hydrocele with a hernia.
A hernia is a twisting swelling resembling a grape bunch, with weakness of the scrotum, making it difficult for the patient to move, exercise or walk. The treatment of this condition is similar to what has already been mentioned.وإن كان الورم متعلّقا بالخصى أو منفردا فلا بأس من أن تعالج هذا المرض وحده، ويجوز عندنا أن تخرج الخصيتين جميعا وتقطع دالية من وسطها لتخرجها من الصفاق ويكون ذلك مع قطع الوريدين العروق الذان يخرجان من وسط الحشى الى
But it is preferable to treat this condition alone, and it is permissible for us to remove both testicles and cut the hernia in its middle to remove it from the fascia, and this should be done by cutting the two veins that come out of the middle of the viscera - but we should mention the procedure as it was done by the early surgeons.I say that the patient should sit on a high chair, then push the spermatic cords down, then hold the skin of the testicle with your fingers along with the vessels that are close to the penis.ثمّ تمدّ البيضة الى فوق وتقطع المعلاق من كلّ جهة من جهات البيضة كما تقدّم، وتسحبها الى أن تستخرجها وتقطع الوريدين الذان يخرجان من وسط الحشى
Then stretch the testis upwards and cut the spermatic cord on all sides as mentioned earlier, and pull it until you remove it, and cut the two veins that come out of the middle of the viscera  - but another assistant should hold it and stretch it tightly, then make an oblique incision with a broad, sharp knife along the vessels until they are exposed, then peel them off on each side as I mentioned to you in peeling the arteries in the ears, then insert a needle with a double thread into it.وإذا أمكنك أن تفعل ذلك فافعل، وإذا لم يمكنك فاعمد الى الموضع الذى أشرنا إليه من قبل فاغرزه فيها حتى يعقد الخيط على الوريدين، وإن كان الوريدان قد التمشتا وامتدّا الى داخل الخصى فلا بأس أن تعقد الخيط على جلدة الخصى، ثمّ تقطع المعلاق بعد أن
And it is tied at the beginning of the locations to which the scrotum extends, and it is also tied at the end, then it is split vertically along the middle and everything that has accumulated in it of cloudy and spoiled humors is extracted.
Then the wound is treated like other wounds that require a period of time to fall off the vessels that supply one of the testicles, and there is no harm in that. If the scrotum covers all the vessels, then it is advisable to remove one of the testicles along with the vessels so that the ovary does not lack nutrition. from cutting off the vessels, wilts and is not beneficial.
Chapter Fifty-Six.
In the treatment of hydrocele.
The occurrence of this hydrocele is from an opening that occurs in the peritoneum that extends on the abdomen towards the inguinal regions of the abdomen, and the intestines descend from this hernia to one of the testicles.والأدرة المعائيّة هى التى تكون من قبل فتق فى موضع العانة وترسل الأمعاء الى أحد الموضعين، وربّما سكنت الدالية بمنبتها فى الغار، وذلك أكثر ما يعرض للنساء وأهل
This hernia can be caused by either a tear in the peritoneum or its extension, and these two types are caused by many factors such as a blow, a jump, a cry, or lifting a heavy object, and its sign is that if it is caused by an extension of the peritoneum, it occurs gradually over a long period of time.ويكون من شقّ الصفاق اذا حدث فى وقت واحد سريعا، والصواب عند الأطباء فى علاج هذه الأدرة أن يختبر موضعها ومقدار ما فيه من الامتلاء، فان كان امتلاؤه يسيرا وكان الموضع قابلا للقطع فقطعه واخرج ما فيه من الماء ثمّ خيّطه كما تقدّم.
And it does not occur suddenly, and the swelling is level toward the depth because the peritoneum squeezes the intestines, and its sign is that if it is caused by a tear in the peritoneum, it occurs with great pain from the beginning, and the swelling is irregular, appearing just under the skin near.فان كان الورم فى الأربيّة اليمنى كان الألم تحت الحلقة اليمنى وان كان فى اليسرى كان الألم تحت الحلقة اليسرى.
This is caused by the intestine prolapsing and its exit from the peritoneum; the omentum may also prolapse with the intestine, in which case this diarrhea is called intestinal and omental. It may occur with flatus, or feces may flow into the intestine and become obstructed there, causing the death of the patient.
Because it causes severe pain and rumbling, especially when compressed. The treatment of these types of conditions with iron is dangerous, so you should be cautious about using it. The method of preparation is to order the patient to push the intestine back into his abdomen with his hand if it can be reduced.
Then have the patient lie on his back between your hands and raise his legs, then stretch the skin below the groin upwards and cut through the scrotum from top to bottom, then insert pins the size needed to open the incision.
The incision should be large enough for an egg to pass through, then strip the membranes under the scrotum skin until the white, tough peritoneum is exposed on both sides; then insert your index finger next to the testicle.
Between the white peritoneum under the scrotum skin and the second peritoneum, and release the adhesion behind the testicle; then fold the scrotum skin inward with your right hand while stretching the white peritoneum upward with your left hand and lifting the testicle with the peritoneum toward the incision.
Then order the assistant to lift the testicle upward and release the adhesion behind completely; then examine with your finger to ensure that there is no twisted intestine in the white, tough peritoneum. If you find anything, push it back into the abdomen.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, insert it at the bottom of the peritoneum under the scrotum near the incision, then cut the ends of the folded thread so that there are four threads. Then some of them are made to overlap and be sutured together, and the peritoneum which we said was under the tunica testis is tied tightly on both sides; then also the ends of the threads are tied tightly so that nothing from the vessels that supply it can reach it. so that no hot tumor will result, and it also becomes a second ligature outside the first ligature at a distance from it of less than two fingers; after these ligatures, you leave of the peritoneum which is under the tunica testis as much as a finger's width.
so that no hot tumor will result, and it also becomes a second ligature outside the first ligature at a distance from it of less than two fingers; after these ligatures, you leave of the peritoneum which is under the tunica testis as much as a finger's width. and cut off the rest all around in a circle and remove with it the testis, then make an incision at the lower part of the tunica testis as we have described above, so that blood and semen flow out as we have described, then use wool soaked in oil and place it in the wound and apply the ligature which has been described.
The white peritoneum which we mentioned may be cauterized after it has been cut, as a precaution against bleeding; this often occurs. The ligature is left until it falls off by itself, and if it is slow to fall off, it should be loosened with hot water and anything that causes sweating until it falls off.
Then the wound is treated like any other wound until it heals.
CHAPTER LXVI.
On hydrocele, this kind of hydrocele I have not seen anyone daring enough to treat it with iron; the ancients mentioned that it should be treated as we described for hydrocele with a hernia. That is, after making the incision, the vessels below are tied gently.
Then an incision is made in the middle, and the tumor is treated with what opens it up until the vessels fall out; the wound is then treated as we have mentioned until it heals.
CHAPTER LXVII.
On hernia in the groin.
A hernia may appear in the groin, as we said, and nothing of the intestine descends into the scrotum; if anything does descend, it is very little, and always returns to its place.
But if this condition persists for a long time, the opening in the peritoneum increases until the intestine and the mesentery descend into the scrotum; this occurs due to the expansion of the peritoneum that is found in the groin, as we have said. This happens because the peritoneum stretches and becomes relaxed, and the area swells and indents; its treatment is by cauterization, as I have already described.
It can also be treated with a hot iron in this way: have the patient lie on his back before you, and then make a cross-shaped incision about three fingers' width across the swollen hernia. Then, you will expose the peritoneum underneath the skin.
Once the white peritoneum is exposed, take a hot iron and press it against the hernia, pushing it deep into the abdomen. Then stitch the two sides of the peritoneum together where you placed the iron.
Then, remove the iron without piercing the peritoneum, and avoid damaging the testicle or anything else, as I have already instructed you in the treatment of hydrocele. Finally, treat it as you would any other wound.
Once the stitches are removed, clean the wound and apply a plaster until it heals. The peritoneum will contract and the hernia will not increase in size.
Cauterization is preferable in this case because it is safer.
Chapter LXVI.
On the relaxation of the skin of the testicle.
It is not uncommon for the skin of the testicle to relax in some people, while the muscles inside remain firm; this makes for an unattractive appearance, and those who desire a remedy should have the patient lie on his back.
And cut all the skin that has relaxed on the thick skin, then bring together the two lips; and if you wish to stitch first the loose skin with three stitches or four and make sure of the stitching, then cut between the stitches.
Then treat it as you would other wounds until it heals and the stitches drop out.
Chapter LIX.
On castration.
Castration is prohibited in our religion.
For this reason, I should not have mentioned it in my book; however, I have done so for two reasons. The first is that a doctor should know how to treat it if asked about it, and the second is that we often need to castrate some animals for our own benefit.
Castration can be done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting and incising. The method of crushing is as follows: we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles relax, soften, and hang down.
Then you should feel it with your hand until it becomes loose and indistinguishable on palpation. As for castration by cutting, you should grab the animal's scrotum with your left hand and tie the ligatures, then cut each testicle once.
Once the testicles protrude, cut them off after stripping them, leaving nothing on them but the thin membrane that covers the vessels. This type of castration is better than the one done by crushing.وأمّا علاج الذى أخصيت خصاه بالشقّ والقطع فبأن تضع عليه الضماد الرطب مدّة سبعة أيّام فإن سقطت الخيوط قبل ذلك فلا بأس وإن لم تسقط فأعد الخصيتين إلى مكانهما واثن عليهما وأبرمهما كما كانا، واعمل فيهما ما تعمل فى جراحات البر
As for the treatment of a castrated animal by cutting, you should apply a wet bandage for seven days. If the stitches drop out before that, there is no problem; but if they do not drop out, return the testicles to their place, twist and fold them as they were, and do to them what you would do in other surgical wounds,.because crushing may leave some of the scrotum, which would
Chapter Seventy.
In the treatment of hermaphrodites.
A hermaphrodite is of two types: one in which a vulva-like shape appears below the perineum, or on the scrotal skin between the testicles, with hair growing from it; sometimes urine flows from what is located on the scrotal skin.
In women there is only one type: a small penis protrudes above the vulva on the pubic bone, resembling a man's penis, and both appear as female genitalia; the treatment for all three types is as follows:.
For the two types of men and one type of woman, you should cut away the excess flesh so that there is no trace of it left, then treat it as you would any other wound until it heals; but for the second type of man from whom urine flows from the scrotal skin, there is nothing to be done and it will not heal.
Chapter Seventy One.
On cutting away the clitoris and flesh that protrudes from women's genitals..
The clitoris may increase in size beyond the normal, becoming misshapen and unsightly; in some women it may even grow large enough to spread apart like a man' s penis and engage in sexual intercourse..والبظر إذا كان على الحدّ الطبيعىّ فلا بأس به وقد يحتاج الى القطع إذا زاد على الأمر الطبيعىّ، وأمّا اللحم الناتى من الفرج فمن الأفضل فيه أن يقطع منه ما زاد على القدر
If the clitoris is within the normal range, there is no problem with it, but if it exceeds the natural limit, it should be cut; as for the flesh that protrudes from the vagina, it is preferable to cut away what exceeds the normal size..You should grasp the excess clitoris with your hand or a probe and cut it off, without cutting too deeply into the root to avoid excessive bleeding.وإن كان البظر عظيماً جداً أو لحم الفرج كثيرا
If the clitoris is very large or the flesh of the vagina is excessive, then treat it with standard wound treatment until it heals; as for the protruding flesh, it is flesh that grows in the mouth of the womb, filling it up..وإن كان لحم فم الرحم كثيراً وكان يمنع الجماع أو كان يعرضه الى نزف الدم فهناك ينبغى أن يقطع ما زاد على الحدّ الطبيعىّ.
And perhaps it came out on the outside like a tail. And therefore some of the ancients call this disease the "tail disease." So you should cut it as you would cut the clitoris, evenly and treat it until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Two.
On the treatment of imperforate anus.
Imperforate anus is when a woman's vagina is not pierced, or the opening is small, and it can be either congenital or acquired. The acquired type is caused by a growth of excess tissue.
Or a thin or dense peritoneum, located either in the depth of the uterus, its sides, top, or bottom, which prevents intercourse, conception, and childbirth; and the identification of this is done by examination from the midwife.
If the blockage is visible and close by, then it can be probed with fingers or a rod; if the blockage is from thin peritoneum and is close to the labia, then you should quickly pierce it; this is done by placing something like a dressing on the labia, and then placing both thumbs of your hands on top.
The woman should be on her back with her legs spread apart, and the labia should be pulled apart with force so that the thin peritoneum is pierced and the blockage is opened; then take some wool, soak it in oil, and place it over the area; the woman can then have intercourse every day so that the wound does not heal over again.
If the peritoneum is thick and dense, then it should be cut with a wide scalpel, like an Aspen leaf; if the blockage is from excess tissue, then fasten it down with sutures, and have on hand remedies that stop bleeding without burning, such as cacia, chiang, and frankincense, all ground up and mixed with egg white.
Then a wide lead tube should be used so that the wound does not heal over quickly; it should be worn for several days, and a wick made from dry flax should be used; then treat with other remedies for healing until it is cured; there may also be other growths of tissue in the uterus, which should be cut in this way.
A cancerous tumor in the uterus is not touched with iron at all, unless it is a malignant tumor.
Chapter Seventy-Three.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, warts, and red sores that appear in the genitals of women.
As for hemorrhoids, they are a swelling of the mouths of veins so that much blood flows from them continuously. When hemorrhoids are advanced, they become warts. Their types, signs and symptoms have been mentioned in the classification, and we will mention them here.
Of those that respond to treatment and those that do not, I say that hemorrhoids and warts, if they are deep in the uterus and do not reach the sense of touch, there is no treatment for them with iron. But if they are at the opening of the uterus and can be touched by the senses, then they can be treated.
So the woman should enter a cool house, then extend the warts with tweezers or a rough cloth and cut them off from their roots, then sprinkle some of the burning powder on them when the blood flows from one of the cutting points, without scorching.وإذا كانت الثآليل فى الفرج أو فى حاشيته فنصفى أصولها بقسط من النار ونقطها بزيت النيروز، فان لم تذهب الثآليل بعد ذلك فعليها بالحديد حتى تزول، وأمّا البثور الحمراء الفارغة من القيح والأوساخ التى
If the warts are in or around the genitals, we cut off their roots with a cautery and drop oil of neroli on them. If the warts do not go away after that, then she should be treated with iron until they disappear. As for the red sores empty of pus and dirt, like cocoon, shian, gum, and the like, then lift her legs against the wall for an hour, then lower them into cold water. If the bleeding continues, sit her in a mixture of sumac, pomegranate peel, and tannin, and so on. Then take barley flour and knead it with honey and vinegar.
And bandage it on her back, for if the bleeding stops, it is necessary to apply cold compresses and a breastband without any condition, then take a piece of wool and immerse it in tarithith juice or larch bud juice, or alder branch juice with tannin and apply it to the area.
If the tumor is stationary, treat the site with ointment until it heals. As for the red pustule, it resembles the rough-looking heads of warts; you should cut what has emerged according to what I have mentioned in the case of warts, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 74
On the treatment of an abscess that occurs in the uterus.
There are many types of tumors that can occur in the uterus, such as cancer, hard tumors, ulcers, abscesses, cannibalistic tumors, fistulas, hemorrhoids, fissures, warts, and hot tumors. I have mentioned all these diseases, their types, and their signs in the classification.
So we should mention in this article the hot tumor that occurs in the uterus, if it is one of the tumors that persist for a while, how its abscess should be treated with iron. You should look into it; if the pain of the tumor is acute at the beginning, with pulsation, inflammation, and fever
If you feel any heat when you touch it, do not rush to treat it; instead, treat it with something that promotes maturation until these symptoms subside. Then, the woman should sit on a chair with two seats and lean back.
She should bring her legs towards the lower abdomen, with her thighs spread apart, and her arms under her knees, bound by a suitable band.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side and use the instrument to dilate the uterus, the image of which will be given later. When using this instrument, you should estimate the depth of the uterus with a speculum so that the part inserted into the uterus is not deeper than the uterus itself.
If the instrument is deeper than the uterus, you should place a pad on the cervix to prevent the entire instrument from entering the uterus. The thread that is inserted into the instrument should be at the upper side.
You hold the instrument while the assistant turns the screw until the cervix is dilated. When the abscess appears and can be touched with the hand, and feels soft and delicate, it should be split at its head with a broad scalpel, once the entire time has elapsed.
A soft wick soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringent should be placed in the wound, and the wick should extend out of the slit in the cervix. A pure woolen ball soaked in boiling water should also be placed outside on the uterus and the pubic area.
Then, after two days, it should be treated with the ointment suitable for this purpose until it heals.
And the uterus and wound may be washed by injecting water and honey, then with water in which aniseed or long pepper has been boiled. Then return to the ointment. If the abscess is deep inside the uterus,
You should refrain from treating it with iron; instead, it should be treated as mentioned in the previous section.
Chapter 75.
On teaching midwives how to treat live fetuses if they are delivered in an abnormal position.
The midwife should first recognize the signs of normal delivery: When you see the woman straining downward and longing to breathe air, and when her vaginal discharge is lightened.واذا رأيتها تتعافى من التعب وتتحرّك الى جانبى الفراش وتتقلّب على جنبيها فاعلم أنّ الولادة قد قربت وانقلاب بطنها الى أسفل علامة على ذلك، ويكون انقلابه كأنه اناء مجوف معقود من فوق مائل الى أسفل وقد خفّ ما كان فيه من
And if you see her recovering from exhaustion and moving to the sides of the bed, turning onto her side, then you know that delivery is imminent, and the tilting of her abdomen downward is a sign of this. The rapidity with which the fetus exits indicates a normal delivery, and it exits either head first or with the placenta attached to its umbilical cord. When you see these signs, you should press on her abdomen to hasten the fetus's exit.واذا رأيت بطنها قد انقلب الى أسفل وظهرت عظام سرّتها ولم تتحرّك من مكانها فهذا دليل على أنّ الجنين قد مات وانقلب بطنها عليه، واذ
If it falls on his head, the placenta will fall with him and he will be cleansed of those fluids quite well. Any birth that does not occur in this way is unnatural and reprehensible, because the fetus may emerge feet-first, with his hands coming out before his head and feet.
And his hand or foot, or he may emerge head-first with one hand, or folded over, and sometimes upside down, and so on, in all these reprehensible forms. The midwife should be skilled and gentle with all of these things, and beware of errors and mistakes.
I will explain each form and how to manage it, so that you can understand and know it. If the fetus emerges head-first in a normal delivery, and the woman finds it difficult, with labor pains, and you see her strength weakening, then seat her on a chair and order the women to restrain her.
And compress her uterus with a poultice of cooked herbs and with moist oils, then the midwife should insert a small blade between her fingers and cut through the placenta, or she can cut it with her fingernail until the fluid inside flows out, and she should massage the woman's abdomen until the fetus emerges.
If it does not come out, then the woman should be injected with a mixture of honey and oil of rose, and then she should be ordered to strain and sneeze using snuff, while her mouth and nose are held shut. The fetus will emerge at once. If the fetus's hands emerge first, they should be gently pushed back in, little by little.
If they do not enter, then place the woman on a platform and raise her legs up, then shake the platform on the ground while the woman holds on so she does not fall during the shaking. If the hands do not enter and the fetus dies, cut them off and pull out the rest of the fetus.
Or, tie his hands with a cloth and gently pull them up; the fetus will come out feet-first. When the fetus emerges feet-first, you should push his feet up, then turn him slightly until he is straight, then take one of his legs and stretch it out little by little.
If they reach the thighs, have her move about and sneeze with snuff, for it will come out. If it does not come out as described, gradually bring back the fetus little by little until you return it to its natural shape; then it will emerge smoothly. If this fails altogether,
Take the saliva of a bitch, and that of a cow, and castoreum, and oil of mallow, and dissolved gum, and beat them all well in a mortar; then anoint with it the woman's vulva and lower abdomen, then have her sit in warm water until it reaches the uterine tubes.
If you see that her lower abdomen has softened, make for her a douche of myrrh which she can tolerate; if the douche remains in place for an hour, have her sit on the birthing stool, then sneeze and block her mouth and nose, and gently squeeze her lower abdomen; the fetus will come out at once. The fetus emerges on its knees and hands.
If it emerges in this way, be careful about putting in your hands little by little; then have the woman lie on her back with her legs hanging down and pressed together while she is lying on a bed, then gently squeeze her abdomen little by little. Then remove the pillows from under her feet so that they are raised at the bottom; if the fetus does not come out, take both of her legs and move them vigorously, then squeeze above the uterine tubes little by little until the fetus rises upward; then the midwife puts in her hand and straightens out the fetus little by little.
Have the woman move about until the fetus comes out; the fetus emerges sideways, hanging down one of his hands; be careful to put back his hand; if she cannot do this, have the woman stand and walk around; if she cannot walk, let her lie on her side.
Then treat the hand and adjust the fetus to its normal position, have the woman sneeze and order her to push until it comes out.
The fetus comes out on its back, with its hands stretched out and its face towards the mother's back. The midwife should grab the hand of the fetus and then turn it gently and adjust it carefully until it is straight; then apply the ointment and saliva that we described earlier.
Then have her move a little bit, then sit her on the chair and order her to lean to the right side; then have her push and sneeze with the douche, for it will come out. The fetus comes out upright on its side.
If the fetus descends into the mouth of the uterus with this description along with the placenta, split the placenta with your fingernail until it is emptied of moisture; if it clings to the face and neck of the fetus, cut it away from the umbilical cord so that it does not choke and die. Then push the fetus back inside until you adjust it as it should be.
Order the woman to push several times; it will come out easily. The birth of twins, or even more fetuses, is quite common, although it is rare for five fetuses to be born at once, and they do not usually survive.
They are all surrounded by one placenta, and they are separated by a membrane that is attached to the umbilical cord of each; they may be born as easily and naturally as a single fetus, but their birth is rare and unfortunate, as we have described.
If some of them are difficult to deliver and develop complications, as we have mentioned, treat them as we have described. The midwife should be gentle and act with caution and hesitation, using whatever methods she can to ensure the safety of both mother and child.
He speaks of what is imagined in the womb, and they fall; one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more than ten may be imagined in the womb. It has been verified for me that a woman aborted seven, and another, fifteen, all of them being imagined thus.
By the estimation of the Almighty, all this ought to be in the knowledge of a midwife, for perhaps she will encounter something like it one day and treat it as she ought.
Chapter Seventy-six
On Extracting a Dead Fetus
If you have treated the dead fetus with the remedies mentioned in the previous chapter and it has not come out, and you are forced to use manual means, then you should examine the woman. If she is strong and does not display any of the symptoms that would endanger her, then she should lie on a bed on her back.
Her head should be tilted downward and her legs elevated, with an attendant supporting her on both sides or tied to the bed so that her body does not stretch when the fetus is extended.ويسنّد سريرها من تحت بمرفق أو حشية لئلّا يذهب فى الأرض عند مدّة الجنين فينقطع باطنه، فيجب أن يكون المرتفع منه فى وسط البدن ويكون المرفق او الحشية عليه.
Then the opening of her vagina should be lubricated with moist oils mixed with Salva, fenugreek and flax seeds, then the midwife should moisten her hand with these oils and saliva, then gently insert it into the womb, seeking a place to insert the pins into the fetus, in accordance with the appropriate locations,.وإذا وجدت فى الرحم جنينا ميّتا وقد أدركته فلتسكن عنه حتى تستبيان حاله ثمّ إذا وجبت الحاجة الى استخراجة فعليها أن تفعل ذلك على تدريج.
If the midwife finds a dead fetus inside and it is possible to deliver it head first, she should insert the pins into its eyes or forehead or mouth or palate or under its chin or on its Adam's apple or in the areas close to the ribs or below the clavicle.وإن كان متأتّيا على قدميه فلتغرز الصنّارات فى عينيه او فى صدغيته او فى فمه او فى حنكه او فى رقبته او فى المواضع القريبة من الأضلاع.
And if it falls on its feet, it is in the groin and the middle ribs. You should hold the forceps in your right hand and place its bend between the fingers of your left hand, gently insert your hand and pierce a forceps into some of these places that we have mentioned.
Until you reach something empty, then pierce a forceps opposite it, or a third if needed, so that the pull is equal and does not tilt to one side. Then extend it evenly, and the extension should not be straight only, but also moved in every direction.
To facilitate its exit, as is done with a tooth when it is pulled out. In between, the extension should be loosened. If it is blocked on one side, the midwife should grease some fingers with grease and insert them from the side to turn what is blocked. If some of the fetus comes out, the forceps should be transferred to other places.
She should slightly elevate it, doing this until the fetus comes out completely. If a hand comes out before anything else and cannot be pushed back due to its compression, a cloth should be wrapped around it and then pulled until it comes out completely, then cut it off.وإن كان ميتاً ولم يمكن دفعه الى داخل فليقطع منه ما يمكن قطعه وليس له موضع ينزف منه فيبقى فيما بين العانة والأضلاع الوسطى، ويقطع ما سواه وينزع الجلد والعظام حتّى يسهل خروجه.
If it is dead and cannot be pushed back inside, cut off as much of it as possible, for it has no place to bleed from, so it remains between the groin and the middle ribs. Cut off anything else and remove the skin and bones so that it can come out more easily. This should be done either at the wrist joint or at the elbow, and this is how it should be done on the other hand and legs. If the head of the fetus is large and it is compressed while coming out, or if there is a gathering of water in its head, you should insert a scalpel between the fingers.
And split its head with it, and the water will come out, or prick it with the instrument called "al-mudakhkh", the picture of which comes with the pictures of other instruments in the chapter after this one.وإن احتبس فى الظهر أو تحت الأضلاع السفلى، وكان يخرج على جنبه، ينبغى أن تمسك القابلة بكلّ يد صنّارة وتدخلها من الجانبين
If the fetus is large-headed by nature, then you should split the skull or compress it with a chisel as we said before and remove the bones with forceps. If the head comes out and is compressed at the collarbone, it should be split until the moisture in the chest is released.
If the chest is then closed, and if it does not open and cannot be delivered, then you should cut as much as possible. If the lower abdomen is swollen or there is a hernia, you should open it until the moisture flows out.
If the fetus is on its feet, then pulling it and straightening it towards the mouth of the uterus is easy. If it is compressed at the abdomen or chest, you should pull it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand and split the abdomen or chest until what is inside flows out.
If all the members have been removed and the head is retained, then the midwife should insert her left hand, and if the mouth of the uterus is open, she should insert her hand into the cervix, feel for the head with her fingers, and pull it towards the mouth of the uterus. Then she should insert a hook or two hooks and pull it with them.
If the mouth of the uterus has closed due to a hot swelling, then you should not be harsh with it, but at that time, one should use the application of moist, fatty things and poultices, and sit in waters that soften and moisten.
However, if the fetus is on its side and it can be straightened, then you should use what we have mentioned for a live fetus. If this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and removed. You should not leave any part of the placenta inside at all. When you have finished your treatment, use the treatment that we have mentioned for hot tumors that occur in the uterus.
If there is bleeding, then she should immerse herself in astringent waters and use other treatments. I have seen a woman who became pregnant while already pregnant; the first fetus died inside her, and then she became pregnant again.
Then the other fetus also died, and after a long time she developed an abscess in her abdomen, which swollen until it opened and began to discharge pus. She was brought for treatment, and I treated her for a long time, but the wound would not heal, so I applied some strong astringent ointments.
Then a bone came out of the wound, and after a few days another bone came out. I was amazed by this, as the abdomen is not a place for bones; so I assumed that they were bones from the dead fetus. So I probed the wound and removed many bones from the head of the fetus.
I continued to do this until I had removed many bones from her, and the woman was in the best of health; she lived like this for a while, with a small amount of pus still discharging from the wound. This is why I came here today to tell you this unusual story.
Because it contains knowledge and guidance for the doctor who tries to treat with his hands.
Chapter 77.
In this chapter are images of the tools needed to remove a fetus.
Image of a speculum used to dilate the cervix:
This instrument, which is used to align the pages of a book evenly, has two speculums at the ends of the wooden pieces. However, this speculum should be more delicate than the instrument, and it should be made either of ebony or boxwood. The width of each piece of wood should be the thickness of two fingers.
The two pieces of wood are curved like a finger, and their length is about one foot and a half. In the center of the wooden pieces are two other pieces of the same type of wood, tied to them, with a length of half a foot or slightly more, and a width of two fingers or slightly more. These two pieces
are the ones that go into the cervix to dilate it when you turn the speculums. Image of another instrument for this purpose, lighter and more delicate:
These are made of ebony or beechwood in the shape of hooks, except that they have two prongs at their tips, as you see, each about a span long and as wide as two fingers. If you want to open the uterus with them,
sit the woman on a bed with her legs dangling and spread apart, then insert these two prongs tightly into the opening of the uterus while you hold the end of the instrument beneath her between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with hooks, to the extent that you want to open the uterus. So that the midwife can do what she wants, a picture of another spiral mentioned by the early ones:
The image of the cannon that expels the fetus:
The image of the punch that punches the head of the fetus:.
It is similar to scissors, with teeth at the end as you see. It can be made rectangular like hooks, as you see, with teeth like a saw blade, to cut and grind.
Also an image of a cannon:
The image of a fishing rod:
This fishing rod is slightly thicker so as not to break when pulling the fetus. The image of a fishing rod with two prongs:
Image of two wide scalpels for cutting the fetus:
All these tools, the more types you have and the more prepared you are, the faster your work will be and the higher you will be regarded by people for your skill. So do not underestimate any tool, for it may come in handy when you need it.
Chapter LVIII.
On removing the placenta.
If the placenta is retained after childbirth, the midwife should make the woman sneeze using snuff and hold your hand firmly over her mouth and nostrils. If it comes out this way, then take a cup. If not, then take another cup.
And make a hole in the lid and put in it aromatic herbs to dilate the mouth of the uterus, such as fennel, savoury, caraway, camomile, thyme, marsh mallow, and centaury - all or some of these remedies - and soak them in water and place them over the fire. Then put a silver tube through the hole in the lid, and the other end into the mouth of the uterus.
And hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the womb, then sneeze as we said; for the placenta will come out quickly. But if, after this treatment, it does not come out and remains, the midwife must dip her left hand in sheep tallow or honey-cistus balm.
Then she should insert her hand into the vagina and feel for the placenta; if she finds it, she should grip it gently and pull it out slowly. If it is stuck deep in the womb, she should insert her hand as described until she finds the placenta, then pull it out a little at a time with caution.
So that it does not drop the womb when pulled too hard; instead, it should be transferred gently to the sides, right and left, then the amount of pulling increased. When it responds at this point and is released from adhesion, if the mouth of the womb is closed, we have described the treatment with sneezing and the treatment of the pot and herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have described, you must not use force on her by pulling again; instead, you should tie what has come out to the mouth of the womb to the woman's thigh, then inject her with the quartan ointment, for it rots her after a few days.
And it dissolves and comes out; however, if it rot, a bad smell will spread from it to the stomach and head, and this will harm the patient. So, you should use suitable smoke.
For this purpose, some of the early experimenters used smoke from privet and dried fig, in the form of the instrument with which a woman is smoked when she has retention of menses, placenta, etc. as follows:..
It is made of lead, like a funnel, or of copper; the thin end is inserted into the vagina, and the wide end is placed on the fire with incense placed on the embers. You hold it until that incense goes and then you replace it with more..
Chapter Seventy-Nine.
In the treatment of an unperforated anal fistula.
Many children are born with their anus unperforated, the membrane being closed by a thin serous tissue; the midwife should perforate this membrane with her finger, or if that cannot be done, she should use a sharp bistouri, taking care not to touch the muscle.
She should then apply a ball of cotton soaked in wine and oil, and treat it with ointments until it heals; if she fears that the opening will close up, she should insert a lead tube into the fistula for several days, removing it whenever the child needs to pass stool.وإن كان الثقب واسعًا فلتبطه بخرقة مغموسة فى الشراب والزيت وربما احتاج إلى خياطته بالحرير.
If the fistula is large, it should be packed with a cloth soaked in wine and oil; sometimes it may be necessary to stitch it with silk.The fistula may also be caused by the closure of a wound or by swelling; the closed wound should then be cut open and treated as we have described, with packing and stitching.وإن كان الرجل شيخًا فليشرب قليلًا من زيت الارقطيون ويشرب الماء الحارّ وي
If the patient is an elderly man, he should drink a little arctium
oil and hot water;Chapter Eighty.In the treatment of hemorrhoids which occur in the lower part of the rectum.وإن كان شابًا
If the patient is young,And hemorrhoids which occur in the lower part of the rectum are caused by a complex or thickness which occurs near the anus on the outside, or within the cavity, on one side or more.وإن احدث الناصور ثقبًا فى المغبن فلينخرق إلى أن يخرج الداء وربما احتاج إلى مبضع، ويضمد بمنديل مغموس فى الخلّ وي
If the hemorrhoid has created a perforation in the mucous membrane, it should be punctured until the disease is discharged; a bistouri may sometimes be necessary. It should then be dressed with a napkin soaked in vinegar andAnd if this complex becomes chronic, it opens up and discharges a thin white watery fluid or pus; some of these hemorrhoids may be perforated to the mucous membrane and to the intestine, but most are not perforated. The perforated ones can be recognized by what comes out of them when the patient defecates.وإن كانت غير منفوذة فلينظر هل هى ملتصقة بالمقعدة ام لا فإن لم تكن ملتصقة فلا تخاف ان تفتح واذا فتحت فهى سهلة الانغلاق وربما
And perhaps worms will come out of it, and there may be fistulas from it if they are in the space penetrating into the bladder and into the urethra, and there may be penetration into the hip joint and into the coccyx. What is known as a fistula penetrating into the rectum also, but not penetrating.
And if there is no deflection, insert a thin probe of brass or iron into the fistula; if there is a deflection, insert a thin lead probe or a horse hair.
Until you feel the probe or hair in your finger, if you do not feel it at all and nothing comes out of the hole like stool or gas or worms as we said, then know that it is not penetrating, so hurry to treat it.
And if the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra, its sign is that urine comes out of it and it does not heal with remedies; whereas if it is penetrating into the hip joint or into the coccyx, its sign is that the probe reaches there.
If there is no deflection toward the bone and there is pain in that direction, and pus always comes out of it, and no remedy helps and it does not heal with ointment; all these penetrating fistulas have no cure.
And its treatment is a vain effort for those ignorant physicians who operate on them; whereas the non-penetrating and non-chronic ones are hoped for to heal by iron, as I will describe and as I have experienced: that is, you make the patient lie on his back.
And you raise his legs upward and his thighs tilt towards his abdomen, then insert the brass or lead probe if there is a deflection in the fistula until you know where the probe ends; if the patient feels it towards the rectum, you should insert your index finger into the rectum.
If you feel in your finger the probe has passed through by itself, uncovered and without feeling any membrane or flesh between your finger and it, then be sure that it is perforate, so do not tire yourself with it as there will be no cure for it as we have said.
They have said that in some people it heals, and of the treatment which is hoped to be beneficial, is to heat a thin iron on the size of the fistula as previously mentioned, and insert it into the fistula until it reaches near the anus, then take it out twice or thrice.
until you know that all the excess flesh, which is coagulated and resembles a bird's feather tube, has been burnt, then treat it with a twist moistened in suet until the burnt flesh comes out, then treat it with healing ointments, if it heals.And if you see in your dream any fistula in a person or a woman, it means losses and heavy expenses for him.
And if it does not heal without this treatment forever, and if you insert the probe and it did not pass through to the finger which is in the anus, and there was a thick membrane of flesh or membrane between it and the probe, and you see the fistula on the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula.وإن رأيت فى المنام ناصوراً فى شخص أو امرأة، فهو خسائر ونفقات ثقيلة عليه. And you pass the probe through the fistula, and it is in the anus until the probe tip passes through, then you clean the coagulated flesh which resembles a bird's feather tube and do not leave any of it.ثمّ تعالجه بفتل مبلولة فى السمن فإن برئ وإلّا فلا يبرأ أبدا.
Then treat it with moistened twists in suet until it heals, and if blood prevents you from cutting off those flesh, the best thing to do and the quickest benefit is cauterizing it with fire or a sharp drug, because cauterization with fire combines two good states: burning off that excess flesh.والدّاء الحادّ يقطع عن الدم ويغلب على الندبة فيجفّفها ويشفيها، وقد قالوا إنّ هذا الدّاء هو أفضل الأدوية لهذا المرض وأسرعها انتفاعا.
Cut away the clotted blood, dry up the moisture, then treat it with compresses of fat or powdered sulphur in oil until pus forms and the charred flesh comes out through the pus. Then treat the wound with a salve that encourages the growth of tough meat.
These remedies are astringent and drying. If a fistula has reached the depth of the rectum and is remote from the surface of the body, insert your finger in the rectum and feel around with it.
If you feel it with your finger and there is a membrane or layer of flesh between you and it, and it is close to penetration, then the only course of action is one of hope and expectation; either cauterize it as we have said,
or you might slit it to reach its depth so that you can get close enough to insert the compress and treat it, but do not over-extend the slit so as not to cut the muscle surrounding the rectum, causing the patient to involuntarily pass out feces; then treat him as we have mentioned, for he may heal as we have said.
Or you may penetrate that membrane and pierce it, after slitting it close to the rectum as we have said, either with a probe or some other sharp instrument; then carefully remove all the clotted flesh inside the slit as far as you can reach.
Then close the wound all around, along with the slit and the upper opening, so that it heals and the fistula remains open inside the rectum, which is easier on the patient; the fistula may be pierced in this way.
This is when you insert the probe into the fistula and it is located on one side of the rectum, close to the surface of the body, with skin and tissue surrounding the rectum; then take a probe with a perforated tip like a shoemaker's awl in this way:..
And introduce into it a twisted thread of five threads or thereabouts; then introduce the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its depth; if it is perforated at the margin of the seat from within, close to.
And draw out the thread from that opening by introducing your finger into the seat, and bring out the end of the thread; then gather together both ends and fasten them tightly for a day or two; whenever the thread cuts through the flesh, you tighten it tightly until all the flesh between the thread ends is cut off and falls away, then treat the wound until it heals up.
If the opening of the fistula is not perforated, then perforate it as best you can; however, do not do so if it is too deep, lest you cut through the muscle; then treat it as we have mentioned until it heals up.
The figure of the spinal probe with which you split fistulas; the concavity should be very sharp and the other side not sharp so that it does not cut what is not needed, as you see.
Chapter 81.
On the piercing of hemorrhoids from which blood flows, and cutting them off and treating fissures.
There are two types of hemorrhoids: either they are inside the anus, resembling red pimples or like grapes, and they may be small or large, and blood flows from them constantly.وإمّا أن تكون فوق المقعدة وهى التى تسمّى بالعامية شقاق ويكون منها ما يسيل الدم ومنها ما لا يسيل، فهاتان جهتا البواسير، وأمّا النافضات فهى من نوعين إمّا حارّة أو م
And they may be above the anus, which are called in common speech 'fissures'; from them blood flows and from others it does not; thus these are the two types of hemorrhoids. And the pimples are of two types: either hot or cold; there is only one cold pimple, and it is numerous, outside the anus and on its edges; however, these which are outside the anus are usually few in number, and they emit a yellow water or a little blood constantly, and they are the color of the flesh.وأمّا الحارّة فهى التى تكون تحت المقعدة وهى ع
And the treatment for [fistulas] that are inside the rectum is to order the patient to defecate and strain until the rectum protrudes and the warts appear to you, so you quickly grasp them with pins or hold them with your fingernail, then cut them at their base. If the pins do not hold due to their moisture and relaxation,
then trim them with a rough cloth or a piece of a sponge-like substance, or grab them with your fingers and cut them, then after cutting, sprinkle on some sharp particles to act as a cauterization, or stitch them as previously described in the section on cauterization.
Then treat it with other treatments until it heals. If the rectum does not protrude, inject the patient with an enema that has a mild irritant to wash out the rectum and make it protrude quickly when the patient strains. The treatment for warts outside the rectum is straightforward and easy.
This is done by grasping the wart with your fingernail or a pin and cutting it, then treating it as previously described until it heals. For those who dislike cutting with iron, one should instead pierce the wart in this way: take a twisted thread and insert it into an needle.
Then pull the wart up and pierce it with the needle at its base from the other side, and wrap the ends of the thread under the needle which is now transverse, and tighten the wart tightly, then tie the thread and remove the needle. Do this to all the warts except for one, which you should not pierce.
Let the blood flow from it, then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerotium on the rectum and tell the patient to remain still, then leave him until the warts fall off. Once they have fallen off, treat them with ointments and other treatments until they heal.
As for the treatment of fissures, they often occur due to constipation and dry stools. If they persist and no treatment works, one should strip off the top layer of skin with a scalpel or fingernail until it becomes moist and the dry skin is removed.
Then treat it until it heals as it should. If it does not heal, repeat the treatment with a more intense scarification than before until it bleeds profusely and the skin is sloughed off. Then treat it, for it will heal.
Chapter 82.
On the treatment of ingrown and non-ingrown warts, dry warts, and moles.
A wart is a round nodule on the color of the body that resembles the head of a nail and occurs all over the body, especially on the soles of the feet and fingers, and causes pain when walking.
Therefore, one should cut around the wart and grip it with a tweezers or forceps and pull it out from its root, then treat it. If you wish, you can also cauterize it as mentioned in its chapter. As for dry warts, each of them is a small, rough, knobby protuberance that is round on top and raised above the surface of the body.
It often occurs in children's hands, and its treatment is to stretch the wart, cut it off, or pierce it with a silk thread or a hair so that it falls off. If you wish, you can also cauterize it as mentioned before using fire or a sharp remedy.
The ingrown and non-ingrown warts can also be removed using the tool that I mentioned in the treatment of moles. A mole is also a small, dense, thick protuberance on the surface of the body that goes very deep. When it gets cold, one feels in it a sensation like the sting of an ant.
It can be found all over the body, but most often on the hands. Its treatment is to take a tube made from a strong goose or eagle feather and place it over the mole so that the tube surrounds the mole on all sides. Then you turn your hand with the tube until you split what is around the mole.
And you will make it deep in the flesh and uproot the ant from its base, and if you wish, you can do that with a copper or an iron tube in this form:
The upper part of the tube, which is inserted into the skin, should be smooth and twisted to facilitate its manipulation by the fingers. If you wish, you can kill the ant as previously described in the section on treating warts in the chapter on cauterization..
Chapter 82..فى علاج القمل فى الرأس.
On the treatment of lice in the head. On the forms of instruments used for enemas to treat disorders of the rectum, diarrhea and colic..الكتاب الثاني فى علاج الأدواء.
Book 2 on the treatment of diseases. The syringe can be made of silver, porcelain, brass or copper. These instruments can be made small or large depending on their intended use..وقد رأيت فى بلد الروم محقنا يصنع من عود الزان او من الخشب الأحمر طولا ذراعا وعرضه مقدار أصبع ويكون مجوفا من وسطه وقد فتح فيه ثقب مسمار أو أكثر. I have seen in the land of the Romans a syringe made from oak or red wood, one cubit long and as thick as a finger. It is hollow in the middle with an opening the size of a nail or more. The syringes used to treat young children or those with narrow or painful rectums should be very small. Image of a large syringe:.ويجعل له خرطوم طويل يفرغ منه ما دخله من الفضلات ويجعل للخرطوم فوهة ضيّقة جدّ
And it has a long tube through which the waste is eliminated. The upper end of the tube, where the bag is attached, is wide as shown, with a partition where the bag is attached and the lower end, which enters the rectum, is smooth and solid on one side with two holes and on the other side with one hole..وإذا كان للمحقن خرطوم طويل فلتجعل له فوهة تركيبها واسعة لئلاّ يضيق الخرطوم ويتعذر إدخاله.
If the syringe has a long tube, then make its nozzle wide so that the tube does not narrow and become difficult to insert. The size of the hole should be as thick as a needle or thicker slightly. The bag in which you put the medications is made from the bladder of an animal or from lamb's membrane, it is made in the form of a small dish, its diameter being one span..وتجعل له خرطومين طويلين يكون أحدهما لخروج الفضلات والآخر ليدخل فى المقعدة ويكون
He pierces many holes as it circles, and the distance between each hole should be the thickness of a finger. Then a strong thread, folded from ten stitches or so, is passed through these holes, and the bag is tied up like a purse. If the medicine is put in, the tip of the syringe is tightly pressed between the two stones, and then it is injected. This is the image of the circular bag and the holes:
The procedure for using it is to fill the bladder or container with the medicine, which has been heated to a temperature that the patient can tolerate. Be careful not to make it too hot or too cold. Then the patient lies on his back and raises his legs upwards.ويثقب ثقبا كثيرة كما يدور ويكون بعد ما بين كلّ ثقبة غلظ أصبع، ثمّ تدخل فى تلك الثقب خيطا وثيقا من غزل ثنى من عشرة أخياط او نحوها وتجمع به الزقّ كالسفرة.
He pierces many holes as it circles, and the distance between each hole should be the thickness of a finger. Then a strong thread, folded from ten stitches or so, is passed through these holes, and the bag is tied up like a purse. The container is placed under a mat or sheet, and the tip of the syringe is lubricated with oil, egg white, or other lubricant, and then gently inserted into the anus. Then the attendant of the bag squeezes it with both hands until all the contents of the syringe are emptied into the intestine.
Then the syringe is removed and the patient's legs are brought down to the wall. If the medicine urges him to go out, he should hold on as long as he can, and if he sleeps with it all night, it will be more beneficial. If it is injected for diseases of diarrhea and quick exit is desired, the enema should be repeated until he recovers.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful sores in the anus, the syringe should be very smooth and smooth like the syringes used to inject children. This is the image of a smooth syringe tightly stretched:
Chapter 84.فى احتقان المقعدة فى علل الإ
On the Treatment of Wounds.
I have mentioned in the division of treatments for what resembles burns, and I will mention here their treatment by hand and by medication to perfection. I say that wounds differ according to the thing with which the wound is made and according to the place where the wound occurs.
There are many things that cause wounds, such as a stone blow, or a sword cut, or a knife, or a spear thrust, or a stick, or an arrow, and many other things.فأما المواضع التى تقع فيها الجراحات فهى ثلاثة مواضع: الرأس والوجه والجسم، فالجراحات التى تكون بالرأس هى اخطر الجراحات وأصعبها علاجا، ثم جراحات الوجه، وأيسر
As for the places where wounds occur, there are three types: head, face and body. Head wounds are the most serious and difficult to treat, then facial wounds, and the easiestare those that occur on the body, such as a wound on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, liver, and other organs.وأما الجراحات التى تكون باليدين او الرجلين فهى أسهل الجر
As for wounds that occur on the hands or feet, they are the easiest. I will describe the treatment of some simple head wounds so that you can use them as a standard and rule for other wounds. I will begin with simple head wounds, especially since compound wounds will be mentioned at the beginning of the third chapter of this book.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no fracture, you should examine it. If it is from a stone blow or the like and it only cracks the skin and the wound is large and you fear the occurrence of a hot swelling in the patient, then proceed and phlebotomize the scalp vein.وإن لم تفصده خيف عليك الورم الحارّ وعسر النفس وفساد الفكر وزيادة الوجع وتأخير البرء وأنت على الخيار ان شئت فصدت وان شئت لم تفصد. If you do not phlebotomize, you should fear the hot swelling, difficulty in breathing, corruption of the mind, increase in pain and delay in healing. You have the choice to phlebotomize or not, depending on the strength of the patient and the absence of any مانع that prevents phlebotomy, especially if the amount of blood coming out of the wound is small. The phlebotomy should be done from the opposite side of the wounded area.وإن كان الجرح من طعن رمح او سكين وكان كبيرا لم
Let the sick person abstain from rich food, drink, and heavy meals; if he is unable to abstain entirely, let him reduce his food, and not eat flesh or drink wine. If the wound becomes inflamed, apply a poultice of cotton dipped in rose-oil alone, or with the wine that causes contraction.
If you fear inflammation, apply to the wound, if it is fresh and not changed by the air, the ointment that I shall describe to you presently; but if the air has changed its appearance, apply one of the poultices.
Let the pus flow until it is exhausted, then treat it until it heals; if the wound is large, and caused by a sword or the like, and its lips have not come together by means of poultices, bring them together by stitching as I shall describe in the section on abdominal wounds.
If the skin has exposed the bone and is hanging loosely, and its attachment is only a small part, cut it away and then treat the wound with remedies that promote hard tissue growth in place of the skin; let the patient eat nourishing food such as meat and porridge and the like.
If the skin becomes putrid and does not adhere to the bone, cut away all the putrid part and then treat it; if in these wounds an artery or vein bleeds and the blood does not stop with remedies, look for the artery.
If you find it, do not cut it off but tie it; if the remedies we have mentioned are ineffective and the bleeding is urgent, cauterize it until the blood stops; if these wounds are small and superficial, they are easily dealt with, it is sufficient to apply this powder while they are still bleeding.
Prepare the powder before the air changes it; the recipe for the powder is as follows: take one part myrrh, two parts alums, and three parts lime, whether slaked or not; grind them all together and sift them, then pack the wound with the powder and tie it up firmly until it adheres.
It is tied with blood and then tightened from above with bandages, and it is left without being loosened as long as there is no swelling; the treatment will not be removed from it until it is healed. Gypsum can do that on its own if you don't have myrrh and frankincense.
Gypsum can also do this in many large wounds if you master its placement on them and tighten it, as long as the wounds are soft with their blood and not changed by air. But if they have been changed by air, especially in summer, then:
there is no effective use in placing this powder, so treat it with one of the ointments we mentioned, or apply a poultice of barley flour made with water and honey to soften the pus, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
However, if the wound is a fracture of the bone and it is slight, then draw it with a splint. I have mentioned the treatment for head fractures in the section on neck surgery; so, if the wound is on the neck, there is no difference in its treatment from a head wound if it is minor.
However, if it has cut a nerve or an artery in the neck, then, if it is a nerve, there is no way to treat it other than avoiding treatment with anything that causes strong constriction, such as alumen, alum, and the like, because they harm the nerve and cause spasms.
And do not put anything cold on the wound at all, because the nature of the nerve is cold, and its connection is to the brain, which is the most honorable of the organs; so whatever treatment you use should be gentle, such as washed alum, repeated times, moistened with oil or rose water and ceruse.
If you also wash with pure water and other mineral stones in this manner, as well as moist ointments, then, if the wound is large, use sutures or bring its lips together with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
If a wound has a cavity and there is an abscess at the bottom that contains pus, then open it in its lowest part. If a blood vessel is ruptured in the wound and bleeding occurs, then ligate or cauterize it if necessary.
If the wound has cut through some or all of the vocal cords and the windpipe is undamaged, then bring together the edges of the skin by stitching them onto the windpipe without touching the larynx itself. Then smooth it out and return it to its natural shape, after which you should tightly ligate it and leave it for a few days.
Then treat it with ointments that promote healing and dryness until the wound is healed. If the wound has affected the bone, then inspect it. If there are any bone fragments in the wound, remove them all or as many as you can. If you cannot remove them all, leave them and let the wound fester until it heals and it becomes easier to remove the remaining fragments.
If the wound is still soft, then dust it with the powder we have described earlier. If there is a large amount of pus in the wound and it has become a sinus, treat it as mentioned later in the chapter on chest and shoulder surgery.
If it is a stab wound from a spear or a knife and you see that it is cavernous, then examine it. If air escapes from it when the patient breathes, know that it is a deadly wound. If it does not have a cavern and is still soft with blood oozing from it, do not put the powder on it at first or tighten it so as not to cause the blood to pool in its cavern.
This is because it will return to the heart and kill the patient. Instead, put an attractive ointment on the wound and change it twice a day. If you do not have any ointment available, place an old cotton pad over the mouth of the wound so that it absorbs the fluids coming out of the wound. Also, make sure the patient sleeps on his side with the wound facing downward.
And if there is pus in the wound, and it has been three days or more since the injury, and there has been no bad convulsions, nor a rapid pulse, nor shortness of breath, and you see that his other conditions are good, then know that the wound is healthy, so treat it with compression and other treatments until it heals.
If it is difficult to heal and the pus keeps flowing, then know that it has become an abscess, so treat it from its source. If the wound is in the chest or back, treat it as mentioned before with sutures.
If the wound is large or a small one, if it has affected the bone and broken off pieces, then inspect the wound and quickly remove those pieces, if they are healthy; but if not, then leave them be for now.
Let the wound fester, as that will make it easier to remove them; for other wounds that occur in other organs, their treatment is the same as what we have mentioned.
Chapter 85.
On abdominal surgery and the protrusion of intestines and their stitching.
The perforation that occurs in the abdomen may be large or small, and it can also be intermediate; for a large perforation, one or several intestines may protrude out, so to put them back inside and stitch them up is more difficult and challenging.
For a small perforation, it can also be challenging in another way; it is necessary to return the intestines to their place as soon as possible, for if they are left out, they will swell and thicken, making it difficult to put them back inside; this is why the intermediate perforation is the best type of abdominal wound, because it does not make returning the intestines as difficult as the other two types.وإذا خرقت الخرق المتوسّط فى البطن فإنّه يجب أن يكون معتدلا فى الجرم الذى يخرقه ولا يفرط فى كبره حتّى لا يعسر إدخال المعاء من جهته ويجب إذا كان الخرق من جهة اليمين أن يبدأ بردّ المعاء من جهة الشمال، وإذا كان الخرق من جهة الشمال فيبدأ بردّ المعاء من جهة ال
Know that the suturing of the abdomen has four types of sutures: the two general sutures are used for suturing the abdomen and for suturing other wounds in the body; the other two special sutures are used for all wounds, but they are especially suited for suturing the abdomen.
I will describe them to you one by one, explaining and clarifying: If the wound is small and something of the intestine protrudes and it is difficult to return it, this is due to one of two reasons: either because of the small size of the incision as we have said, or because the intestine has been affected by a swelling caused by cold air.
If it is so, you should warm it by dipping a sponge or a wet cloth in lukewarm water alone or in water in which savory, thyme and jasmine flowers have been boiled, and use it to anoint the intestine until the swelling subsides.وإن كانت النفخة من برد الهواء فينبغى أن تغمس الإسفنجة او الخرقة فى الماء الحار وحده أو مطبوخا فيه سنا ناعمة وحنظل وتنطل به موضع النفخ وتدّلكه برفق حتّى ينحلّ النفخ.
If the swelling is caused by cold air, you should dip the sponge or cloth in hot water alone or in water with astringent herbs such as dogwood or hellebore, and gently anoint the swollen area until the swelling subsides. This can also be achieved by using a drink with astringent properties, which is preferable to water alone for dissolving the swelling. Once you see that the swelling has dissolved, moisten the intestine with water in which marjoram or chamomile has been boiled, as this will make it easier for the intestine to enter more smoothly.وإذا صار المعاء طائعا ودخل فى الجرح فأحكم خياطته ثمّ ض
If the intestine becomes pliable and enters the wound, then stitch it firmly. If, after this treatment, the intestine still cannot return to its place, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used for nasal polyp removal (see Figure). The first treatment, if possible, is preferable to making an incision, and one should only resort to incision when all other options have failed. This is the image of the instrument: .
One side of the instrument is curved and the other straight, and the thin end should not be as thin as a scalpel but slightly blunt. It should resemble a small spear, as you can see in the figure. If the wound has widened and the intestine has entered, it should be returned to its natural shape.
And its specific location, if you can, is better. And if the hole is wide and at the bottom of the abdomen, the patient should lie on his back and make his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper abdomen, he makes his head and chest higher than the bottom.
And likewise, if the hole is on one side of the abdomen, always make the side with the surgery higher than the other side. And so should be used in great surgeries and intermediate surgeries.
And as for minor surgeries, put it according to what you can manage. Then bring between your hands a gentle servant who holds the hole with his hands and gathers his lips, then reveals something after something for the person in charge of sewing.
This is the general description of a single stitch, which is that you take a needle or several needles according to the width of the wound, then leave at one end of the hole the thickness of a thumb, and insert a needle in one of the edges of the skin without a thread. Along with the peritoneum under the skin from the inside until it penetrates from that side, having gathered the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum and become four slits, then tighten a doubled thread around the needle several times on both sides until the edges of the wound come together firmly.
Then leave the thickness of a finger as well, and insert another needle, then interweave it with the thread as you did with the first needle, so continue to do this with whatever needles you need until you have finished sewing up the entire wound, and let the needles be medium between thickness and thinness.
Because very thin needles quickly cut the meat and thick ones are difficult to enter the skin, so they should be of medium thickness, and it is not advisable to insert the needle into the edge of the skin near yes.
So that the flesh is not cut away rapidly and the wound opens before it has healed, nor should you pull too hard with the stitches so that the wound does not close, then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient when he sleeps, and make him a pad from linen cloth on each side to hold the ends of the needles.
And leave it until you know that the wound has healed, and this type of stitching with needles is thus more appropriate for small wounds because they may only require one or two or a few needles to sew them up.
As for the second stitching method used by the common people, it is to gather together the four edges - that is, the two skin edges and the two peritoneum edges - in one go with a needle carrying a suitable twisted thread of moderate thickness and stiffness. Then, once you have passed the needle through all four edges, you bring the needle back out from the side from which you started.
So that the thread is laced across the top of the wound, so that the stitching is like the stitching on bags used to carry goods, and there should be a space between each stitch of the thickness of a small finger. This type of stitching is known to everyone.
With this stitching method, I once treated a man who had received a stab wound to his abdomen, and the wound was more than ten centimeters in width. The intestines had protruded by about two centimeters from the middle intestine, and the wound was in the center of the abdomen.
I returned the intestines to their proper place after they had protruded from the wound for 24 hours, and the wound healed in about 15 days. I treated him until he recovered and lived many more years afterward, able to perform all his usual activities, even though the doctors had judged that he would not survive.
And it is remarkable that I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where no medicines were available, so I simply applied old cotton to the wound twice a day and ensured that it was washed with honey water until it healed.
And as for one of the two types of specialized stitching, I will mention it according to Galen's words: that you begin the stitch from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside; when the needle has penetrated the skin and the muscle going straight along the entire length of the abdomen.
Leaving the edge of the peritoneum on the side where you inserted the needle, and then insert the needle into its other edge from the inside out at the other edge of the navel; when you have inserted it, then insert it again in this same edge from the navel from outside to inside.
And leave the edge of the peritoneum on this side, and insert the needle into its other edge from the inside out, and as you insert it, insert it into the peritoneum to the edge of the navel on its side until it is all inserted,.
then begin again from this same side and stitch it with the edge that is of the peritoneum in the other side, and bring out the needle from the skin next to it, then return it to that skin and stitch the edge of the peritoneum that is in the other side with this edge of the navel.
and bring it out from the skin on its side, and do that again and again until you stitch the entire incision in that manner; and the total description of this stitch is that it is stitched like the fur stitch of furriers.وأمّا الأخرى من الخياطة الخاصّة فإنّى أذكرها أيضا على نصّ كلام جالينوس وهو أن تبدأ بالخياطة من الجلد وتدخل الإبرة من خارج الى داخل فإذا أنفذت الإبرة فى الجلد وفى العضلة الذاهبة على الاستقامة فى طول البطن كلّه.
by stitching the peritoneum once from one side with the edge of the skin and leaving it once from the other side until you finish; and the second type of specialized stitch which Galen also mentioned, this is his exact words:
is that you stitch it in the same way that some healers stitch it, by joining each portion to its natural pair, that is, by stitching the edge of the peritoneum to its other edge and the edge of the navel to its other edge; and that will be as I describe to you.
The needle should be inserted into the edge of the peritoneum nearest to you from outside and driven inwards through it alone, then the peritoneal edges, then the needle is withdrawn and driven from outside inwards through both peritoneal edges, then withdrawn again.
And it is driven from inside to outside through the other edge of the peritoneum on the opposite side, and this type of stitching is better than common stitching, which is the stitching that was mentioned earlier. This is the exact words of Galen, and some have said that the abdomen can be stitched with two needles. And you should insert a single thread into both of them, and start by inserting the needle from your side and driving it to the other side, and inserting the other needle from the opposite side and driving it from your side, just like the stitching of shoes.
Know that the incision in the middle of the abdomen is more difficult to sew than other parts of the abdomen. As for the treatment of the wound, its rule in treatment is the same as for other wounds. If you catch the wound fresh with its blood before it is changed by air, return the intestines and stitch it and seal it tightly with caustic.
If the wound has been changed by air, then carry some ointments that you can get until it suppurates and the threads fall out and the peritoneum and peritoneum heal, then treat it as you would treat other wounds until it heals.
If you don't have any medicine available, then carry it from the time it starts to suppurate with old cotton and change it twice a day as I told you until it heals. You will usually not need any other treatment if the wounds are simple. If you fear that the wound may affect the principal organs in pain,
You should soak soft wool in lukewarm oil or rose oil and place it around the areas between the ribs and armpits. If he feels pain or putrefaction in his intestines, this often occurs, so inject him with a warm astringent drink.
If the mold has reached the intestine and become a wound penetrating into its cavity, know that whatever is thick in the intestines is easier to heal, and whatever is thin is more difficult to heal.
As for the small intestine, known as the jejunum, it does not heal from surgery at all, due to the abundance and size of its blood vessels, its thinness, its proximity to nerve tissue, and its nature. However, if the peritonitis is discovered early and you act quickly, treat it in the same way as you would treat a wound in the intestine.
If some time has passed and it has turned green or black, you should tie it with a thread above the point from which it has turned black, so that bleeding does not occur. For in the peritoneum there are blood vessels and arteries, then cut below that ligature.
You should make the two ends of the thread hang below the wound, outside of it, so that it is easy for you to pull it and remove it when the peritoneum falls and the wound suppurates. This is the wound that occurs in the intestines. However, if a hole occurs in the intestine and it is small
it can heal in some people, because I have seen a man who was stabbed in the abdomen, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach. The wound became chronic and turned into a fistula from which feces and flatus were discharged. I treated him, but I did not hope for his recovery. I continued to pamper him until the wound healed and the tissue joined together. Then, I was afraid that something bad would happen to the patient in his abdomen, but nothing bad happened to him at all, and he remained in the best of health. He was able to eat, drink, have sexual intercourse, use the bathroom, and engage in physical activity without any problems. Some experienced people suggest that when a small hole occurs in the intestine, it should be stitched in this way.
And it is taken from the large ants' heads, then the lips of the wound are gathered together, then one of them is placed with its mouth open on the lips of the wound. When it grasps and tightens its mouth, its head is cut off; it will stick and not come loose. Then another ant is placed near the first one.
And you should keep doing that with several ants according to the size of the wound, then you return it and stitch the wound. Those heads will remain stuck in the intestine until the intestine becomes granulated and healed, and the patient will not be harmed at all. It is also possible to stitch the intestine with fine thread.
The method of removing it from the animal's intestine, to which it is attached, after passing it through a needle, is as follows: Take one end of the thread from the intestine and draw it gently, then tie a thin, twisted flax thread to that end, then pass that thread through the needle. Then stitch the intestine with it and return it to the abdomen. This type of stitching with ants and intestines is based on hope and expectation.
However, if the hole is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy or cure for it.
Chapter 86.
On the treatment of a cold and fistula.
Know that any wound or swelling that becomes chronic and old, and turns into an ulcer without healing, and from which pus always flows without stopping, is generally called a fistula, in any organ it may be; we call it a cold.
It is in reality a dense, solid white complexus without pain, with a cavity like the cavity of a bird's feather.
And for that reason, some people call it a feather. Sometimes it is moist and always discharges pus; sometimes the moisture stops, and sometimes it is abundant or scarce, thick or thin.
I have presented in the section on surgical operations that any ulcer which does not heal and in which no flesh grows is due to one of nine reasons: either because of a deficiency of blood in the body, or because it is of poor quality, or because there is hard flesh inside it and on its lips, preventing the growth of good flesh. Or because it is full of wounds and dirt, or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the matter which feeds it is of poor quality, or because the treatment is not suitable for it, or because there is some corruption in the town like an epidemic, or because of some particular condition in the town.
Or because it is full of wounds and dirt, or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the matter which feeds it is of poor quality, or because the treatment is not suitable for it, or because there is some corruption in the town like an epidemic, or because of some particular condition in the town. As it was shown in the city of Zaragoza, where diseases find it difficult to ripen and tumours heal slowly by nature, or because there is one or more bones in it; I have explained all these causes and their signs and treatments with medicines in the section.
And I should now inform you of the treatment for fistulas and colds which are treated by manual operation; know that fistulas may occur in all parts of the body, some of them ending in large vessels or nerves.
Or to the peritoneum, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to a rib, or to a vertebra of the spine, or to a joint which is complex in its composition like the hand and foot, and some lead close to a principal organ and so on.And fistulas occur due to many causes which I have explained before; and they differ in their treatments according to their locations, sizes, depths, and the matters which feed them.
And those which are of this description are among the most difficult diseases to heal, and they do not accept treatment; and engaging with them is effort and ignorance. And if there are any of these fistulas which have not reached the places mentioned, and you hope and expect to treat them, then know that their treatments differ according to their locations, sizes, depths, and the matters which feed them.فعليك بان تعرف موضعها وما هى من العضو الذى هى فيه وما هى من الفقار والضلوع والأعصاب وما هى من الصفق والجلد وما هى من السطح وما هى من الباطن، وكم مقدار عمق
And if you wish to discover this, take a probe made of copper or iron. If the fistula passes straight through, examine it with this; but if there is a bend in the fistula, examine it with a thin lead probe, because lead is soft-bodied.
And if it is tortuous when you enter it and bends towards the bend, if the fistula has many mouths that you cannot discover with the probe, inject one of its mouths with fluid; because the moisture that you inject will flow towards the other mouths and leak out.
Then examine thoroughly in any way you can to find out whether there is a bone or nerve, whether the bottom of the fistula is far or near, or whether it is one fistula with many mouths; and find all this out as much as you can by questioning the patient about where he feels pain when you press your hand on the area.وإن كان الألم شديدا عند غمز يدك على الموضع وكان قعر الناصور بعيدا فاعلم انّه عظم أو عصب.
And if the pain is severe when you press your hand on the area, and the bottom of the fistula is far away, then know that it is a bone or nerve. And look for other signs, too, that may be associated with the tumor; then when you know all this for sure, proceed to treat confidently as follows: If it is...
If the fistula is superficial and close by, or in a healthy spot far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places mentioned to you earlier; then incise the fistula as described previously, and remove any inflammation, rotten tissue, or excess flesh within it.وإن كان الناصور على مفصل او عصب او شريان او وريد، او فى موضع فيه مرض من المواضع التى ذكرت لك فقد زاد عليك فى هذا الموضع ان تنتزع ما ذكرته لك وتفصل بين لحم الورم الساقط وبين الاصل الذى هو متصل به فإنّ ذلك يضمد.
If the fistula is on a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in an unhealthy place among those mentioned to you, it is more important for you to remove what I have told you and separate between the fallen flesh of the tumor and its original connection; because this will heal. And if it grows in its mouth any flesh or wart, etc., treat it until it heals; but if the fistula is deep and straight, you should incision it deeply as much as possible then clean all rotten flesh from it.وإن كان الناصور منحنيا وكان قعر الناصور بعيدا فاعلم انّه على عظم أو عصب، فإن اشتدّ الألم عند غمز يدك عليه وكان منحن
Then use the twisted thread with medications for sharp wounds and insert it into the bottom of the fistula that you reach with the iron. Do this several times until the sharp medication eats away all that remains in the bottom of the fistula.
Then force it with ointments that promote healthy tissue growth until it heals. If it does not heal, then remove the cause of the fistula as I have described to you earlier. If the cause is a bone and this is evident to you, then explore and split it as I have told you, unless something prevents you from doing so.
If you discover a vein, nerve or major organ as we have said, then remove it completely until all traces of corruption and blackness are gone, then treat it with remedies that promote healing until it is cured. If it does not heal and the pus continues to flow as before.
Know that you have not removed all the corruption, then expose it again completely and remove and cleanse it as best as you can, then treat it. If it heals, well and good; but if not, know that the corruption is in a deep cavity, so expose it again completely.
and remove and cleanse as much as you can. If the small bone was rotten and you were able to pull it out, then do so with fine clamps that are suitable for this purpose.
If there are many bones, then remove them all and leave nothing behind as much as you can. If something blocks your way and it is not dangerous to cut, then cut those ligaments and meat if they are there, and free the bone.
If you cannot remove the bones at that time, then cover the wound with something that promotes rotting and leave it for a few days until what surrounds those bones rots away, and protect the wound so that the slit that you made during your operation does not close up.
Or, if you are worried about that, place on it cotton soaked in powdered sulfur with oil or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments. When those ligaments rot and the bones soften, they will be easy to remove and pull out.
If it is a single large bone such as the leg or thigh bone, and only the surface has become infected, then remove all the rotten flesh thoroughly until the blackness and decay are gone, and then heal the wound. If a large portion of the bone is affected and the decay has reached the marrow, then it must be removed.
Cut it completely where the decay ends, then treat it until it heals. I will tell you about a cold that a young man had in his leg to make it an example and help for your treatment. This young man had
a pain in his leg due to a disturbance from within the body until the humors reached the leg and caused a swollen, painful lump, and it was not caused by an external factor. Over time, with the mistakes of doctors, the lump opened up.
Many fluids flowed from it, and he was mistreated by several doctors for almost two years, none of whom were skilled in surgery.
until he came to me. I examined his leg and the fluids were flowing profusely from those mouths, and the man had become thin and yellow. I inserted a probe into one of those mouths, and it reached the bone. Then I examined all the mouths.
I found that they were connected to each other all around the leg, so I made an incision on one of those mouths and exposed some of the bone. I found it rotten, blackened, decayed, and perforated to the point that it penetrated into the marrow, so I removed what was exposed to me.
I was able to reach the rotten bone, and I believed that there was no more decay in the bone than what I had removed and that I had completely removed it. Then, I treated the wound with healing medications for an extended period, but it did not heal. So, I examined the bone again, over the previous incision.
I found the corruption connected to the bone, so I exposed what appeared to me of that corruption, then applied the plaster, but it did not heal or fuse. So I also examined it and kept cutting the bone bit by bit and tried to heal it, but it did not until I had cut about a palm from the bone.
I removed it with its membrane, then applied remedies and it healed quickly and recovered. The reason for this repetition in his treatment and incision was due to the patient's weakness and inability to withstand, and I feared he might die because he had severe fainting spells from excessive vomiting. He recovered completely.
Hard flesh grew in the place of the bone, and his condition improved throughout his body, and his strength returned, and he was able to carry out his affairs without any harm affecting him while walking. If a bone is broken in any part of the body,
it should be exposed in this manner: take a ligature and tie it to the protruding bone, and have someone pull it upwards while you apply another ligature of thicker wool than the first one.
Then tie it to the flesh under the bone and extend its end so that the flesh is attracted downwards while you expose the flesh in the area you want to cut so that the saw does not harm the flesh, and place a board or a plank underneath the bone from below, securely.
Because if you do that, the saw will not be prevented from cutting through the rotten bone. The cut should be slightly above the rotten area so that there is no more corruption inside the bone cavity, which would not be apparent to the sense, and you would have to cut it again.وينبغى أن يكون المنشار مستقيما لا عوج فيه لئلّا يؤذى اللحم ويصير النشر على جانب منه فتخاطر بضرر العصب، وينبغى أن ينشره مرّة واحدة ولا يرجع فيه فإنّ الرجوع فيه يضرّ العصب
If the bone is rotten but not protruding, but rather connected to the rest of the bones, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then expose the flesh on all its sides, then place the board from below, and cut it from the first side where the corruption is.ثمّ إذا فرغت من نشره من تلك الجهة فأكشف عليه من الجهة الأخرى فلم تزل تنشره وتكشف اللحم عنه حتّى تنتهى الى موضع الفساد، وقد ينجبر العظم وينضمّ من غير أن تنشر منه شيئا ولكن ينبغى أن تكشف عليه وتفحصه.
If you have finished spreading it, spread it from the other side so that the spreading is slightly away from the corruption as we said. If the corruption is in a joint, cut off the joint itself and spread the bone where it connects on the other side.
If the corruption is in the connection of two joints, there is no remedy except amputation. If the corruption is in the palm or the foot, its treatment is very difficult indeed, but you should peel away the corruption however it appears to you and strip it off and cleanse it as best you can.
By any trick that you can manage, provided a tendon or a nerve does not get in your way. Know that the knives and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, their thickness and thinness, their size and smallness, their hardness and porosity. Therefore, you should prepare for each type of work a tool that matches that work.
Know that the work itself can guide you to the type of tool you need if you have long experience and knowledge in the techniques of this craft, for those who are adept at the craft and have seen many types of diseases. He can devise for himself the tools that match each disease, and I have illustrated for you in the latter part of this chapter a range of tools.
Make them examples to be followed and measurements to be used on others, God willing. Image of a saw: .
Image of another saw: .
Image of a small saw:  .
Image of a large saw:  .
This chisel has a head shaped like a nail and is carved in the shape of a carving chisel. It is suitable for rubbing on the heads of joints when they are rotten, or on large, wide bones. Image of another small chisel:  .
Image of a broad chisel:    .
He makes his upper bow and its blade from iron, and its handle from a piece of wood in the shape of a tightly bound cone, with a hollow interior.
A delicate image:
Image of a curved tip:
Image of a small probe-like instrument:
Image of another small section:
And its tip is like a pestle, used in many places on bones. Image of an instrument suitable for treating holes in bones:
Its tip is triangular with sharp edges, made from Indian iron. All the chisels and cutting instruments we have mentioned should be made this way. Image:
Chapter LXXVIII.
On cutting off limbs and splitting bones.
When the limbs have become gangrenous, either from an external cause or an internal one, and you have treated this with medicine without success, and you see the corruption spreading through the limb without being checked by anything,.
you should cut off that limb where the corruption has reached, so that the patient can escape death or a great calamity greater than the loss of the limb. The sign that this is the case is that the limb turns black, so that you would think it had been burnt by fire..
Or it may become gangrenous after turning black, and the gangrene may spread to the part next to that limb and throughout the body; so be quick to cut it off. The same is true if the cause of the corruption is the sting of some insect like the sea scorpion or adder or centipede..
If the corruption or sting is in the tip of a finger, cut off the finger and do not delay the corruption from spreading to the hand. Likewise, if it has reached the hand, cut it off at the elbow joint and do not delay the corruption from spreading to both bones of the forearm..
Likewise, if it has reached the arm, cut off the arm at the elbow joint in the joint itself. If the corruption passes and you see it taking towards the shoulder, do not cut off the shoulder altogether, for that would kill the patient. Instead, use whatever other treatment is possible to the best of your ability..
And you shall do the same for a man if gangrene has set in his finger, cut off the finger at one of the joints; and if it has set in the big toe, cut off the entire foot; and if it has risen to the knee, cut off the leg at the knee joint.
And if the gangrene has reached above the knee, there is no remedy but to leave it and abandon the patient to die. The method of amputating or spreading the limb is to tie a ligature at the base of the part you want to cut off and another ligature above the site.
The assistant ties one ligature below and another assistant above, and you yourself strip the flesh between the ligatures with a broad knife until all the flesh is exposed, then cut or spread it. You should also place pieces of linen on all sides.
So that the saw does not touch the correct spot and cause excessive pain and hot swelling for the patient. If bleeding occurs during your work, quickly plug the site or press upon it with some hemostatic agent, then return to your treatment until you are finished.
Then bind the wounded limb with a bandage suitable for it and treat it until it heals. I will tell you about a case that occurred in a man's leg just like this one that I am describing to you, namely, that a blackness occurred in his leg with a burning sensation like fire.
This gangrene first occurred in his finger, so the man cut it off at the joint on his own initiative when he saw the gangrene spreading throughout the limb and felt intense pain and burning. And he healed.
When a long time had passed, the same gangrene occurred in his index finger, so he came to me, and I tried to stop it with remedies after cleaning his body, but it did not respond and spread to the other finger.
Until the corruption had taken hold in his hand, he called for me to cut off his hand, but I refused, out of pity and hoping that he would recover his strength. I was also afraid that he might die from the loss of blood if I were to amputate his hand, as his strength was already weak. When he despaired of my help, he left for his own country.
I was told that he eventually had his hand cut off completely, and it healed. I narrate this tale as a guide and an example to be followed in similar cases.
Chapter 88
On the treatment of abscesses and how to inject them with medicines.
If a swelling occurs in one of the fleshy members and the swelling persists for some time, until it is like a bag and all the matter inside is discharged, leaving the area empty like a container.
The skin over it is like a cloth that has become thin, and the corruption has not yet affected any bone or nerve or ligament. From here, it deserves to be called an abscess rather than a fistula, unless its duration is prolonged until the corruption affects one of these members.فإنّه يسمّى ناصورا.
At that point, it is called a fistula or a sinuses. Its treatment is to cut away all of the skin around it, especially if it has become thin and like a cloth, and you are certain that it will not adhere to the site due to its corruption.فإنّ هذا الجلد مفسد لا يصلح إلّا أن يقطع والموضع صحيح، فإن كان الموضع مفسدا فلا بدّ من قطع ذلك الجلد وبعض ما حوله من الجلد الصحى حتى يبرأ.
If you expect the skin to adhere and the corruption has not yet progressed, and there is thickness of flesh on the skin, then treat it with an injection. That is, look at the abscess. If it is large and the pus that comes out of it has a foul odor, inject it with Egyptian medicine.وإن كان المخبأ صغيرا والقيح طيب الرائحة، فإنّه يبرأ بالدواء اليونانيّ.
Take equal parts of vinegar, oil, honey, and alum, mix them in a vessel, and cook over fire until the medication thickens to the consistency of honey. Then take what you need, dilute it with water and honey, and inject it into the fistula. Tie off the opening and leave the medication in for two hours.
Then you remove it by pressing, and you do this for several days until the fistula is cleaned and the odor goes away. If this medication is not available to you, you can use ashes water instead. Take grapevine ash or oak wood ash, pour water on it.
Then filter it and inject it to ensure that the fistula has been cleaned. If the patient cannot tolerate the medication or ashes water, then inject a mixture of water and honey with some ground alum in it.
Or you can inject a mixture of honey and wine, as honey cleanses and washes while wine makes the fistula sticky, especially if the wine has some astringency to it. Once you have done this several times and are sure that the fistula is healed, inject something that promotes tissue growth.
For example, take some nard balm and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine, or inject some other balms and medications whose properties we have described in the chapter on balms. If the opening of the fistula is too narrow for the syringe,
widen it slightly with an iron tool or place a piece of gauze dipped in Egyptian balm or siriacon balm to widen it. If the opening is also wide, stitch up the lips and leave enough room for the syringe without forcing anything.
If the opening from which pus drains is high up, cut it at its lowest point so that the pus can drain down. If the pus is trapped in a hollow fistula, it will prevent tissue growth there.وإذا كان القطع فى موضع عظم فإن كان القيح قد احتقن الى أسفل واللحم قد نبت فوقه فاعمد الى مكان القطع بحديدتين وحرّكهما تحريكا رفيقا على أن يكون العظم بينهما حتّى يندق العظم ويفتح فى المخبأ طريق للقيح، فإن لم تفعل ذلك
If you cannot split the abscess at its base as desired, then cut the organ in such a way that pus flows out easily according to what you see fit, and make sure that no pus is retained in it at all.
As for the ointments that are applied externally to the abscess, and how to apply them, take one of the appropriate ointments and spread it on a linen cloth, the size of which should be sufficient to cover the entire abscess. Then, with scissors, cut an opening in front of the abscess that is slightly larger than its opening, and spread one of the soft ointments on another cloth, the size of which corresponds to the opening. Place it over the abscess so that the pus can flow out easily, and do not remove the larger cloth until later.
The one on the abscess should be changed several times a day, while the larger one is left for several days. By checking the pus that flows out, you can determine if it is abundant or scarce, mature or immature.
At the same time, examine the site of the abscess itself: does its owner feel pain there or not? Is there swelling or not? If your treatment continues like this and you see that only a small amount is being discharged from the abscess opening,.
know that the abscess has become attached or is about to do so. At that time, open the wound on the next day or the third day. When you open the wound, replace the cloth with a new one and renew the ointment. If pus flows out after some time, do not despair of its detachment.
The healing is close at hand, because some people are slow in the growth of flesh in their wounds, while others are not. If pus flows out after many days, know that the abscess has not become attached. If the abscess does not become attached,.
And if the wound is deep, increase the amount of astringent drugs, and let these be drugs which are moist in their consistency but dry in their action, such as palm oil ointment when it has had an extra quantity of alum added to it. The best treatment is to use palm oil ointment.
And it can also be treated with rose oil, sprinkled with old, moderate wine, and then mixed into a paste with the wine and used. Or you can do the same thing if you don't have palm oil ointment by boiling honey until it thickens and using it mixed with myrrh, aloes, and galangal, all ground and sprinkled over the honey while it is still on the fire. And then spread it on a piece of cloth and bind it over the wound, or spread it with honey that you have boiled until it thickens, sprinkle it with the drugs, put a piece of cloth over it, and then bind it.
And for such a wound, you can also use the long-stemmed violet, the root of the white iris, and the seeds of pepper all by themselves or ground together, sifted over the honey as described above, and then used. If the wound is deep and does not heal with this treatment, then know that there is something bad in its depths.
It has affected the bones or other tough nerves or ligaments, then treat it as you would a fistula, as already described.
Chapter 89
On the treatment of warts and ingrown toenails, and on cutting off an extra toe and separating joined fingers
A wart is a lump of flesh that grows under the toenail or fingernail, and sometimes it can grow on other fingers as well. If it is not treated and allowed to get worse, it becomes swollen and hot.
Or it has rotted and affected the nail root, and sometimes it can rot the whole nail, and sometimes the rot can reach the bone so that it has a foul smell and the end of the finger becomes swollen, its color changes to blue, and if you treat it with what we mentioned in the previous chapter and your treatment is not effective.
All the waste that grows from under the nail should be cut with iron, and then the wound should be cauterized, for cauterization in this case is very beneficial. If, however, the bone is sound and the nail also, then cauterization should not be used.
If the angle of the nail is pushing into the flesh and causing irritation, a thin instrument should be placed under the angle of the nail to lift it up, and then the irritating flesh should be gently cut away.
You should apply a burning, caustic poultice to the remaining flesh until it is all gone, then treat it with ointments until it heals. If, however, the corruption has affected the bone, you should cut that bone out, for as long as there is corrupt bone, it will never heal.
If you see corruption spreading in the finger, cut it at one of the joints as mentioned earlier and then treat it until it heals. If the nail is struck or crushed and a severe pain results, the patient should be bled first.
Then split the nail with a sharp knife diagonally from top to bottom, being careful not to cut into the flesh under the nail, for this will cause the patient great pain and may result in the growth of excess flesh in that spot. Then treat the wound with something to alleviate the pain.
Now, as for the extra finger which sometimes grows on people's hands, it may be all fleshy, or it may have some bones in it, and it may even have a nail; sometimes it grows at the base of one of the finger joints.
The ones which grow at the base of a finger joint may move, but those that grow at one of the finger joints do not; it is easy to cut off those which are all fleshy, for you have only to cut them at their base with a wide knife.
And as for those that grow at the root of the joint, their treatment is difficult, so one should avoid cutting them. And as for those that grow in the finger at one of the phalanges, one should first cut off its flesh in a circular manner to the bone, then spread the bone with one of those saws that are suitable for that.
Then treat it until it heals. As for the fusion that occurs between fingers, this often happens and is usually due to a person's constitution, or as a result of the healing of a wound or burn, etc. One should split this fusion.
until the fingers return to their natural state, then place between them a bandage or a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil so that it does not heal quickly, and separate them or put between them a thin lead plate until the site heals as it should.
And if fusion occurs between some fingers and the palm, split that fusion according to what is possible and suitable for the shape of the limb.وإن كان التحام الكفّ كلّه ببعضه فانشقه من وسط الكفّ، وإن كان التحام كلّه فأميله الى أحد الجانبين حتّى لا يعرض لكفّه
And if the entire palm is fused, split it from the middle of
in cutting varicose veins.
Varicose veins are thick, twisted vessels filled with black humor that occur in most parts of the body, but they are more common in the legs, especially in people who stand a lot, such as farmers, porters, and carriers. First, it is necessary to use cupping several times with black cupping glasses.ثمّ تضع تحت الساق من قبل الركبة رقعة حارّة وتحتكّ به وتسكنه، فإنّ ذلك يسهل خروج الفضول السوداويّة منه ويخفف الورم ويزيل الألم ويقطع عود الداء من موضعه، وإن لم يفعل هذا ذهبت الى الوريد فشققته على ما هو المذكور.
Then, the patient's basilic vein should be phlebotomized. As for treating it with iron, there are two ways to do this: one is to cut it and drain out the black blood; the other is to sweat and drain it all out. As for cutting it, this is done in the following way: first, the leg is soaked in hot water.
Let the thick blood coagulate, then tightly bind the leg of the patient from above his thigh to below his knee with a bandage, and then make an incision in one place or two or three places, making the incisions wide.
Then you should draw out the black bile with your hand from under the leg to above, and from above to below until you extract enough of it, or as much as the strength of the patient permits. Then he should be bound and instructed to abstain from foods that generate black bile, and then emesis and phlebotomy should be repeated.
When the veins are full and this is harmful to the patient, then it should be drained in this way: Shave the leg of the patient if there is a lot of hair on it, then immerse him in a hot bath and rub his leg with hot water until it turns red and perspires or he exercises vigorously.
If he does not have access to a bath to heat the limb, then slit the skin across the vein, either at its end near the knee or at its base near the ankle, and then open the skin with tweezers and strip the vein from all sides until it becomes sensitive to touch.
When you see it, it will be red and swollen; once it is separated from the skin, it will feel like a tendon. Then insert a probe under it until it rises and separates from the skin, then attach it to a blind, smooth hook, and then make another incision near the first one, about three fingers wide.
Then strip the skin from the vein until it is visible, then lift it with the probe as you did before and attach it to another hook as you did at first, then make another incision or many incisions as needed.
Then drain and cut it at the end of the incision near the ankle, then pull and drain it until it comes out of the second incision, then pull it towards the incision above it and do this until you have pulled it out of all the incisions.
If it does not yield to traction and dislocation, insert a strong, doubled-up thread through the needle, tie it, and pull; then place the probe underneath and twist your hand this way and that until it comes out. Be careful that the thread doesn't break, for if it does, it will be very difficult to dislodge it.
And the patient suffers harm from it; when you have extracted all of it, place on the wound wool soaked in wine and rose-water or oil, and treat it until it heals. If the vein is twisted with curves and turns in various directions,
and is not straight as we have said, you should cut it at each of its curves and turns, then pull it with pincers until you extract all of it. Be careful when cutting not to cut the vein or injure it, for it will be difficult to extract.
Figure of the incision instrument used to extract the vein:.
Figure of the blind pincher:.صورة الصنّارة ذات الرأسين:
Figure of the double-headed pincher:.The instrument should not be curved like other pincers, nor should it have a sharp tip so as not to injure the vein; it should be somewhat thick in its bend and smooth, because if it is thin it will cut the vein as we have said. Its thickness should be as we described.
Chapter 191.فى علاج الجراحات والنزلات التى تصيب العرو
Treatment of wounds and infections that affect the veins.In extracting a civil vein.
This vein occurs in the legs in hot countries like Hejaz and other Arab countries, and in hot, barren, and infertile countries; it can also occur in other parts of the body besides the legs. Its occurrence is due to an infection that happens under the skin.والعروق التى تحدث فى الساقين هى التى تسمّى المدنية وهذه العروق تكون عفنة والنزلة فيها شبيهة بالدم الصديدىّ وربّما خرجت من موضع النزلة صلابة سوداء مثل الكرب وتسمّى هذه العروق بالمدنية.
As happens in the bodies of living beings and in worms, and in the swelling of pumpkins and worms that are generated between the skin and the flesh, the sign that this condition is beginning to occur is that there is severe inflammation in the leg, then the site blisters and then the sweat begins to flow from the site of this blister.
As if it were the root of a plant or an animal, and if its tip appears, it should be wrapped around a small piece of lead, with a weight of one to two dirhams, tied tightly, and the lead left hanging from the leg.
Whenever something comes out of it to the outside, wrap it around the lead and tie it tightly. If it gets too long, cut some of it off and wrap the rest up, but do not cut it from its root until everything has come out, because if you cut it short, it will retract inside and cause swelling, putrefaction, and a bad ulcer in that spot.
For this reason, it should be treated with care and pulled out a little at a time until it comes out completely, leaving nothing inside the body. In some people, what comes out of this sweat can be as long as five cubits or more.
I have heard that in one man it came out to a length of twenty cubits. If it gets blocked during your treatment, insert a rod into its hole and push it along the body until everything inside it has come out, then try to putrefy the spot with medications for several days.
Then treat it as you would a tumor. This sweat may have many branches, especially if it appears in the leg joint or in the leg itself, so that it has many mouths, and from each mouth comes a branch, so treat it as we have mentioned above.
Chapter 192
On incising the worm that is generated under the skin, also called the "cattle disease".
This disease is called in some countries here the "cattle disease" because it often affects cattle, and it is a small single worm that is generated between the skin and the flesh and moves up and down throughout the body.وأولى علامات هذا المرض أن يبدو فى الساق قرحة كقرحة البرد ويكون لها ألم شديد وعرق وتورّم، فإن وقع ذلك فهو الدود ولا يداوى تلك القرحة بل يشرب مرارا النبيذ ويستخرج من القرحة ما خفّ منها بحديد حار ويدهن موضعها
It is apparent to the sense upon its flow from one member to another until it pierces where it pierces in the skin a place and goes out and forms from putrefaction of some humors as occurs for worms, snakes, and scabies bumps in the abdomen.
And it is expected from its harm that when it crawls into the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it might open in it and go out, which abolishes the eye, and this occurs often. If you want to treat it and get rid of it, it can only be done when it starts moving and becomes apparent to the senses.
So you should tighten what is above and below it with a tight bandage, then cut it out. If it has sunken into the meat and you don't find it, carry on the site with fire until you burn it, and the most expected damage to the eye as we said.
If you see that it has reached the head near the eye, tighten below it on the forehead tightly and then cut it out. It is advisable for the patient to cleanse his body with laxatives of bad putrid humors and abstain from foods that generate putrefaction,.
Chapter 92.
On incising the disease known as furuncle.
This disease, which is called in our country a furuncle, is a pain that occurs in some members and then moves from one member to another, and I have seen it as I will describe it to you.إذا دبّت فى الجسم وظهرت عند موضع من المواضع من الفخذين أو الذراعين أو الرأس أو العنق أو الصدر او غير ذلك من الأعضاء، فربّما لم تزل تنف
If it crawls into the body and appears at a place in the thighs, arms, head, neck, chest, or any other member, it may not stop moving as I was called to a sick woman in some of the countryside and uncovered her arm and showed me slight inflammation in the vein of the upper arm. When I stayed for an hour, I saw that inflammation crawling with the radius as fast as possible.
If it runs from one place to another, the pain leaves that spot and settles in the shoulder, then I sat for a while and it ran through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm, then she scratched herself and told me that her whole body was spinning as I saw.
I was amazed at the speed of its movement from one part to another, and I had not seen this disease before in this way, except that I saw a group of people who felt the pain moving from one part to another, but I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in this woman.
I didn't expect that, except that the woman was from the desert, with a dry body and exposed veins, so the moving wind could be sensed by the senses. It is necessary that this should not appear on this scale in people of luxury and moist bodies with subtle veins.
If you want to treat it and the owner feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have mentioned, then tighten it with a tourniquet above and below until that trapped wind comes out and dress the place.وإذا لم يظهر لك بعينه فأكثّر عليه الحكّ حتّى تتحرك مواضع الوجع منه ويكثر التنهد والتأوه ويخرج الريح مع العروق الملتئمة ويكون ذلك بإزالة الوجع عنه لا محال.
If you don't see it with your own eyes, then treat him by shaking the body and what repels wind and scatters it, such as the seeds of the wild gourd and the seeds of Scammony, and similar remedies.وإن لم يظهر له موضع بعينه، فاستعن على خروجه بالمشي حتّى يتعرق البدن وينفتح المسام ويكثر التنفس ويتحرك الى الأطر
Chapter 94.وإن كان من أهل القرى ومن أهل الخمول وسكن
If he is from the villagers and from the idle people, then you can get
Arrows can vary depending on their types and according to the places where they fall in the body. And as for their variation according to their types, there are large ones and small ones, hollow glass and solid glass, and some have three angles and four angles.وأما اختلافها بحسب المواضع التى تقع فيها من الجسم فمنها ما يقع فى الأطراف كالأكعال والأكف والعصب فيكون أسهل خروجاً منها إذا وقعت فى اللحم بين العظام.
And some of them have tongues, and some of them have splinters. And as for those that are according to the members in which they occur, they are of two types: either the members are hollow principal members such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and the like. When an arrow falls into one of these members and the signs of death that I am describing to you after it appears, then you should avoid removing that arrow from it, because death overtakes its owner in most cases. And when these bad signs do not appear and the arrow is hidden in a deep part of the member, then remove it and treat the wound. And from the signs of the brain, if an arrow hits it and penetrates the bone and wounds the peritoneum that covers the brain, then severe headache, vertigo and dizziness occur.
And when these bad signs do not appear and the arrow is hidden in a deep part of the member, then remove it and treat the wound. And from the signs of the brain, if an arrow hits it and penetrates the bone and wounds the peritoneum that covers the brain, then severe headache, vertigo and dizziness occur. And there is redness in the eyes and tongue, convulsions, mental confusion, and sometimes blood comes out of the nostrils or ears, and sometimes speech is cut off, the voice goes away, and a white fluid like a dough flows from the wound, and a watery fluid like meat flows from it.
And if these signs appear, stop treating the patient and removing the arrow, if it has not come out; and as for the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart and is close to the left breast and feels as if it were lodged in something solid rather than something empty.
And sometimes the arrow has a movement that resembles the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound; and this is followed by coldness of the limbs and cold sweat and fainting; know then that death is certain to come. And the sign of the arrow when it wounds the lung is the outflow of frothy blood from the wound.
And the vessels that follow the neck swell up and the color of the patient changes, he breathes heavily and wants to breathe in cool air; if the arrow hits the diaphragm which is in the chest, it will be close to the small ribs and breathing will be great with severe pain.
And if the arrow has pierced the liver, all the members of the shoulder blades will twitch and a severe pain will follow, and blood resembling the liver in its redness will flow out from the wound. And if the arrow has pierced the stomach, perhaps something undigested will flow out from the wound.
And if the arrow has pierced the abdomen and lodged in it, and something of the feces or membrane or intestine has come out of the wound, there is no hope for its cure nor for removing the arrow. And if the arrow has pierced the bladder and urine has flowed out,
and a part of it protrudes to the outside, and the pain is severe for the patient, then know that he will surely die. As for the other members such as the face, eye, neck, shoulder, upper arm, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, thigh, leg, and similar body parts, most of them may be saved.
when the arrow has not hit an artery or nerve, and the arrow is not poisonous, then I will tell you about some of what I have witnessed regarding these arrows, so that you can use it as guidance for your treatment. It so happened that an arrow pierced a man's eye at the root of his nose.
I extracted it from the other side, under the ear lobe, and he recovered without any harm to his eye. I also extracted another arrow for a Jew who had been pierced in the lower eyelid. The arrow was hidden and only its small tip, which attached to the wooden shaft, was visible.
It was a large arrow from a composite bow, with a smooth square-tipped iron head, and without any notches. The Christian recovered without any harm to his throat. I also extracted another arrow from the neck of a Christian, and that arrow belonged to an Arab.
It is the one with two notches, and I made an incision between his collarbones as it had pierced deep into his throat. By gently manipulating it, I was able to extract the arrow and both the Christian and the Arab recovered without any issues. I also extracted another arrow from a man's abdomen, and we estimated that he would die from it.
When he had remained for about thirty days without any change in his condition, I made an incision over the arrow and extracted it, and he recovered without any complications. I also saw a man who had been struck by an arrow in the back, and the wound had healed over it.
After seven years, the arrow emerged at the base of her thigh. I also saw a woman who had been struck by an arrow in the abdomen, and the wound had healed over it, leaving the arrow in place with no change in her condition and no impairment in any of her natural functions.
I also saw another man who had been struck by an arrow in the face, and the wound had healed over it, causing him little pain. There are many such cases. I also extracted an arrow from a captain of the Sultan's guard that had pierced his nose and tilted slightly to the right.
The entire arrow had entered, so I was called to treat him three days after he had been struck. I found the wound of the arrow very narrow, so I probed it with a thin probe and felt nothing, but he experienced a pricking pain below his right ear.
I hoped that this pain was from the tip of the arrow, so I applied a poultice with a mild astringent in the expectation that the area would become inflamed and reveal the location of the arrow, but nothing happened to indicate that the arrow had reached its mark.
I continued to apply the poultice for many days, but no incident occurred, so the patient lost hope of extracting the arrow and one day he felt the arrow inside his nose, so I was informed and applied a caustic ointment to the wound for several days.
Then it opened, and I probed it and felt the thin tip of the arrow that is glued to the wood, so I continued to open the wound with this caustic ointment until the tip of the arrow appeared to us, and it took me about four months to do so.
Then, when the wound had become enlarged and I was able to insert the forceps inside it, I pulled and moved it but it did not respond by coming out, so I continued to manipulate and coax it with various instruments until one day I managed to grasp it firmly with a pair of forceps, as its image will be shown at the end of this chapter.
The physicians had believed that the cartilage of his nose would not heal, but I was able to repair it and the wound healed completely without any further complications. I will now describe how some arrows are extracted so that you can use this as a reference for similar cases that I have not described in detail.
Because the details and nuances of this craft cannot be fully described in words or contained in a single book. The skilled practitioner measures and infers from what is known to what is unknown, and innovates new techniques and tools for unexpected situations.
When it comes to extracting arrows, there are two main methods depending on the location of the arrowhead: either by pulling from the entry point or from the opposite direction. Those that are extracted from where they entered.
If the arrow is protruding from a fleshy area, you should try to pull it out immediately. If it doesn't come out right away, you should leave it for a few days until the surrounding tissue becomes infected, which will make it easier to remove. The same goes if the arrow is lodged in a bone.
If it still doesn't come out after a few days, you should gently drill around the arrow in the bone with a thin drill to create more space for the arrow and then try pulling it out again. If that doesn't work, you'll need to cut through the bone around the arrow until you've made enough room to pull it out.
If the arrow is lodged in the skull and has penetrated into the brain, and the patient is exhibiting any of the symptoms mentioned earlier, stop trying to pull out the arrow and wait a few days to see how things develop.
examine the arrow and extract it. If it is firmly lodged and does not yield to extraction, use a boring instrument around the arrow as described, then treat the wound until it heals. If the arrow has penetrated deeply into a part of the body, examine him with a probe, if you feel it, extract it with suitable instruments for extraction. But if you cannot extract it because of the narrowness of the wound and the arrow's depth, and there is no bone, nerve or tendon in the way,
make an incision to widen the wound and grasp the arrow so that you can extract it. If there are two points of entry, free the flesh around them on all sides by every means possible and use every trick to free the flesh if you cannot extract the arrow without breaking or twisting the ears.
When attempting to remove the arrow from any location, use your hands with forceps in every direction to free it and be very gentle so that the arrow does not break and become difficult to remove. If you cannot remove it immediately,
leave it for a few days until the flesh around it putrefies, then try again, as it will be easier at that time. If you encounter bleeding, use the treatments mentioned in that section. Be very careful not to cut a nerve, tendon or ligament; use cunning.
use every means possible to free the arrow, but do so gently, slowly and carefully as described. It is best to have the patient in the same position as when the arrow was fired, which is more effective.
If you cannot do that, use what you can, and as for the arrow coming out from the opposite side, sometimes part of it will protrude outside, or you will feel its tip through the skin, which will be protruding.
Make an incision over the site of the arrow and make it wide enough to accommodate the hooks. Then pull on the arrow, as this will make extraction easier. If the arrow is stuck in the bone, twist your hand in a circular motion until the arrow affects the bone and creates its own space, then pull it out.
If it doesn't come out easily, leave it for a few days and then try again. If the arrowhead is still inside, use the arrow itself to push it out. If the shaft has broken off and you want to try pushing it out, insert a hollow instrument so that its hollow end goes into the base of the arrow, and then push it out with that.
If the arrow is hollow, push it out with an instrument inserted into that hollow. This will make extraction easier. If the arrow is poisoned, try to scoop out the poisoned meat, as much as possible, and then treat the wound accordingly.
If the arrow is in the chest, abdomen, bladder or flank, and if it can be felt with a probe, make an incision over it and be careful not to cut any nerves or blood vessels. Then extract the arrow.
Then stitch the wound, if necessary, and treat it until it heals. The diagram below shows the hooks used for extracting arrows: [Diagram of hooks]
The ends of these hooks are shaped like a bird's beak and are designed to grip an arrow or similar object tightly, without letting go. They come in various sizes: large, small, and medium, depending on the size of the arrow and the width of the wound.
Diagram of the hollow probe:  [Diagram]The hollow probe is used to extract arrows with broken shafts.
Diagram of a solid probe  [Diagram]A solid probe is used to feel around inside a wound
This solid-tipped probe is designed to be inserted into a hollow arrow and push it out.
Chapter 95
On phlebotomy.
The veins that are usually bled in the body are thirty, of which sixteen are in the head. These are the two pulsating veins behind the ears, known as the temporals; the two arteries in the temples, visible and apparent; and the two veins in the eye sockets, known as the oculars.
The vein that stands upright in the middle of the forehead, the vein at the tip of the nose, the two jugular veins in the neck, the two veins in the upper lip, the two veins in the lower lip - these are known as the labials - and the two veins under the tongue.
As for the veins that are bled in the arm and hand, there are five: one is called the cephalic vein, located on the lateral side, which the common people call the head vein; the second is the cubital vein, which is the middle vein, composed of a branch of the basilic vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, which the common people call the body vein.
The basilic vein is located on the medial side and is also called the axillary vein; the common people call it the stomach vein. The antecubital vein, which is located on the forearm just above the wrist, is where the palm of the hand joins the back of the hand; this vein is attached to the antebrachium, and it is the one that appears most prominently above the thumb. The basilic, however, runs along the inner side of the arm, below the elbow joint.
There are three veins in the leg: one is below the popliteal space, on the lateral side; the second is the posterior tibial vein, located at the back of the ankle on the medial side; and the third is the peroneal vein, located on the lateral side of the ankle.
In the other leg, there are three veins similar to those mentioned: the two veins behind the ears are beneficial for chronic colds, migraines, ringworm, and poor-healing head wounds. The method of bleeding these veins is as follows:
Shave the head of the patient and rub the back of his neck in the area between the ears with a rough cloth, rubbing hard. Then choke the patient's neck with a turban until the two pulse points appear behind the ears, in the low-lying areas of the head. Feel for their pulse with your finger, and where you feel it beating under your finger, mark it with ink.
Then take a skalpel, which is known as a neshal, and insert it under the pulse point in the skin until the skalpel reaches the bone. Then lift your hand with the pulse point and skin up and cut the pulse point, along with the skin, off completely. The length of the cut should be about two finger widths.
Or you can stop the flow of blood as much as you want, then hold them tightly with ligatures and leave them until they heal. You will find their use in the beginning of this book; cutting and cauterizing them. As for the two pulse points in the temples, their use is to treat chronic migraines, severe headaches and constant eye discharge.
How to cut them is as I will describe to you: the patient should tighten his neck with a turban until the pulse points become apparent and their pulse can be felt under your finger. At this point, mark them with ink. Then lift the skin above the pulse point up with your index finger.
Insert the skalpel, neshal, from underneath and lift the pulse point up, and cut it off just as you did with the other two pulse points. Stop the flow of blood as needed, then release the patient's neck and put your finger on the pulse point for a moment.
Then place a cotton pad and bandage over it, tighten it tightly and leave it until it heals. Their use, as well as their cutting and cauterization, has already been mentioned at the beginning of this book. As for the pulsation in the forehead, its use is to treat chronic conditions of the face, such as ringworm, ulcers and erysipelas.
And the manner of its application is to choke the sick person's neck with a bandage until perspiration appears, then take the instrument called the axe, and this is its form:
You place the protruding spike at the head of the axe on the same vein and strike it with a comb or something similar, and let the blood flow to the extent that you desire, then release the patient's chokehold and tighten it until he is healed.
And it may be opened with a wide lance, but the lance should not be sharp-tipped like other lancets, but should be slightly wider at the tip. And you should let it flow on the side, because the bone is close by, and if the lance is thin, it may break in it.
As for the two veins in the inner canthus of the eye, their benefit is for ailments of the eye such as scabies, redness, conjunctivitis, and facial diseases. As for the manner of opening them, the patient should tighten his neck with a bandage, then you open them while standing above his head, and let the blood flow slightly towards the length with a small, slightly wide lance.
For the site has no flesh, and if the lance tip is thin, it may break. Then let the blood flow as needed, then place a cotton pad on them and tighten them for one night, then release them. As for opening the nasal vein, it is beneficial for acute fever.
And severe headache and ailments of the face, such as a red splotch on the nose, especially if it is chronic. The manner of opening it is that the patient tightens his neck, then you hold his nose in your left hand and take a thin, long lance with your right hand.
And you insert it into the middle of the nasal septum itself between the nasal bones on a straight line, because the vein is not felt there, so the blood will flow immediately. You should push your hand with the lance slightly and let the blood flow as needed, then tie it for one night, as it will coagulate quickly.
And as for the lymph nodes, the benefit of incising them is for shortness of breath and the onset of leprosy and melancholic diseases that appear on the surface of the skin, such as black vitiligo, ulcerous sores, and bad ulcers. The way to incise them is for the sick person to tighten a ligature under them around their neck, and for the surgeon to stand over the patient's head.
The patient sits on a chair, then the lymph node is incised just slightly wider than the length of the node, and a moderate amount of blood is let out, or according to what you see is needed. Then you do the same with the other node, then release the ligature.
You should tighten the lymph nodes moderately so that the patient does not choke, and leave it until the next day; the wound will heal. As for the jugular veins, the benefit of incising them after incising the scalp is that it benefits from mouth ulcers, gum decay, ulcerous sores, lip cracks, and bad ulcers.
which are in the nose and around it, and the way to incise them is for the patient to sit in front of you and tighten his neck with a turban, then turn his lips and look at the lymph nodes which you see, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, and distinguish them by their darkness.
Also, around them are thin black veins, so cut them off cleanly. If it is not clear to you which they are, then cut the largest and most obvious one, and do the same with the lymph nodes in the lower lip.
And as for the lymph nodes under the tongue, the benefit of incising them after incising the scalp is for hoarseness caused by diseases of the epiglottis and mouth diseases. The way to incise them is to have the patient sit facing you in front of the sun, lift his tongue, and look under the tongue on one side to see a lymph node and on the other side another, both of which are dark in color.
You should incise and ligate them without cutting too deeply, as there are veins underneath that could cause bleeding if cut. The three veins in the elbow that are usually ligated in people are ligated in two ways.
You can either make an incision with a broad, cherry-wood scalpel or an olive-wood one; or you can use a curved scalpel, which is known as 'the peel' [and this is its image]. The image of the broad scalpel:
It is broad as you see, so that it is suitable for opening the hollow, filled veins that are visible, thick and containing dark, viscous blood. This is the image of the olive-wood scalpel:
This scalpel is narrower and has a thinner tip, suitable for ligating thin veins that contain thin, yellowish blood. This is the image of the peel scalpel:
This peel is suitable for incisions and comes in various widths, depending on the size of the veins, both wide and narrow. This is well-known among craftsmen.
As for the basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, the benefit of ligating it is that it draws blood from the ailments below the neck and throat, near the chest and abdomen. When ligating it, the phlebotomist should be careful, as there is a artery underneath it. If he makes a mistake and goes too deep with the scalpel, he may cut that artery.
This will cause bleeding, so it should not be ligated with a scalpel used for incisions, but rather with a peel. If the basilic vein is not clearly visible, one should avoid it and look for its branches instead.
Or you can ligate the basilic vein in the arm, as it is clearly visible, and incise it with a peel as we have said. If you want to ligate it directly, you should first tighten the arm, feel for the pulse, then mark it with ink.
Then tie the arm and make an oblique incision in the vein with a scalpel, as we have said, being careful to avoid striking the artery. And when you tighten the ligature and see swelling in the place that you marked with ink, this is the swelling of the artery; so avoid it.
If you see the blood when phlebotomized, jumping as a boy's urine does and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from the artery; so then quickly put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger; if the blood stops, often it will stop; so tighten the arm.
And leave it, and warn the patient from negligence and let it be on his neck and do not move it for days until it heals; if the blood does not stop and you are overwhelmed by it and there is no medicine available to you at that time, then cut the artery if it appears to you, because its ends contract and the blood stops.
Or take a pistachio shell, split it and take half of it and tie it tightly on the vein with a bandage until the next day; if the blood stops, well and good; otherwise, treat it as already mentioned by placing cauterizing agents to stop the bleeding; stopping the flow of blood is not difficult in most cases.
Because of the small size of the wound and the bandage being tied tightly on the arm, you should know this; as for the ulnar vein, the benefit of phlebotomizing it is that it draws blood from the top of the head and the bottom of the body because it is composed, as we have said, of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic.
The phlebotomist should be careful when phlebotomizing it, because there is a nerve under it; if he increases the depth of the incision with the scalpel and hits the nerve, it will cause paralysis that is difficult to cure, and often cannot be cured at all; this nerve can often be perceived by touch.
If it is slight in some people and thin so that it cannot be seen clearly, you should incise it with a scalpel and avoid cutting the tendon as much as possible. If the vein lies between two tendons, cut the vein lengthwise. As for the scalp vein, the benefit of incising it is that it draws blood away from the head.
This vein is beneficial for ailments of the eyes and it is preferable, if you want to incise this vein in particular; to do so with a olive-shaped scalpel or a broad rhombic scalpel, because it is the safest of all veins, as there are no arteries or nerves underneath it.
However, when phlebotomizing, you should avoid the head of the muscle with the scalpel and seek the soft spot. It is not harmful if it is not hit on the first attempt that it is phlebotomized several times, except that it may swell in some people if it is not hit on the first attempt.
However, that swelling is not harmful at all. As for the technique of phlebotomy and its precautions and what should be done to prepare for it, first of all, you should know that phlebotomy can either be used for maintaining health only.
Or it can be used for treating diseases, and which is used for maintaining health and sustaining it, and preventing the occurrence of diseases, is to phlebotomize in one of the three veins at the elbow, namely the citalis, the ocularis, and the basilic, and to phlebotomize at the beginning of spring when signs of fullness appear.
Phlebotomy for maintaining health should be done on a Sunday or Tuesday after three hours of the day have passed. However, phlebotomy for treating diseases does not have a limited time, but whenever there is a need or urgency for it, day or night.وينبغى أ ن يكون الفصد بعد غسل اليدين وقبله بمده، وأمّا العود الذى يفصد به فينبغى أن يكون خفيفا طولا ويكون طرفاه مدببين وأمّا المباضع فينبغى ان تكون زيتونيّة ورحيّة واسعة منقّ
And in every hour and in every time, and it is not proper that boys should be bloodlet at until they are fourteen years old, nor elderly men who have surpassed sixty years, and if anyone intends to let blood for any reason whatsoever.
And it is proper that his intestines should be purged with a soft enema before phlebotomy if there is a lot of constipation, so that at the time of phlebotomy no putrid substances which would harm the principal organs are drawn from the intestines into the vessels. And neither a pregnant woman nor a drunken man or an intoxicated person should be bled until these conditions have left them.
And phlebotomy should also be avoided immediately after defecation, vomiting, excessive sexual intercourse, exertion, lack of sleep, fasting and anything that weakens the body or the soul; then examine the thinness of the humours before that if the blood is thick.
By food, drink and medicine if he can, then he should enter the bathhouse if no impediment prevents him or do some light exercise to thin the blood and have his phlebotomy in the early morning as we have said, and also clear his chest of all bad psychological conditions that day.
Such as worries, anger, fear and all bodily conditions such as excessive fatigue and sexual intercourse etc., and have in his presence things which people are accustomed to use from among perfumes, flowers and amusements etc. each person according to what he can afford.وينبغى أن يكون المجلس طيّبا، وأن لا يفصد الصبيان والنسوان فى المجالس التى يكرهها الشرع، ويكون على جنب اليسار من العضو الذى يريد فصده.
And it is proper that the room be pleasant, and boys and women should not be bled in rooms which are disliked by the Law; and he should sit with his left side to the member from which he wants to bleed. Then the phlebotomist sits on a pillow which is higher than the pillow on which the person being bled sits, then he puts out his arm and the phlebotomist rubs it with his hand twice or three times then tightens the band by the ligature and twists it twice or three times and the tightening should be moderate.وإن كان المبتدأ فى الفصد، فليكن شدّه خفيفا ولا يبالغ حتّى لا يعود الى الموضع مرّتين او ثلاثا، وي
Because when the bandage is not moderate, either by being too tight and preventing the flow of blood, or by being too loose and also preventing the flow of blood, then after tightening it one should rub both hands over the affected area.
Until the veins swell and become apparent to the touch, then the phlebotomist should wipe the blade of his knife with a little old oil especially, and then place his left hand's index finger on the same vein under the spot he wants to cut, slightly to avoid the vein from slipping and missing the blow. Because some veins are like a belt and slip away when phlebotomized, and others are filled with air, so when you place the blade on them they sink under the blade and trick the phlebotomist and he doesn't open the vein, and even if he opens it, it will only be a small opening.
For that reason, the phlebotomist should be steady and patient with all these matters, then bring down the blade; if it opens the vein from that pass, well and good, otherwise he should try again under that spot a little bit or above it quickly, provided the spot is not swollen.And know that the vein sometimes turns back up into the arm, so you should keep your hand on it and not take it off until you see the blood flow.
If he swells or the patient feels distressed, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage; for it may bring on a hot swelling and he should not enter the bathhouse, then phlebotomize again if he wishes; if you insert the blade and the opening is small and the flow of blood thin
and you fear that not enough blood will come out as you desire, then reinsert the blade into the same slit gently and on the level, and increase the opening a little, and do this quickly before the spot swells; for in many people the spot swells when there is a small opening.And if you see the vein swollen and red like a string, phlebotomize it without hesitating because it is a good vein.
If you see that it is swollen, do not return to it at all, for it will not help; place on it some of the oil emulsion, for it facilitates the flow of blood and is better in this place than oil itself or any other fat.
Use the oil emulsion in all your phlebotomies of the veins when the flow of blood is difficult; also, the universal antidote and scopolamine will do this if some of either is placed on the site, for the blood becomes thinner and more fluid when it is thick and viscous.
If a large swelling occurs at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, especially for someone who has never been bled before or if the opening of the vein is small, quickly place on the swelling a sponge soaked in lukewarm water and salt, and bind it there for an hour; it will become thinner.
It is proper that you do this after the blood has left the vein itself completely or another vein; if something remains at the site for several days of blackness or greenness, it does no harm; if you like, apply to it some myrrh and aloes dissolved in alcohol.
Or something from the essence of fennel and the like; it often happens that a swelling or lump occurs when bleeding the basilic vein; place your hand on it, and if you find it smooth under your touch, that is a bad lump, so beware of placing any of what we mentioned on it.
For it often happens that arterial blood is shed; however, bandage it with something that constricts to harden the site and then treat it with other treatments until it heals; you should withdraw blood from each person according to their strength and the predominant color of their blood.وأمّا عروق الأيدي والأرجل فهي منفصلة فى العروق واللحم والشحم والعظام والأوتار.
The veins of the hands and feet are separate in the veins, flesh, fat, bones, and tendons; if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red, and likewise if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner, and likewise if it is sharp, until its edge is gone; for someone who is full-bodied and needs to withdraw blood all at once.
Let the incision be made with a broad blade, and for the weak, let it be made with a narrower blade. It should be made in several incisions, and the hole should be narrow. The best way to make an incision for phlebotomy is to make a curved,斜切開, not a stitch.
This method of phlebotomy is safe from bleeding and nerve damage, and it is better and safer than phlebotomy across or lengthwise. If a person is prone to fainting during phlebotomy, they should be given something to eat before the procedure, such as bread soaked in pomegranate water or скинжбин.
If he is hot-tempered and the blood comes out in three or four incisions, then if he has a cold temperament, he should be given bread soaked in mallow wine, or in honeyed wine flavoured with أفاويه, or in fragrant wine before the procedure.
If fainting occurs during phlebotomy and it is caused by the outflow of a large amount of blood, then he should be given meat water and thin, fragrant wine, and should use perfumed ointments, and his chest should be rubbed with them. He should also use all the treatments mentioned in the section on fainting.
Those who want to freshen their arm and circulate their blood again, if their phlebotomy was for a large amount of blood and their strength is weak, should circulate the blood little by little, according to their strength, over several days.وإن كان فصده لاستفراغ قليل وقوّته قوّة معتدلة فلى سرّح دمه مرّتين او ثلاثا فى اليوم، وأمّا إن كان يستفرغه للبرودة فينبغى أن يبدأ بالذراع الأيمن فيفصد منه ثم الذراع الأيسر فيسّرح منه ثم الكبد فيسرّح منه.
And for those who want to freshen their arm and circulate their blood again, and whose body is strong, they should do so seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy. And for those who want to attract the blood from their body to the opposite side that it has tilted towards, they should do so on the second or third day.وإن كان فصده لاستفراغ قليل وقوّته قوّة معتدلة فلى سرّح دمه مرّتين او ثلاثا فى اليوم، وأمّا إن كان يستفرغه للبرودة فينبغى أن يبدأ بالذراع الأيمن فيفصد منه ثم الذراع الأيسر فيسّرح منه ثم الكبد فيسرّح منه.
And as for those who have much blood in their bodies that has become hot and acute, causing fever, one should remove the blood in one go, taking out a large quantity and enlarging the opening until the membrane is exposed, after having checked all the conditions for phlebotomy. And you should place your hand on the pulse when the blood is flowing so that death does not occur at the site of the membrane, for this often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and careless, and it is not appropriate if you want to loosen the arm and let the blood flow again.
And if the opening of the vein is closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow, you should not press on it heavily or twist it forcefully, as this is very harmful. Instead, either leave it until you perform phlebotomy again, or use the scalpel to loosen any congealed blood in the opening of the vein.وينبغى أن يكون الفصد فى أوّل النهار قبل طلوع الشمس بيسير فإنّه أسهل للدم وعند ذلك ينبغى أن يصادف المكان الذى تريد الفصد منه الهواء الطلق وليس بينه وبين الهواء ساتر فإن كان بينهما ساتر فالدم يكون أثقل وأبطأ فى الخروج.
It is preferable to perform phlebotomy in the early morning, just before sunrise, as this is easier for the blood flow. At that time, you should ensure that the area you want to phlebotomize is exposed to fresh air, and there is no barrier between it and the air. If there is a barrier, the blood flow will be heavier and slower.If the vein has become swollen, leave it.You can also apply something salty dissolved in water or something like theriac or scilla on the area and gently press it to encourage the blood flow.
Do not touch it until the swelling subsides, and if you must draw blood again for whatever reason, either phlebotomize above that spot or on the other arm or vein.وإن كان الذراع قد تكلّف من الفصد الاوّل فلم يبقَ فيه من الدم ما يتسارع به إلى موضع الفصد فإنّه يقوى على الخروج ولا يسير بلين، فإمّا أن تعيده إلى حالته الاولى بالفصد وإمّا أن تضع عليه شيئا من المراهم المسكنات حتّى يسكن الور
And if the arm has become tired from the first phlebotomy and there is no blood left in it to speed up towards the phlebotomy site, it will be strong and stiff, so either return it to its original state by phlebotomizing again or apply some soothing ointments to calm the swelling.As for phlebotomizing the brachial artery, it is done instead of the ulnar or basilic veins if they are not available or are difficult to find, as it is a composite of both. The procedure is as follows: the patient immerses their hand in hot water until the forearm turns red and the vein becomes visible, then a bandage is tightly wrapped around the arm.
Then the vein is pricked on a slight deviation, neither to the side nor upwards or downwards, and the incision should be wide. You should phlebotomize above the wrist joint by a little, for if the blood does not come out easily, put the hand back in the vessel with hot water and let the blood flow into the water.
until you get what you need. If you are in the summer days, you may not need to put the hand back in hot water. The most common reason for making blood flow into hot water is in winter time. Phlebotomizing this vein is safer than all other veins. Because there is no vein underneath it or a nerve, and phlebotomizing the right ulnar vein is beneficial for liver disorders. The way to do it is to tie the wrist with a bandage or with your hand after putting it in hot water until the vein swells.
Because there is no vein underneath it or a nerve, and phlebotomizing the right ulnar vein is beneficial for liver disorders. The way to do it is to tie the wrist with a bandage or with your hand after putting it in hot water until the vein swells. It is very apparent to the senses, then phlebotomize it slightly off-center. If you cut it completely, it won't harm him at all. Be careful not to go deep with the knife because there is a nerve underneath the site, and the spot is stripped of meat. Then put the hand back in hot water.
Let the blood flow into it, because if you don't put it back in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the mouth of the vein and prevent it from flowing. When you've taken out as much blood as you need, put some oil and salt on the vein so that it doesn't heal too quickly.
And you should do the same with each narrow branch. As for the benefit of phlebotomizing the left ulnar vein, it is beneficial for spleen disorders. You should do the same with this one as well, just like the second one. As for phlebotomizing the popliteal vein, its benefit is for disorders in the lower part of the body, such as uterine disorders.
And menorrhagia, kidney disorders, chronic sores on the thighs and legs, and similar disorders. The way to phlebotomize it is to put his leg in hot water and massage it until the veins appear, then tie a bandage above the ankle joint, and the vein is located at the back of the heel, towards the thumb.
And it divides in the face of man into many branches, so phlebotomize him at the widest division, or at the ankle, at its junction; for that is better and safer. And if you phlebotomize him in the face, beware of the nerves under it in the face.
And let your phlebotomy be by twisting as if you were about to amputate, and the scalpel should be a blade; for if the blood does not flow easily on the first attempt of the phlebotomist, let him return his leg in hot water and leave the blood to flow until it is empty, for if the phlebotomist misses the vein with the first incision.
Let him return to phlebotomy a little higher, for the site is safe and there is no danger if you beware of the nerve as we said; and so do with the popliteal vein of the other leg, the same. But the sciatic vein is located, as we said, at the back of the heel on the lateral side.
And the use of phlebotomy for hip pain, if it is due to hot blood; and the manner of phlebotomy: let the patient enter the bath quickly and pull his leg from under the hip to above the ankle with four fingers in a thin, long bandage, for it will not appear otherwise.
And when it appears, phlebotomize it on any condition that holds you; either by twisting, which is better, or cut it out and split it open, for its site is safe, and in most people it is very delicate, but if you do not find it
and did not appear to sense, phlebotomize some of its branches, which are those that appear in the back of the foot towards the little and ring fingers, and beware of the nerves and send out the amount of blood you want.
Then loosen the tension, and put on a pad at the site of phlebotomy, and tighten the site; for it soon heals.
Chapter 96.
In leechcraft and how to use it.
Cupping vessels may be made of horn, wood, copper or glass. Cupping has two aspects: one is cupping with incisions and blood-letting, the other is cupping without incisions.
This cupping which is without incisions has two aspects.
And the cupping of the two cheeks, which are the sides of the neck, and the cupping of the chin, which is under the lower jaw below the mouth, and the cupping of the shoulders, and the cupping of the coccyx at the base of the tail, and the cupping of the two forearms, and the cupping of the legs, and the cupping of the ankles.
Cupping draws blood from the fine veins scattered in the flesh and for that reason it does not weaken as much as phlebotomy and cupping, whether with fire or without, should not be used in any disease that is due to fullness until the body is completely exhausted.وأمّا الحجامة التى تكون بالشرط فمواضعها أربعة عشر أيضا، منها ثلاثة عشر موضعا تجتذب من كلّ محجم الشرط والدم معا، وواحد لا يجتذب إلا الشرط فقط.
And as for cupping which is with incisions, its sites are also fourteen, of which thirteen draw both the incision and blood together, and one only draws the incision itself. If there is a need for cupping for a disease or as a precaution, we use it at any time during the month, whether at the beginning, middle or end.
This is because some people, when their blood becomes excessive and in need of being extracted by cupping, feel heaviness and headache, while others experience fullness and redness in their face, head and neck, while others experience itching in their face and sides, darkness and itching in their eyes.
And some laugh a lot, and some find the taste of blood in their mouths and their gums swell and they spit up blood, and some sleep a lot, and some see in their dreams blood, and redness, and wounds, and what is similar to this, so whenever we see something like that.
Especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we then commanded cupping after two or three hours have passed of the day. As for the benefit of cupping on the nape, it benefits from heaviness in the head and water flowing to the eyes.
But it should be after evacuating the whole body. This cupping can be instead of phlebotomy in the head, and one must beware to use it if one has a cold brain or a cold, as it will greatly harm them.
For that reason, the elderly and those with cold diseases in their heads should not use it, and those who are accustomed to it will cause them to forget.
For that reason, the barber should be ordered to lower his hand with the cup slightly below for fear of generating forgetfulness. As for cupping on the shoulder, it is instead of phlebotomy in the ankle and phlebotomy basilic vein.
For that reason, it benefits from asthma and shortness of breath, and splitting the apparatus of breathing, and coughing, and fullness, and one should lift cupping on the shoulder a little because if it was placed below, it would generate weakness in the heart and stomach.
As for cupping on the cheek, it benefits from pains that occur in the head, eye pain, migraine, and sore throat, and is instead of phlebotomy basilic vein. One should command the barber to not deepen his hand with incision so as not to cut an artery and cause bleeding.
As for cupping under the chin, it benefits from mouth ulcers and gum disease, and other diseases in the mouth, and can take the place of phlebotomy in the jaw which is in the lips. As for cupping on the shoulders, it benefits from palpitations that are from fullness and heat.
Vein-letting on the two bellies of the forearm is beneficial for the same reasons as the three vein-lettings basilic, ulnar, and cephalic because it draws blood from all those thin veins in the flesh, and those thin veins are drawn from other thicker veins until the drawing reaches the three thickest veins.
You should tell the blood-letter not to cut too deep because the area is bereft of flesh and underneath it are nerves and arteries. As for the single cupping done on the coccyx, it benefits hemorrhoids and sores in the lower abdomen.
You should tell the blood-letter to use a large cup made of brass because the area requires strong suction and sometimes the glass cup breaks if many incisions are made. The cups on the legs decrease edema significantly.
Because it draws blood from the entire body and benefits chronic pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder, as well as inducing menstruation and helping with blisters and skin bumps, serving the same purpose as vein-letting on the top and bottom of the foot except that it is much more exhausting for the body and often causes fainting in many people. The cups on the ankles are almost as beneficial as cupping on the legs.
Placing the cups: First, place the cup empty and create moderate suction without leaving the cups in place for too long; rather, place them quickly and remove them just as quickly so that the humors flow to the area evenly. Repeat this process until the area turns red and opens up.
When the blood appears, then cup and continue sucking gently little by little, and then examine the state of the patient's body; if a person is thin with porous skin, you should only cup once to avoid causing an ulcer.
And you should command the barber to enlarge the incision and deepen it slightly, and gently massage and move the area. If there is thickness in the blood, then one should incision twice. In the first time, they should open a path for the thin blood and its water, and in the second to completely expel the thick blood.
If the blood is very cloudy, then the incision should be repeated a third time to achieve the goal. In general, if we want to expel a little blood, we are content with one incision; if we want to expel a lot of blood, we make more incisions, and if we estimate that the blood is thick
One should make an incision deep enough to reach the subcutaneous fat; this is the appropriate depth for the incision. There are certain ointments that should be used when placing the cupping glasses, and certain waters, and there are things that one who is being bled should be careful of, especially if their skin is thick, hard, dry, and their pores are narrow
One should anoint the sites of the cupping glasses with oils that are dilating, softening, and dissolving. If it is summer time, one could use oils such as rose oil, violet oil, sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
And if it is winter, one could use oils such as narcissus oil, lily of the valley oil, chamomile oil, or dill oil and the like. If the waste product is thick and cold, then one should use oils such as marjoram oil, myrrh oil, parsley oil, or fennel oil and the like.
If the person being bled has wide pores and soft flesh, then they should abstain from using oil. Such people should wash their cupping glasses after bleeding with rose water, cold water, grape vine water, pumpkin water, or purslane water and the like. And if one's blood is very moist
They should wash their cupping glasses with vinegar, rose water, sumac water, and the like. And if one's waste products are thick, they should wash their cupping glasses with old wine, marjoram water, parsley stew, or chamomile tea and the like. One should be cautious about cupping in a bathhouse or immediately after a bath.
It should be used after leaving the bath an hour or two, and no one should sleep after blood-letting; what the person who is to be cupped, and the one doing the cupping, should do before and after blood-letting.
You should first look at it, and if the person to be cupped or blood-let is bilious, and his blood is predominantly sharp and inflammatory, he should take cooling remedies such as pomegranates, dandelions, endive, scordium, and similar herbs, and make his food quail, lamb, and similar dishes.
And if his temperament is cold, he should be given honeyed drinks, or scordium seed syrup, and moderate aromatic wine, which is in between old and new, and he should be instructed to eat less, and make his food quail, pigeons, sparrows, and young doves, cooked dishes, and it is preferable that the drink on the day of cupping or blood-letting is more than food.
It is also preferable to give some people a theriac, or a musk medicine, or an elecampane drug at times before cupping or blood-letting, or after it, to strengthen the vital organs and thin the blood, and it should not be given to those who are feverish.
And as for unconditional leeches, they are leeches that are placed on the liver, spleen, breasts, abdomen, navel, kidney position, and hip bone, because these organs cannot withstand scars, and their purpose is either to attract blood from one organ to another.
As when we place a leech on the breasts in case of epistaxis, or we use it to release a cold wind that has settled in an organ, as when we place a leech on the abdomen and navel, it loosens the organ, makes it warm, and relieves pain by dissolving that wind.
And it may be placed on the kidneys if there is an obstruction or stones, so that by its吸引力it might open the obstruction or dislodge the stone from its place; and likewise, if placed on the liver and spleen when a wind disturbs them, these cupping glasses may be used empty merely by suction.
And they may be used with fire, and they may be used filled with lukewarm water in disorders of the shoulder joint; that is, the cupping glass, which should be large, is to be filled with hot water alone or with water in which some herbs suitable for this purpose have been boiled.
Then they are placed filled on the affected area, held in place, removed and reapplied as needed. This is the image of the cupping glass that is used with fire:
Its mouth should be the width of two open fingers as pictured, and its depth should be half a span. There should be a small hole in one side, about halfway down, that is large enough for a needle to pass through. It is made from white brass or yellow brass with a thick rim.
It should be smooth and polished so as not to injure the organ when placed on it. In the center of its interior there should be a horizontal protuberance made of brass or iron where the candle is placed with fire. These cupping glasses may be made large, larger than what we have described, and small, depending on the disorder.
Now, we will discuss the use of these cupping glasses. The cupping glasses for children and thin people are not like those for men with robust bodies. As for the way to place this cupping glass with fire on an organ, take a flax wick that has been tightly rolled, or a small tallow candle, and place it in the center of the protuberance in the cupping glass.
Let the fire ascend upwards towards the bottom of the cupping glass so that the patient's body is not burned. Then place it on the organ, and keep your finger over the hole we mentioned until you are ready to remove the cupping glass.وإذا كان العضو ضخماً شائكاً أزلقت عليه زلقة ثمّ وضعته عليه لئلا يثلمه أو يؤذيه وأمّا سعة المحاجم التى تستعمل بالنار والبرودة فمن نصف اصبع الى اصبعين ومن اصبعين الى ثلاثة ومن ثلاثة الى أربعة، وهذا على قدر الاعضاء الت
The steam will emerge from that opening, and the cupping glass will be released in its place. Then, the wick is advanced according to the description, and it is returned if needed. As for the cupping glass that is used for the disease of water retention, there is no rigid rod or hole in it.
It is only used by filling it with water and placing it on the affected body part. This is its image: .
This cupping glass, the larger it is to hold a lot of water, the better.
Chapter Seventy-Eight
On the suspension of leeches.
Leeches are most commonly used in parts where cupping glasses cannot be placed due to their small size, such as the lip, gum and similar areas, or because the body part is naked of flesh, such as the finger, nose and similar areas.And leeches are of two kinds: one kind is used for drawing blood from a part, and the other for injecting it into a part.
And the way to use them is to get leeches that are in clean, fresh water free of impurities and leave them for a day and night in fresh water until they are hungry and there is nothing left in their stomachs.Then you take one of them and make it fast with a thread so that it does not move away from the place where it is put on the body, then you bring its mouth to the place where you want to withdraw blood from, and it sucks immediately. Then the body is bled first by venesection or cupping, then the diseased member is wiped.And if you want to inject blood into a part, you take it with your fingers and make it fast so that it does not move away from the place where it is put on
until it turns red, then put it on the part, and if it is full, it will fall off, and if you can suck the spot with a cupping glass, it is more beneficial, but if not, wash the part with vinegar, then with plenty of water, and rub and squeeze it, and if blood continues to flow after the leech falls off, it will be a rash, so wet a linen cloth in cold water.And let it stay on the part for a long time until it stops bleeding, then wash the part with water and vinegar.
And put it on top until the bleeding stops, if the blood increases, sprinkle powdered alum or sumac or similar astringent until the bleeding stops or place peeled almonds on the spot.Or take some fresh water and add vinegar to it so that it becomes a little sour, then wash the part with it, and if the bleeding does not stop, put some honey on it, and if it still does not stop, cut the skin around the wound with a sharp knife and make cuts in a circle.
And it should be left until the leech sticks to the spot, for then the blood will stop; and if it is necessary to re-attach the leech, do not attach that one again if another can be used. If the leech refuses to attach, the spot should be wiped with fresh blood.
Or, pierce the spot with a needle so that some blood comes out, then place it there; for when it feels something of the blood, it will stick to its place. If you want to remove it, sprinkle on it some myrrh or salt or ashes, and it will drop off in its place.
Chapter III.
On Splinting.
This chapter is also from the craft of medicine, which is necessary for splinting broken and dislocated bones.
Know, my children, that this chapter may be claimed by ignorant physicians and laymen, and those who have never read a book or a letter on the subject from the ancients.
For this reason, this art of science has become extinct in our country, and I have never met a master of it.And since I am the first to introduce it, I will describe its methods.اعلموا أنّ الكسر هو انكسار العظام وذهاب مواضعها وفصلها عن بعضها بحيث لا يمكن لها الوصل إلا بض Know that a fracture is the breaking of bones, and their separation so that they cannot be joined except by means of setting them, and this only after much difficulty.I have gained this knowledge through my long reading of the books of the ancients, and my eagerness to understand them, until I extracted the science from them; and also through my constant experience and practice throughout my life.وأول ما يبدأ به فى الكسر هو أن يتفحّص الموضع المكسور ويشاهد هل هو نازف أم
The first thing to do in a fracture is to examine the broken spot, and see whether it is bleeding or not.I have illustrated for you in this chapter all that my knowledge has reached me on this subject.و And I have applied my experience to it, after bringing it close to you and freeing it from the branches of prolixity and summarizing it to the utmost degree of brevity, and making it as clear as can be, and illustrating for you in it many pictures of the instruments used in it.وإليكم الآن ترتيب ما يستعمل فى الكسور.
And it is from the increase of statement as I did in the two previous chapters, and there is no strength except through Allah, the Most High, the Most Great.
Chapter 1.
In it, he will speak about the bones and their various injuries, and before we begin to talk about the individual broken or dislocated limbs, one by one, it is fitting that at the beginning of this chapter, we should mention a few general points and principles. You must first understand them and grasp their reality, you and whoever else is eager to learn this noble craft.
I say that whenever a bone is broken, dislocated, bruised, or sprained, you should first apply a splint or traction, or both. This should not be prevented by any obstacle such as weakness of strength, or if the person affected was a child or an elderly man, or if the time was very hot or extremely cold.
Then his diet should be restricted to cold pulses, poultry and kid meat, and he should avoid drinks, fatty meats, and over-eating, or any food that fills the blood vessels with blood, until you are sure that there is no swelling and you do not expect any fluid to leak into the affected area.
Then the patient should return to his usual diet, and if the broken bone starts to knit, the patient should eat nutritive, hearty, and thick foods that have a sticky consistency, such as porridge, rice, meat heads, goat legs, and cow stomachs.وأن يشرب شرابا دافئا رقيق اللزوجة مثل الحليب الدافىء والخلّ المائيّ والسمن المائىّ وعصير العنب. He should also drink warm, thin fluids such as warm milk, watery vinegar, oil water, grape juice, eggs, soft fish, and thick drinks. By following this treatment, the bone fracture will heal faster and better. Know that broken bones in strong men and elderly people can never heal and join back to their original nature.وأما الصبىّ والمرأة والشيخ الفتى فيمكن أن يلتئم الكسر فيه على طبيعته الأولى وان لم يكن مثله ولابدّ، وأمّا الكسور التى تكون فى العظام النافعة للحركة كعظم الزند والساعد والكفّ وعظم الفخذ والقدم والذراع والكتف وغير ذلك من العظام التى هى آلة الحركة فينبغى أن يتدبّر الكسر فيها بالتئام وانجبار
For the bones become dry and hard, and that which was of extreme softness among them joins and fuses together, like the bones of small children; but nature produces upon the broken bone something resembling glue on all sides, by means of which it coheres and is bound together until it becomes continuous.
And binds it together until it is extremely strong and firm, as it was at first, so that nothing hinders him from his actions,.
For this reason, the patient's food should be that which has firmness, adhesion, and thickness, as we have said. Know that fractures vary according to the different members; for a fracture of the leg-bone is different from a fracture of the head, and a fracture of the breast-bone is different from a fracture of the back-bone.
And all the other members also differ from one another; and we shall mention each type of fracture in its own place in detail, separated from others. And a fracture of bone may also differ in itself.
For it may be a compound fracture, without any pieces being driven in; and it may be a longitudinal fracture along the bone, and there are projections from the fracture and un projec tions, and the fracture is accompanied by a wound and a perforation of the skin, and the fracture may be a slight crack.
And each type has its own special method of treatment, as will be mentioned in detail in its proper place; and by which you may know a fracture of the bone is its crookedness and protrusion to the sense, and its crepitus when you press it with your hand.
So when there is no evident crookedness in the part, nor crepitus, nor do you feel any disturbance on feeling the bone, and the patient does not experience much pain, then there is no fracture there; but it may be a bruise, or a slight fracture, or a mere crack; therefore you should not move it at all by extension and flex ion.
Take care of it with the remedies mentioned later what suits the site, and then tie it gently, and know that if a bone is fractured and crushed by two without causing splintering except that each part has moved away from its owner.
You should hurry to straighten it and adjust it before a hot swelling occurs, and if a hot swelling occurs, leave it for a few days until the hot swelling subsides, then adjust it in any way you can with gentleness and cunning.
Know that its correction and adjustment are easier than the bone in which splintering has occurred, then it is tightened as mentioned later. If there are splinters in the bone, it is necessary to extend the broken limb on both sides, whether hand or foot.
Either with your hands if the limb is small, or with two ropes, or with a rope and your hand. Place the limb on a flat surface in its natural shape so that when the two parts of the broken bone extend, then pull back those projections into their places in any way you can with cunning and gentleness.
Be very careful not to cause the patient pain or discomfort, and try your best to bind one bone with its partner in the best way possible. At that time, you should touch and feel them with your hand, and if you find something contrary, correct it and adjust it as much as you can.وينبغى لك أن تحضر من الأدوية التى تذكر بعد حين ما يوافق الموضع، فتبدأ بهذا المرهم الذى ذكرناه أولا وتضعه على موضع الكسر وعلى الجروح، ثمّ تطلى عليه عسل النحل وترشه بالماء البارد، ثمّ تربطه بضمادة من اللون الأبيض، وتمنع المريض من الحركة والانفعال وتطعمه ما يوافق وتسقيه المراهم والأدوية المسهلة للبلغم والم
You should bring the remedies mentioned later that suit the site, and first use the ointment we mentioned and put it on the fracture and on the wounds, then apply honey and spray it with cold water, then tie it with a white bandage, and prevent the patient from moving and getting excited, and feed him what agrees with him and give him ointments and medications that ease phlegm.And beware of excessive extension and strong compression as many ignorant people do, and often cause hot swelling or chronic illness in the limb, as I have seen them do many times.وينب
Then, after leveling, mastering, and tightening, force that member into a state of rest and tranquility, and warn the sick person against moving it in any way during waking or sleep, when changing position or disturbed, or when defecating, and during all other movements to their fullest extent. Make sure that the position of the member is one in which pain is avoided.
This is because when he feels pain or discomfort while the member is in its upright position, he should move it to another position where there is no pain, and he should also make sure that this new position is level and straight.
So that the member does not become crooked when it heals. Now, as for the way to splint a broken member, know that broken members differ in size, from small, like the arm, finger, or wrist, and so on.
For small members, the wrapping should be soft and gentle, but for large members like the thigh, back, or chest, the wraps should be broad and sturdy, as a broad bandage holds and supports large members more effectively, tightening them evenly on all sides without any gaps.
Then, after you finish leveling, you should start applying the appropriate plaster. Start by gently applying the plaster splint over the fracture, then wrap the bandage around the fracture site three or four times, depending on the member, tightening it gently as you go. Then move upward from the fracture site.
Wrap it more loosely as you move upward from the fracture site, then space out the wraps slightly and loosen the tension a little at a time so that you get a good grip on the healthy area above the fracture site. Then take another bandage and wrap it around the fracture site as well.
Then move downward from the fracture site, wrapping more loosely and loosening the tension as you go, just as you did with the top bandage. Then place some soft padding or gauze between the bandages to even out any crookedness in the fracture.
If there is any crookedness, then do not put anything in it; then wrap another bandage around it and make firm bandages on top of these turns, hour after hour, if there is no swelling or hot inflammation in the part.
If there is any swelling or hot inflammation, apply something that will soothe the inflammation and reduce the swelling, then leave it for a few days; then make firm bandages on top of these turns, hour after hour. The bandages should be made of half-slender, carved cane, prepared with skill, or they may be made of wood from strainers.
These should be made of pine, palm leaves, heath, or rush, or whatever is available for this purpose; the width of each bandage should remain the same as in the previous example.
However, the bandage that is placed directly on the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the other bandages. The length of the bandage should be made according to the size of the broken member, large or small: the shape of the bandage:.
Then wrap another bandage around the splints in the same way as before, and tie it firmly on top with strong threads in the same way as described earlier, which is that your hold on the site of the fracture should be firmer. The further away from the fracture you go, the looser the bandage should be.
The threads should be of intermediate thickness, neither too thick nor too thin; they should especially not be made from twisted linen strips as some unskilled people do, for that is a great mistake.
Thick threads do not allow for the desired amount of control, and thin threads are also unsuitable as they do not provide sufficient grip. There should be no less than a finger's width between the splints.وينبغى أن يكون الشدّ على الجبائر بقدر ما يحكم به الكسر، ولا يشدّ شدّا يمنع من التحوّل والانقلاب، فإنّ ذلك لا بدّ منه إذا كان في العضو نفخ أو ورم حارّ، ولذلك ينبغى شدّه شدّا ي
If the patient suffers from the ends of the splints after being tightened in the correct places, place under them some soft felt or fluffy wool so that nothing hurts him because of it. As for if the fracture is accompanied by a wound and a breach occurs in the skin, we will come to mention it separately.
Know that not every fractured member should be tightened with splints on the first day, for if the member is large, it should not be placed in splints until five or seven days have passed, or more, depending on how secure you are from the occurrence of hot swelling.
This is the description of the bandages that were used by the early people to set fractures, dislocations and sprains. It is a general, concise description of a bandage that sets fractures and is suitable for most temperaments, especially children and women, because it does not tend towards heat or cold.
It is made from the flour dust that clings to the walls of the millstone when the mill turns, which you knead as it is without sifting it with egg white and make its consistency neither thick nor thin, then use it.
Description of another bandage that sets fractures, dislocations and sprains: take ten dirhams each of mash, ladan, caraway seeds, rosemary, myrrh, and ten dirhams each of Armenian or Roman clay, and five dirhams each of alder and castoreum. Grind and mix all with alder water or egg white if the patient's temperament is hot, then use this bandage, for it is good at joining broken bones quickly and suits most people due to its moderation.وإن كان مزاجه باردا فليخلط بماء العاقول او بصفار البيض، وإن اشتدّ البرد جدّا فأضف اليه شيء من الترياق الجذاب.
Description of another bandage that is also beneficial for fractures and sprains: take ten dirhams each of rosemary and mash, ten dirhams of white hellebore, five dirhams each of myrrh and caraway seeds, six dirhams of Armenian clay, grind and sift all finely, then knead with water or egg white and use.
A bandage for joints and bones that have become dislocated from their sockets, and which relieves the pain that arises from them, as well as for a bone fracture or fracture. Take spun wool and soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area. This bandage has no power to set a broken bone.
But it is excellent in relieving hot swelling and pain, especially when used with a cold compress. Another bandage that sets a broken bone: Take fig leaves and poppies and pound them both together. Then apply them as a poultice while they are still moist. Another simple bandage to be used when the bone has set:
To draw out the remaining swelling, take equal parts of plantain leaves, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, and ground carnation. Pound them all together and mix with plaster to form a paste. If the affected area is inflamed, mix the ingredients with coriander water or just water.
Another bandage that is even more effective in reducing inflammation than the previous one is used when a hard swelling occurs after a bone has set. Take equal parts of plantain leaves, flax seeds, fenugreek, rosemary, violet flowers, and chamomile flowers.
Pound them all together and mix with vinegar water, fresh water, or plaster, depending on the temperature of the affected area and its level of inflammation. However, in his book, Hippocrates does not mention applying anything to a broken bone when setting it.
Except for cerat, which is made from wax and oil alone, and he described it to be of medium thickness, not too thin or too thick. However, Galen believed that when setting a broken bone, one should apply ingredients with some warmth, such as myrrh, pitch, and gum, in addition to what we have already mentioned.
A bandage that is beneficial for weakness and pain: Take equal parts of mugwort, roasted barley, human hair (or bird feathers), plantain leaves, and salt. Pound and sift them together, then mix to form a paste and apply it as a poultice. As for how long the bandage should be left on,
Then it is resolved, that you should look, if there is no pain or itching or movement of the broken bone out of its place, do not resolve it for many days, but if there is severe itching or worrying pain or swelling in the site.
Then proceed to resolve it at the time and do not postpone it at all, and remove the bandage from it, then take a soft cloth or sea sponge with lukewarm water and wash the site until the itching subsides and the pain is relieved, then leave the limb to rest for an hour.
Then you should apply to it wadded wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and tie it on overnight until you are safe from hot swelling and the swelling of the limb subsides and the pain goes away, then return it to gentle compression and a little bandage, but do not compress it as tightly as before.
And be gentle with it until it heals, and if you see that the swelling, redness, pain, and swelling have completely disappeared, and you need bandaging and compression, then return it as you did before, equally. But if nothing happens to the limb of what we mentioned.
Do not resolve it except after three, four, five, or seven days, and it may be left for twenty days, all depending on the condition of the limb as we said, until the bone has healed and the meat is about to join.
At that time, also increase the compression more than your first compression, and also increase the thickness of the patient's food as mentioned earlier. If you see that the site of the fracture has dried and become thinner more than it should, then know that the food is prevented from reaching it.
So moisten it with lukewarm water every time you resolve it, and let this be every three days, and lighten the compression a little, for by doing this food will flow to the limb and it will heal quickly. As for what ignorant physiotherapists do, of breaking the limb again.
If it does not heal first as it should and heals crookedly, then that is a mistake on their part and a great danger. If it had been correct, the early authorities would have mentioned it in their books, and we would have seen evidence of it in their work, but I have seen no trace of it at all. The correct course is not to perform this procedure.
Chapter 2.
On fractures of the head.
There are many types of fractures that can occur in the head, and they can take on various forms and have diverse causes. Some fractures are caused by a blow from a sword, which may split the bone all the way to the peritoneum beneath it. Just as an axe splits wood.
This type of fracture is called a 'split fracture'. The wound from such a fracture can be large or small.And if the sword cuts only part of the bone and splits its surface but does not penetrate all the way through, this type of fracture is called an avulsion fracture.
Another type of fracture is called a 'comminuted fracture', caused by a blow from a stone or falling on a stone, etc. This fracture may be penetrating, having approached the membrane beneath the bone, or it may be in the surface of the bone.And there are fractures that are called '圧迫骨折' caused by compression, such as when a heavy object falls on the head, causing the bone to collapse without penetrating the membrane beneath it.
The wound from these fractures can also be large or small. There are also fractures that are hidden within the bone, only visible at the hairline, a slight fracture.
This type of fracture is called a  'hairline fracture'. Another type is caused by a fall or a blow from a stone, etc., which penetrates the surface of the bone and creates a concave depression, similar to what happens to a copper vessel when it is struck.And there are fractures that occur due to a twist or torque, where the bone is twisted or turned, causing a break. This type of fracture is called a  'torqued fracture'.
This type of fracture is most common in the heads of children with soft bones, and all these types of fractures can have fragmented or non-fragmented pieces. We will discuss the treatment of all these types of fractures in their respective sections, and we will identify all these types of fractures through examination.And there are other types of fractures that occur due to the bone being pulled or stretched, causing a break. This type of fracture is called a  'pull fracture'.
And inspect it with probes and pull out the rotten flesh from it, and as for the hairy type, it is known by exposing the bone and wiping and staining it with ink, because the fracture appears black. As for the treatment of the fracture, first look at the symptoms of the patient.
If you see from his symptoms what clearly indicates fear, such as vomiting bile, extension, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, fainting, severe fever, bulging and redness of the eyes, and other similar symptoms, then do not approach the patient or treat him, because death will definitely occur in most cases with these symptoms.
If you see milder symptoms and hope for his recovery, then proceed to treat him. This is because if the injured person comes to you soon after being wounded, and this is during the winter days, then take him into a warm room.
You should strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day in any case, and if it is during the summer days, you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the membrane under the bone becomes rotten and those symptoms that we have described occur.وإن كان الجرح فى الساق أو الذراع فاعمد إلى موضع الكسر وافحصه فإن رأيت العظم مكسورا والكسر قريبا من بعضه بعضا وكان الظفر قد منع من اتّصال أجزاء الكسر فلا بأس عليك أن تصل الكسر وتضبه ثمّ تعالجه بما ذكرناه من المداواة.
If the fracture is in the leg or arm, examine the site of the fracture; if you see that the bone is broken and the pieces are close together, and the nail has prevented the connection of the fracture pieces, then it is permissible for you to connect the fracture and treat it as I have described to you. However, if the fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain and there is fracturing and crushing, then you should cut off the crushed and fractured part as I will describe to you; shave the head of the injured person.فإنّك إذا قطعت الجرح ووصل
When you cut the wound and expose the bone in any way that is possible for you, and according to the shape of the wound and what is easier for the patient, if you see bleeding or hot swelling upon exposing the bone, then address it as appropriate.فإنّه إذا أزيلت الأعراض وقطع الورم الحارّ فى موضعه ولم يبق إلاّ برودة فى الموضع وعظم خفقان القلب وانحطاط القوى واختلاف الكلام والتفات الوجه إلى أحد
And that is to pack the site with bandages soaked in syrup and rose oil, and clean the wound until the swelling subsides and bleeding stops. Then you proceed to hollow out the bone and extract it, and this can be done in one of two ways.
As for the first way, it is to cut the bone with a fine, narrow blade, and this is its picture:
Then use another cutter after this cutter, which is slightly wider, and this is its picture:
You should also use another cutter, which is wider than the second, and it must be that you have a variety of cutters, some of which are wider than others, and some shorter than others, and they must be very sharp-edged, made of Indian iron or good steel.
And use gentle blows on the cutter so as not to shake the head and harm it. If the bone is strong and hard, you should drill around it before using the cutters with drills that they call non-submersible drills. They call them non-submersible drills because they do not submerge into the bone but just break the surface.
Because the drill has a rounded edge just below its sharp tip, like a ring or small circle, that prevents it from penetrating and going beyond the thickness of the bone.And if you do not have any of these drills, you should use a chisel instead, and chisels are better than drills because they do not submerge into the bone but just break the surface.And if you don't have either of those, you can use a sharp-edged knife to cut through the bone, and this is the last resort.
You should have a lot of these drills, each one suitable for the thickness of that bone so that for every skull you have a drill with a sharp tip that is suitable in length and width for the thickness of that skull, and this is the picture of three types:And if you don't have any of these drills, you should use a chisel instead, and chisels are better than drills because they do not submerge into the bone but just break the surface. of the drills: large, medium and small:وينبغى لك أن تتّخذ من هذه المثاقب عدّة كث
The method of drilling around the broken bone is to place the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated, then move the drill to another location and make the distance between each hole as thick as a file or similar.
Then cut with the cutters between each pair of holes, and do this as gently as you can, as we have said, until you remove the bone either by hand or with another object using some of the tools that have been prepared for this purpose.
Like the gaff and the delicate hooks, you should be extremely careful that the drill or cutter does not touch any of the membrane. If you have hollowed out the bone and it is free from the membrane if it was attached to it, then you should remove it.
And smooth the roughness of what remains in the bone with another tool similar to the cutter except that it should be thinner and more delicate than other cutters. If there are any small bones or fragments remaining, remove them gently with the tools you have.وينبغى أن تعلم أنّك إذا أردت أن تخيط فتقا أو جرحا وقد احتاج الى خلع عظم، فإنّ الخلع أولى من الخياطة إذ كان الإلتئام بعد الخلع أتمّ من الإلتئام على الخياطة.
You should know that if you want to stitch a hernia or a wound that requires dislocating a bone, then dislocation is preferable to stitching as healing after dislocation is more complete than healing after stitching. Then treat the wound afterwards with compression and ointments which will be mentioned later. The other side of the operation is quite simple and far from danger, as mentioned by Galen who praised it greatly. This is what he said:وأمّا الثقب حول العظم فلو وقع فى موضع لم يكن فيه عظم، فإنّه يبرأ ولا شيء عليه وأمّا إذا كان فى موضع به عظم فأنت If drilling around the bone occurs in a place where there is no bone, then it will heal with no issues. However, if it occurs in a place with a bone, you should first expose a portion of the bone from the location where the fracture is most prominent and severe. Once you have exposed that portion, place the tip of this lentil-shaped cutter underneath it. This is its appearance:.
The lenticular portion of it is smooth and does not cut anything, and the sharp portion is in its sides that go towards length as you see, so that the lenticular portion is based on the peritoneum and the face of the sharp section is in the bone. Then you hit the section from one side.
with a small hammer until all the bone is cut gently as it turns and you are safe from the membrane, nothing terrible will happen, yes, even if the operator is the most ignorant and most cowardly person, even if he is sleepy.
If something of the membrane remains on the bone in some parts of the bone, scrape it off with the tip of the lenticular section itself and get rid of it gently, for it will be gotten rid of without harm or fear.
However, if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate the membrane and the broken part of the bone is rough and has small splinters, you should remove those roughnesses and pluck out those splinters with delicate curettes that have been made in a variety of sizes so that you can use them in each place according to what the work leads you.
And the same bone, and its shape, you should use in stripping first for the bone the widest of those curettes, then afterwards use one that is finer than it, and continue to do so in turn until you use all of them, the finest and thinnest of all.وإذا كنت تستعمل عدّة المجارد لطافة بعد لطافة وجب عليك أن ترى أيّها أصلح للعظم وأوفقه، فإنّك لا تزال تدور به على العظم حتّى ينفصل عنه كلّه، ويجب عليك ان تجعل وجه المقطع فى موضع الخشونة والشظايا اللطاف ليكون ذلك أمنع من
And as for the other small hairline fractures and minor fractures, you should use a treatment on each one according to what will lead to its healing; this is something that is not hidden from anyone with even the slightest experience in this craft who has read and understood what we have written about large fractures.وأمّا الكسر الطولانىّ الذى يكون مع الخشونة فى أحد جوانبه فيجب عليك أن تجعل المقطع الحادّ على الجانب الأملس وتضرب به على العظم ضربا لطيفا حتّى ينفصل عنه، ثمّ ترفع المقطع من موضعه وتعيده الى موضعه الآخر فإنّه يقطع الخشونة ويمزق الغشاء الذى تحتها فتبقى تلك الخشونة مع العظم وتنفصل تلك الجوانب كل
If the membrane remains exposed when you pull out the bone, you should take a linen cloth the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil, then place it over the mouth of the wound. Then take another folded or triple-folded cloth. You should soak it in syrup and rose oil, then place it over the first cloth. You should do this as gently as possible so as not to put too much pressure on the peritoneum. Then use a wide bandage above it, but only tighten it enough to hold the wound closed.
Let it remain for a day or two, until you are sure that the inflammation has subsided. Then remove the bandage and apply remedies with a little dryness, such as lilium roots, saffron, galangal, and the like, made into a powder.
And sprinkle it on the wound as is, dry, and in general use a medicine that will clear without stinging. In treating the wound, make every effort to keep it clean, free of oil or dirt, and do not let pus accumulate in it at all.
When pus gathers on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and decays it, which can bring great misfortune to the patient. This may occur in the peritoneum when bone is exposed and especially if treatment is neglected.
If you find darkness on its surface, and the patient experiences the symptoms we mentioned, know that he is undoubtedly doomed. If the darkness occurred due to a medication applied to it, and the strength of that medication caused the darkness, then
you should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, mix them well, and soak a cloth in it, then place it on the peritoneum. Then treat it with the appropriate remedies until it heals.
Chapter 3
On mending a broken nose.
Know that nothing breaks in the nose except its upper sides, both or one of them, because they are bones. As for the lower part, it is cartilage and does not break; rather, it may become bruised, crooked, or deformed.
If one of its sides breaks, you should insert the little finger into the nostril and adjust that fracture from the inside with your index finger and thumb from the outside, until you restore the nose to its natural shape. Be gentle in doing this, and make sure that your action does not cause the patient pain.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, then it should be adjusted with a rod that has a slight thickness; if the fracture is on both sides, do the same. The fracture should be treated as soon as possible within the first day of the injury.
If this is not possible, then after the seventh or tenth day when the hot swelling has subsided, insert a cotton thread into the nostril; if the fracture is on one side, use one thread, and if it's on both sides, use two threads.
The threads should have a thickness equal to the size of the nostril cavity; some early bandagers mentioned that the threads should be moistened with ghee and changed every day. However, I do not recommend this method; instead, the threads should be moistened with an egg white mixture with flour powder.
Then, the threads should be left in place until the bone sets and the cartilage hardens. If necessary, goose feather tubes can also be inserted into the nostril, wrapped in soft fabric, to provide additional support for the nose and prevent the patient from breathing through their mouth.
This is not necessary, but if you want to do it, you can either use the goose feather tubes or make the threads yourself. If the nose becomes swollen during the treatment, apply a poultice of cerate or cotton saturated with vinegar and rose oil, or something from the diapulon ointment.
If there is no hot tumor, you should apply a poultice on the outside with fine semolina and ground kalandar mixed with egg white, then place a soft bandage over it, and do not tie anything around the nose at all. If the bones of the nose are broken in small places,
if they are fractured or splintered, you should split them and remove them with the appropriate instrument, then sew up the incision and treat it with ointments suitable for that purpose. If there is a wound inside the nose, it should be treated by irrigation and lead tubes should be used. until it heals.
Chapter 4.
In the treatment of a broken mandible.
If the lower jaw is broken and there is no wound, then its treatment is straightforward. If the break is on the outside only and not in two places, and if it is concaved towards the inside, then its treatment is simple.
You should then, if the break is on the right side, insert the index finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth, and likewise, if the break is on the left side, insert the index finger of the right hand and gently lift the fragment of the break from the inside to the outside.
With your other hand, you should gently smooth out the break from the outside of the jaw, ensuring that it is straightened. If the jaw is broken in two places, a splint should be applied on both sides to straighten it out. If there is a tooth stuck in the gum,
you should extract it with a sharp instrument, then use a piece of gold or silver thread, or a needle, to pull it out. Then you should apply the cerat to the broken jaw, and on top of that a folded cloth, followed by a large splint or a piece of leather equal in length to the jaw, which should be applied firmly. Then you should bind it tightly at the top, in whatever way seems appropriate and allows for compression, so that it does not loosen. You should then instruct the patient to rest and eat soft food, and if you think that something has changed in his appearance, act quickly on the third day.
Then you should bind it tightly at the top, in whatever way seems appropriate and allows for compression, so that it does not loosen. You should then instruct the patient to rest and eat soft food, and if you think that something has changed in his appearance, act quickly on the third day. Then dress the wound with flour made from ground wheat, mixed with egg white or semolina flour, after having removed the cerate; and place on the dressing a soft bandage. As long as this dressing adheres to it and the bone does not become infected, leave it in place.
Do not loosen it until the fracture is healed and the bone has consolidated, for this fracture often consolidates in three weeks. If during that time there is a hot swelling, use what we have mentioned repeatedly to alleviate it, until that swelling goes down.
However, if there is a fracture with a wound, you should examine it. If there is a fragment or fragments of bone that have become separated from the bone, gently extract those fragments using any tool that is suitable for the purpose. If the mouth of the wound is narrow, widen it with a scalpel to the extent that you need to.وإن كان الجرح واسع الفم وبه شظايا عظام مكسّرة لم يمكنك انتزاعها فأمطر موضع الكسر بماء نقي وملح مرّتين فى اليوم، وضمّده كلّ يوم بضماد جديد طريّ مع ما ذكر من التسكين حتّى تشتدّ وتبرأ.
If the wound is wide-mouthed and there are shattered bone fragments that you cannot extract, irrigate the fracture site with pure water mixed with salt twice a day, and dress it every day with a new, soft dressing, along with the pain-relieving measures already mentioned, until it heals and consolidates. Then, when you have extracted those fragments and there is nothing left, outline the mouth of the wound if it is wide; otherwise, apply one of the ointments suitable for this purpose. And then sew up the wound until it heals.
Chapter Five.في علاج الكسور.
On the treatment of fractures. On the treatment of a broken collarbone.هذا العظم من عظام الأطراف الطويلة، وهو عظم جلدي
This bone is one of the long bones; it is a superficial bone. The collarbone most often fractures from the front end of the shoulder joint, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways: either it may fracture and break into two without causing any fragments, which is the easiest to set; or
It may cause fragments, which is more difficult to set; or the fracture may occur with a wound. If the fracture is not associated with a wound, have one assistant hold the arm that adjoins the fractured collarbone, while another stretches the neck towards the other side.وإن كان الكسر مع جرح فالعمل أن تصلحه بغبار الرحى أو بدقيق السميد وتضمده عليه، فإن لم يمكنك ذلك فأمطر موضع الكسر بماء نقي وملح مرتين فى اليوم، وضمّده كلّ يوم بضماد جديد طريّ، حتّى يشتدّ الكسر وتبرأ.
Then straighten the fracture with your fingers until its shape is as it should be, and there is no bump or indentation. If you need to extend it further, you should place a ball of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit.
The bone should be as long as you need it to be, and you should raise and pull out the collarbone, and press the ball with your hand until the fracture is set as it should be. If you cannot pull the end of the collarbone outward because it has sunk too deeply inside, the patient should lie on his back.
A pillow of moderate thickness should be placed under his shoulder joint, and the attendant should press down on the shoulder until the deep bone of the collarbone rises upward. Then fix the fracture with your fingers.
If you feel that a fragment of the collarbone has broken and is moving around, it should be carefully split open to remove the fragment. If the fragment is stuck in the bone, then you must use one of the cutting instruments prepared for this purpose. After placing the splint underneath the collarbone to protect the peritoneum, which is an instrument made of wood or iron and this is its appearance: .
It should resemble a spoon without any bumps, and its width should depend on the size of the bone, large or small. As for its length, it should also depend on the work that can be done, and it should have two ends, one wider and the other narrower as you see in the illustration.
If the wound opening through which you removed the bone fragment is wide and you are confident of the hot swelling, then suturing the wound edges together is appropriate. However, if the opening is small or you fear the hot swelling, then pack the wound with gauze and bandages according to the size of the wound opening.
If a hot swelling occurs, moisten the wound with rose oil and vinegar or wine, and apply pressure on it. As for immobilizing the bone when there is no wound or incision, it is to apply a bandage made from flour dust mixed with egg white on the bone. And place the soft splint on it, then place the ball under his armpit if necessary, then take a bandage that is very long and its width is about a span, then fold a pad over the splint and bandage, then take a cast from a thin board. Its width is about three fingers and the same in length, then insert it into a cloth, then insert that cloth with the cast over the spot where the bandage lies on the fracture, then tighten the bandage over the fracture as you wrap it around. And place it on his neck, under the armpit of the healthy side and under that of the patient's, and return it several times to each side, and you will see that the tension holds the fracture firmly in place, which is self-evident to you.
And your main concern should be that the cast does not move off the broken bone. And so you should examine the patient every day, and whenever the bandage loosens and you see the cast move, correct that and tighten the bandage. Then let the patient sleep on his back, and place a small pillow under his armpit at night.
So that his shoulder rises and the collarbone fracture rises with it, or tie his arm to his neck. Do not loosen the bandage unless something happens in the spot, like itching or swelling for up to twelve days.
Then renew the bandage if you see a reason for it. And return to tightening and leave it until the collarbone fracture heals and becomes consolidated, which is stronger and firmer in twenty-eight days. In some people this may happen sooner.
Chapter VI.
On the fracture of the shoulder. The shoulder rarely fractures in its broad part, but rather in its edges, and one knows this by touch, and the shape of the fracture is felt.
Set it right and restore it to its natural shape by every means you can, then apply to the site a powder of millstone with egg white and soft lime, place over it a pad of folded cloth, then apply a broad plaster cast of wood.
Make the plaster cast as thin as possible, to fit over the entire shoulder or slightly wider, if there is a depression beneath the cast in any place on the shoulder, smooth out that depression with soft lime until the cast sits flat, then tie it firmly in place with a long bandage.
Secure the cast firmly and make sure it does not shift, check the bandage every day, as the bandage relaxes, tighten it and adjust the cast if it has shifted, let the patient lie on his sound side, the shoulder will heal in twenty days.
Then remove the bandage and you will be safe, this is one of the bones that are not in danger of fracturing or dislocating, if a shard of bone protrudes and pricks under the skin, cut it away and remove it. Do as I mentioned for a broken collarbone regarding soothing the hot swelling if anything like that happens,.
Chapter 7.
On splinting a chest fracture..
The chest may break in the middle, which is rare, but its edges are more likely to break and splinter. The symptoms, if it breaks in the middle, are tilting downward, severe pain, difficulty breathing, and coughing.ويسمع له كلال ككلال الرعد، ويشتدّ الوخم حتّى يتوقّع الموت فى أكثر الأحيان، وأمّا انكسار طرفيه فإنه لا يعرض من ذلك شىء مما ذكرناه غير أنه يشتدّ به الوجع ويزيد ويكون تحت المفصل الألم الشديد والورم الحارّ مع الخفقان ويحتاج إلى جبيرة واسعة من لوح وع
And he may spit up blood and the depression in the broken bone will be evident to the touch, and it is critical that you lay the patient on his back, place a pillow between his shoulders, compress his shoulder blades, and gently adjust the ribs from both sides with your hands as much as possible.ثمّ احمل على الموضع من غبار الرحى وبياض البيض والمشاقة الليّنة وضع من فوق رفادة من خرقة مبلولة ثمّ جبيرة عريضة من لوح، فإن برز منه شظيّة فانتزعها وسوّت موضعها وجبره كما ذكرناه فى كسر الترقوة.
And when the bone has returned to its proper shape, then apply the bandage and splint, and place a thin board of willow or alder, or similar, over it after wrapping it in cloth. Then handle it gently so that the bone does not shift, and wrap the bandage around the broken bone several times, moving it in a circular motion towards the back, and tighten it firmly. Then check the bandage frequently, and whenever it becomes loose, tighten it again.
If it becomes necessary to loosen the bandage due to a pain or swelling in the area, do so promptly, remove the bandage, and treat the issue according to its nature, then reapply the bandage if you see fit.وإن كسر عظم الذراع او الساق فى موضع من المواضع، وكانت الكسرة من الناحية الاُخرى، وكان مع ذلك ورم شديد وعظام مكسورة وعرقوب منحنية، فاعلم انّه لا بدّ من حلول الآفات به، فان كان هذا الداء عظيما وورم العضلات شد If the arm or leg bone is broken in one place, and the break is on the other side, and there is also severe swelling, muscles torn, and an ankle that is bent out
Chapter 8.في علاج النتوءات الت
In the treatment of rib fractures, know that rib fractures most often occur in the thick portions next to the back and at their tips at the front; this is because they are cartilaginous, and this is easily detectable by touch upon examination with fingers.فإن كان الرضّ من قدّام والكسور من وراء، فاعلم أنّه إن لم يكن مع ذلك ورم فليس فيه كسر وإن كان مع الورم ففيه كس
If the impact is from the front and the break is from the back, then know that if there is no swelling, then there is no fracture; but if there is a swelling, then there is indeed a fracture. Adjust the fracture with your fingers to the best of your ability until the shape is restored, then bandage and splint the broken bone as needed. If the rib fracture is slanted inward, then the patient will experience severe pain.
And it feels like a stabbing pain, as it does for those with a punctured lung; this is because the bone is piercing the pleural membrane, and the patient will also experience difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting large amounts of blood; this is very difficult to treat, and the early physicians devised many remedies for it.فمنهم من كان يشقّ موضع النخس فيخرج الدم ويستفرغه، وكانوا يسمون هذا الموضع البلغة لأنّه يبلّغ إلى داخل البدن ويصل إلى الحشى ويزعمون أن
Some have said that the food of the patient should be such as produces wind and flatulence, so that the abdomen swells and expands, pushing the fracture outward. We dislike this because it might emphasize the occurrence of a hot tumor, if it has not already occurred; but if it has already occurred, then it increases and emphasizes it.
Some have said that a cupping-glass should be placed over the site and then sucked with force; this is similar to cauterization, except that it is feared that the cupping-glass may attract foreign bodies into the site due to its weakness. Some have said that the site should be covered with wool which has been dipped in hot oil.
And the dressing is placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandage, when wrapped around, becomes level; then the patient is treated with the treatment of a shrapnel wound in terms of diet and medication. If the patient experiences something very strenuous which he cannot bear, The bone was piercing the diaphragm painfully, and we feared for the patient; so it is fitting that we should split open the site and expose the broken rib, then place under it the instrument which protects the peritoneum, the description of which has already been given, and cut the bone gently and remove it.
Then we bring together the lips of the wound, if it is large, by suturing and treat it with ointments until it heals. If a hot tumor occurs during this time, act quickly; moisten gauze in rosewater and place it on the site, and treat the patient with something which reduces the tumor from within as well.
And he should lie on the side on which he can sleep more easily until it heals.
Chapter 9.
On setting a broken bead in the back and neck.
As for the bones of the neck, when they sustain a fracture, and there is little risk of this happening to them, as well as the vertebrae of the back also; if this happens to anyone, and you want to know whether it will heal or not, Then look: if you see that his hands have become relaxed and numb, and have died, and he is not able to move them, or extend them, or clench them, and when you prick them with a needle, or poke them, he does not feel it, and does not experience any pain in them, then know that in most cases he will not recover and he will perish.
If he can move them and feels the pricking and poking, then know that the marrow of the bone is intact, and that the patient will recover with treatment. If the same happens to the vertebrae, and you want to know whether he will recover or not,
look at his legs. If you see that they have become relaxed and what has happened to the hands has also happened to them, and when he lies on his back wind and stool escape from him without his wanting it, and when he lies on his stomach urine escapes from him without his wanting it, and if he lies on his back and wants to urinate, he cannot do so, then know that he is doomed, so do not bother treating him. But if nothing like that happens to him, the situation is less serious. The treatment for what has happened is to try to calm the hot swelling.
By placing on the affected vertebra rose oil alone, or with roasted egg yolks. Apply this three times a day until the hot swelling subsides, then apply to the site one of the strengthening and astringent bandages and tie it tightly, and tell him to rest and stay quiet.فإن حدث فى الورك مثل ما حدث فى الظهر واليدين ورجليه.
If what happened in the back, hands and legs also happens in the hip, he should sleep only on the side where he does not feel pain until he recovers. If a piece of bone was dislodged from the impact, you should split the skin and remove that bone.وإن حدث فى الكوع مثل ما حدث فى الظهر واليدين ورجليه وأردت أن تعلم هل يبرأ أم لا فانظر الى الساعد فإن رأيت الورم الحارّ قد سكن وذهب عنه الحرور وسكنت آلامه وتقدّمت فيه القوة واعتدلت أعضاؤه التى فيه فعند ذلك يعلم أنه Then you should bring together the lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, then treat it with healing ointments until it heals. If the last bone of the coccyx, which is the tailbone, breaks, you should insert your left thumb into the anus.
And you should adjust the broken bone with your other hand as best as possible and then apply a bandage and a splint, if necessary, and then tighten it.
If you feel a broken splinter in it, cut it out and treat the wound as previously mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Ten.
On treating a broken hip.
Rarely do the bones of the pelvis break, but when they do, it is usually by shattering at their ends and cracking lengthwise, tilting inwards, and causing pain in the area, as well as numbness and a tingling sensation in the affected leg.
To treat it, run your hand over the bone to feel for the break, and then adjust the broken part as best you can until it resembles its natural shape.
If the break is lengthwise, or if it tilts inwards, lay the patient on his stomach so that you can adjust the break. Once you have adjusted it, apply a bandage and then a splint made of wood or leather, and tighten it.
Do not be afraid of the break spreading or the splint coming off; adjust the depression in the hips with whatever fills it so that it is even, and order the patient to sleep on his back or on his healthy side, for if he experiences a hot swelling.
Stop the treatment and allow it to rest until the hot swelling subsides, then resume the treatment and tighten it as it should be; if any splinters or parts of the bone stick out from its ends, do not try to pull them out.
But do not touch it; rather smooth it from the outside as we have said and leave it to heal.
Chapter 11.
On the treatment of a fracture of the humerus.
The humerus is the bone between the elbow and the head of the shoulder. If it is fractured, there are two ways to treat it. One way is to take a curved, smooth, medium-thick stick in this way:
and tie two ligatures at its ends, then suspend it from a high place and let the patient sit on a chair, then drop his broken arm onto the stick so that his armpit becomes attached to the middle of the curve of the stick, then suspend something heavy above him..
Or the patient can be held down by an assistant, then the doctor reduces the fracture with his hands together until it is back in position. The other method is for the patient to lie on his back and suspend his arm from his neck with a ligature..فإنّه يتوجّه الى أسفل ويتقوّس ويستدير عظمه حتّى يردّ الكسر على ما ينبغى فإن زال من يده عاد فربط.
When it is directed downward and curved and turned until the fracture is reduced, then if it slips from his hand, tie it again..Then command two servants to hold, one above the fracture with his hands and the other below it, and each of them to stretch towards his side. If you want the stretching to be stronger, tighten a ligature below the fracture and another above it, and each servant stretches toward his side.
If the fracture is near the shoulder joint, then the middle of the ligature should be under the armpit and the other under the fracture towards the elbow. Likewise, if the fracture is near the elbow, the ligature should be on that site and on the elbow itself..وإذا كان الكسر في أعلى الذراع فعظمها هناك رقيق لا يحتمل رباطا ولا يثبت إن علّق عليه، والطريق فيه أن تستعمل القصباء المكسورة كما تقدّم وتجعل فوقها خشبة مستديرة في عرض الكف وطول ذراعين ونصف تقريبا وتسوّى مع الك
If the fracture is in the upper arm, the bone there is thin and cannot bear a ligature or support one if suspended on it. The method for this is to use a broken reed as mentioned before, and place over it a round stick about the width of a palm and the length of two arms and a half, then smooth the fracture gently without violence until the fracture is reduced and united well..Then tighten it if no hot swelling occurs; but if a hot swelling occurs, leave it until the seventh day, and put on it a poultice moistened with vinegar and rose oil.
Then, when the tumor has subsided, you should tighten it. The prescription for tightening is to place a bandage over the fracture and then place a fold of new cloth on top of the bandage. Then bring the arm onto the shoulder itself and place the hand open on the shoulder.
You should also use splints if you are concerned about any change in the fractured bone, and if nothing prevents you from doing so.
This is how you should place a splint on the fracture itself, making it wider and stronger than other splints. There should be a width of one finger between each splint, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture, with an extra three fingers on each side.
Then tighten the splints as mentioned at the beginning of this section.
You should tighten around the fracture site more tightly.
If you see that setting the splints and tightening as we have described earlier in this chapter, then do so.
If you are concerned about a hot tumor, then leave the splints and tightening until the seventh day as we have said, then check the ligature every three days so that no itching or swelling occurs in the area or that food is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightening. You can fix all of this as we have described.
If you are confident that none of this will happen, then do not loosen the ligature for many days. The patient should lie on his back with his hand on his stomach and a pillow filled with wool placed under the arm.
Check at all times, day or night, so that the shape of the fractured limb does not change or the ligature becomes loose. Fix all of this with your effort. Make sure that the patient's food is mild at first, until the bone feels strong.
It is advisable to thicken his food, for the habit of the arm and leg is to harden in forty days; then it is advisable to loosen and use the bath and treat with ointments suitable for that. If the fracture is outrageous and crushed.
Do not remove the bandage from him until fifty days or two months have passed.
Chapter 12.
On setting a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, one of which is small and is the one next to the thumb, and the other is large and is placed under the small one from below. Thus, the large bone may fracture alone or with the small one, or both may fracture together.
When the small radius above fractures, its setting is easy and its healing is quick. But if the lower radius fractures, its fracture is poor and its healing is difficult. The worst case is when both bones fracture together. If the bone that fractures with the small radius above.
The physician should, when setting it, make its extension slight and gentle until he makes it level. If the large radius is fractured, he should make the extension stronger. But if both radii are fractured, he should make the extension much stronger.
The shape of the hand should be placed, when setting and extending it, on a pillow, with the thumb pointing upward higher than all the fingers, and the little finger lower than the rest of the fingers, and the patient sitting cross-legged.
Let the pillow be opposite him in height so that the patient does not experience difficulty.
Then an assistant extends the arm from below, either with his hand or with a bandage, and another assistant extends it from above likewise. Then the physician reduces the bone to the best shape possible. If there are shards in the fractured bone, he should remove them.
Remove every splinter in its place, for if a splinter appears in it and pricks the skin and you have no hope of healing it, make an incision over it and extract it as described above. If there is a fracture with a wound, I have dedicated a chapter to it.
Take the treatment for this from there. If a hot tumor appears at the beginning of your healing, apply a poultice of cerated linen made with rose oil and white beeswax, of medium thickness between thick and thin, and gently tie the poultice over it until the tumor subsides.
Remove the poultice and apply the bandage prepared from flour with egg white, then put on the splints, and let the splint that is placed on the fracture itself be a little wider and stronger. Know that in most cases, the number of splints for the arm is six.واجعل الكعبين الّذين على طرفى الإبهام من خشب الزان، فإن لم يوجد فمن خشب الصنوبر، واجعل العروق التى تجرى تحت الجبائر من خشب الزان أو الصنوبر، ولا تجعلها من شجر البلوط ولا من شجر الدردار، واجعل العروق الّتى تجعل فوق الجبائر
Make the blocks at the tips of the thumbs from beechwood, and if that is not available, then from pinewood. Make the rods that go under the splints from beech or pine wood, and do not make them from oak or willow wood. Make the rods that you place above the splints
soft and moist, not too stiff, and the thread that is used to tie it should be medium-weight linen as described, and check the limb and ligament after a few days.وإن وجدت الورم لم يزول وأبصرت فى موضع الكسر عروقا حمراء بارزة فافرق بينها بالشدّ، وإذا رأيت أنّ الشدّ يمنع الحركة فأعلم أنّه قد تمّ الجبر.
If something that needs to be repaired happens, such as an itch in the limb, it should be soaked in warm water until the itch subsides and the limb is left loose for a night so that it can rest and then resume tightening.وإذا وقع تعرّض فى موضع الكسر وبدا كأنّه زال منه اللحم وجب أن يطلى بالكافور والزرنيخ أو بماء الورد ثمّ يردّ إلى مكانه ويشدّ عليه كما كان ويستعان على شدّه بخرقة بيضاء مرخوفة.
If the ligament has loosened and the bone has been displaced or similar, you should repair all of this with all your effort. Also look to see if food is prevented from reaching the organ due to excessive tension, in which case you should loosen it slightly and leave it for a few days until food can reach it, then tighten it again.
If the patient has not experienced anything we have mentioned, then he should not be unbandaged for at least 20 days, or thereabouts. Then hang the patient's hand from his neck and ensure his arm is straight, and he must guard against restless movements as much as possible. He should sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm usually heals within 30 days, or 32, and sometimes even within 28 days, all depending on the condition of the humours and the strength of the body.
Chapter 13.
On the healing of a fracture of the hand and fingers.
The metacarpals and phalanges of the hand rarely experience fractures, but they often experience contusions. So, when the hand experiences a fracture or a contusion
the patient should sit cross-legged with a stool in front of him on a level surface.
Then the surgeon should straighten it and the physician should set it, once it is aligned well, then the bandage and splint should be applied if there is no hot swelling.
I have wrapped it in a soft cloth, and if the fracture is towards the bottom, towards the palm of the hand, then make a semi-sphere from a cloth and instruct the patient to hold it with his broken hand, then tighten it with a long cloth.
The splint should be made of soft leather to conform to the bend of the hand, and all of the fingers, and it should be tightened as appropriate. If the fracture is towards the outside, then the splint should be placed on top, and another splint on the bottom of the hand so that the hand is open and straight.
Then hold the ligature as you would a hand and wind it between the fingers, for if the fracture is in one of the phalanges of the fingers, and it is the thumb, then reduce it as it should be, then tie it with the palm; and if you wish to give it a small splint to support the fracture.
And if it does not move, then the fracture is in any of the other fingers such as the middle finger or ring finger or pinky or index finger, then reduce and tie it with the finger next to it, or tie them all together, which is better, or put a small splint on top of it.
As we said about the thumb, and check when you have set the fracture, and its distance from the hot tumor, then treat it as appropriate whenever something happens to it, as described repeatedly,.
Chapter 14.
In setting a femur fracture..
The femur often breaks and is evident to the senses because it rotates forward and backward, and its setting is by tying a ligature above the fracture and another ligature below the fracture, with the patient lying on his back..
Then each ligature server is extended to its side in moderation, if the fracture is in the middle of the bone; but if it is near the hip joint, a soft ligature should be tied, either made of wool or the like..
To the groin towards the pubis, so that the extension is upwards, and the other ligature below the fracture; likewise if the fracture is near the knee, then let the ligature be near the knee, so that the extension be downwards; then the doctor reduces the bone with both hands until he returns it to its natural shape..
And the bone joins well, then the bandage and extension should be applied if no hot tumor occurs in the member; but if it occurs, leave it for a few days until the hot tumor subsides, then return to its treatment..
The bandage should be wound around the fracture with a broad, stiff turban twice or thrice over, and what remains of it should be left to hang down; then the leg should be bound up until the heel is at the root of the buttock, and a long thread should be passed between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, and its ends should be tied above on both sides.
Then you should wind what remains of the turban around the thigh and leg, then place splints on the fracture itself, and make one splint for the shin bone; then fill the gap between the thigh and leg with soft rags to even out the pressure.
Then begin with a strong compression from the center on the fracture site, three or four turns; and the further away the bandage is from the fracture site, the looser and softer it should be.
Then take the ends of the thread that you passed between the thigh and leg, and tie them to the splints above; then pass the thread ends down to the ankle, and tighten them to hold the splints in place on the other side as well.
So that the bandage does not slip out of place; then leave it as is, so long as there is no pain, swelling, or inflammation for the member in question, and if something like this occurs, quickly untie it and fix what has occurred of this, all as we have mentioned many times before.
If there is a splinter of bone that is pushing out, you should smooth it over if possible; otherwise, cut it away and treat the wound as mentioned previously until it heals. This fracture can be bound to the thigh without adding splints to the leg.وإن كان الكسر فى عظم الفخذ فقط من غير أن يتّصل بالساق، فإنّه يشدّ بجبائر على موضع الكسر وعلى الفخذين وأعلى الساقين كما ذكرنا فى الكسر الذى لا يتّصل به الساق، وإنّما ينبغى شدّ هذا الكسر على الفخذ وحده من غير أن تضاف اليه الساق لئلّا يعظم الكسر ويثقل فيصعب عمل الجبائر على الفخذ والساق وي
As we have mentioned in the case of the arm and the forearm, except that its fracture does not cause lameness if set thus, yet if it is set alone without the leg being included, the patient will always be lame.
Know that the thigh bone sets in fifty days or a little more or less, all according to the difference of constitutions and other conditions.
Chapter XV.
On the fracture of the patella.
The patella is rarely subject to fracture, but it is often subjected to contusions; when it does fracturing occur, it consists either in a fissure or in fragmentation of its substance, and this may happen whether there be a wound or not.As for the fracture itself, it usually occurs as a result of some violent blow which causes the patella to split into several pieces.
You will diagnose all this by examination, and you must then reduce the fracture by bringing together with your fingers any fragments which may have separated, until they are as nearly in their proper position as you can manage with care and skill; you must then apply a bandage, and if necessary a circular splint.
You must then apply a compression bandage above, and you should treat all the conditions which have been described in connection with other fractures - such as hot swelling - by applying remedies suited to each condition until the patient recovers.
Chapter XVI.
On the setting of a broken leg.وأما الساق فإذا انكسرت عظمها
The leg has two bones, one of which is thick and is called the tibia, the other thin and called the fibula; these are subject to the same kinds of fractures as the bones of the arm.وإذا عرض لك كسرهما معا فإنّ جبر أحدهما يغني عن جبر الآخر، وأمّا إذا انفرد عظم الساق دون الزند بالكسور فإنّه لا بدّ من أن يعرج صاحبه وإن جبره. If both bones are broken, the setting of one is sufficient; but if only the tibia is broken, the patient will always be lame, however perfectly it may be set.In this case, therefore, the leg behaves as in the case of a broken forearm, and you should treat it in exactly the same way, for the fracture may occur either at the upper or lower end of the bone.
Then use traction, reduction, and splinting according to this method, except that if the fracture of the leg is a severe one with many fragments, the traction should be less and gentler, and you should exercise great care in setting it.
There is one more thing to be done on the leg that is not done in the arm, and that is when you have completed all your work with splinting, take two pieces of pine wood which are used for levelling up rooms, or they could be date palm leaves or similar.
Choose ones which are not too thick, nor very thin, and whose length is equal to the length of the leg from the knee to the bottom. Then wrap a cloth around each one two times along its length, place one on either side of the leg.
From the knee to the bottom of the foot, then tie the two pieces in three places at either end and in the middle, for with this strapping the leg is prevented from tilting to either side and it is set in a good position, and sometimes a wooden rod along the length of the leg may be used.
And a rod is placed in it to prevent movement, and you should do this most especially with a fracture that has an associated wound, particularly. Then examine the leg every day and look after it carefully for any swelling or inflammation or other signs. When something does occur, treat it as appropriate until it heals. The tibia will heal in about 30 days or so,.
Chapter Seventeen.
On the fracture of the bones of the leg and fingers.
The heel bone never fractures, but the bones of the leg may fracture, as may the fingers, though this is rare. In most cases, the fingers are more likely to suffer contusions.
If a fracture of the leg bones occurs and you see those bones projecting out over each other, then let the patient place his foot flat on the ground as if he were walking, then you stand over him and press down on that bone with your weight and reduce it.
until they return to their places, then place a small board with two flat ends under the sole of the foot, and then tighten the bandage tightly after you have wrapped it around the foot and everything else that is needed.
If three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find that the bones which were broken or dislocated are now straight; but if some of the fingers are broken, reduce them and make them even as I have described to you in the case of the fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger, as long as the finger and a little wider, then place under the foot the board which I have described to you, and tighten it tightly; if two or three or more of the bones are broken,
make a splint for each finger, according to its size, wrapped in a soft cloth; and place the board under the sole of the foot so that each of its two ends projects beyond the bottom of the foot so as to hold it firmly in place.
You must not forget to take into account all that I have mentioned to you in connection with other fractures, the symptoms which I have described and to meet each symptom as it arises.
Chapter XVIII.
On the fracture of the pubic bone in women and the penis in men.
When a woman's pubic bone is broken, make her sit on her heels and then bend her slowly backwards, holding her from behind; then the midwife should fill her vagina with cotton so that it becomes like a ball in her vagina.فان لم تزل ترجع الى ورائها فلتضرب على رأسها ضربا رقيقا، ولتكن الضربة مع الخفقان حتّى تجد القابلة ذلك فى مكان الكسر فتمسك منه وتشدّ شدّا محكما ويكون ذلك بعد خمسة ايّام او ستّة من الكسر
Then the woman is shaken and her torso is raised slightly, whereupon that cotton will come out until it reaches the entrance to the vagina like a ball, and the bone will return to its place; then she should put on a pad on her back, and whenever she wants to urinate, she should remove the cotton gently to urinate.فان احست حرارة فى الفرج أو وجعا فأمسك رأسا من القطن وأرخ الآخر ليزول الوجع والحرارة، وإن احست بردا فامسك رأسا وشدّ الآخر حتّى يزول البرد.
And return it as you first inserted it, then return to its natural state. Do this for seven days or so, and it will heal. If you wish, take a lamb's bladder, tie a tube of reed over its opening and insert the whole bladder into its vagina.
Then blow strongly into the tube so that the bladder inflates inside the vagina, and the fracture will return. Then pack it with cotton and stay like that for a few days until it heals. As for when the pubic bone of a man or woman is fractured, to set it:
And its adjustment as we described for the hip bone, and the correct treatment for these rare fractures should not be hidden from you, especially if one has some experience and understands my book - all the more so because in most cases the fracture itself will guide you.
So understand the correct way to set it and tighten it, And as for a man whose phallus is fractured: you insert the phallus of a goose into him, then put a bandage of cloth over it and tie it and leave it for three days or so until it heals,.
Chapter 19
On setting fractured bones when they are accompanied by a wound
Whoever experiences a fracture accompanied by a wound, especially if the bone is large like the femur or humerus, should quickly phlebotomize at the time if the conditions for phlebotomy as we presented earlier allow.وإن لم تساعدك شروط الفصد فقد كان يسوغ لك أن تفعل ذلك فى بعض الأحيان ولو لم يكن مع الكسر جرح لئلاّ يتلف العظم، وقد كان أصحاب الصنائع يفعلون ذلك فى مواضع الكسور التى يحتاج اليها الفصد.
If the wound is bleeding blood, you should promptly cut it off by sprinkling powdered alum over it if nothing else is available to you; then proceed to set the fracture on that very day and don't delay it.فإن لم يدم فى ذلك اليوم وكان لا بدّ من تأخيره الى الغد فافصد ميقات العشاء من ليلة الكسر، ومن قال إنّه يؤخر جبر الكسر الى الصباح ويتمسك بالمذهب الأول فيما ذكرناه له، فإنّى آخذ عليه فى ذلك ما لم يفعل شيئا من
If there is no hot swelling, then if there is a hot swelling, leave its treatment until the ninth day so that the hot swelling subsides and do not approach it at all on the third and fourth days, for he has exposed himself to bad symptoms.
If the broken bone is protruding through the skin and exposed, you should try to push it back and straighten it with your hands gently and a little stretch. If you can't do that with your hands, then do it with this tool, which is made of iron, its length is about seven or eight fingers. and its width according to the wound.
The doctor should therefore make three or four of them according to the needs of treatment in each type of fracture, and they should be round with a slight thickness so that they do not bend when pressed upon during work.وينبغى أن تكون هذه الآلة ناعمة الملمس لئلّا تؤذي الجلد وتضغط عليه عند الغمز بها على العظم فيتآلم صاحبه.
It should be smooth to the touch so as not to hurt the skin and compress it when pressed upon the bone, so that its owner does not feel pain. It should be sharp at the tip, curved at the tip, and thick at the top, but very thin from half to bottom. This is its picture:
And it is called in Greek, a small lever, so you should make its sharp curved tip on the protruding bone and push it back with one blow until the bone goes back and is straightened, then smooth out the edges of the fracture to meet each other.وإن كان العظم مكسورا ومتفرّقا ولم يكن فيه نتوء على الجلد فلا ينبغى أن ترم تسويته كما ذكرناه.
If the broken end is thin and the tool does not hold it well, then cut off the end of that bone so that the tool can hold it. If you are unable to straighten the bone as we have described, then cut it with one of the cutters that we have mentioned, which matches it.وإن كان مكسورا وكبيرا متفرّقا ولم يقدر الطبيب على تسويته بالآلة التى ذكرناها، فينبغى أن يقطعه بالمقاطع ويقلّمه حتّى يتمكن من تسويته.
Or spread it with one of the plasters as you can, then smooth down any roughness and thin scales that remain in the bone. If when the bone is replaced the patient feels intense and harmful pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
If you can return it to its natural position, do so, for you will greatly benefit the patient. When you have finished setting the bone, immerse a cloth in a black astringent solution, especially if it is summer, and do not apply any cerate or anything containing oil to the wound.
So that rot and decay will not occur, then use splints when you have finished setting the bone, and leave the wound uncovered by cutting an opening in the bandages with scissors to the size of the wound.
Beware, above all else, from binding the wound with the fracture. The ignorant physicians often do this and bring about either death or gangrene on their patients, or a cold. Your binding should be gentle and relaxed, contrary to how other fractures are bound.
If the wound is poor or large and you fear some bad symptoms that we have described, and he feels pain in the area that is disturbing, then you should not place splints on him. Instead, make stiff bandages for him in the places where the splints would go, and bind him with them.
If, after a day or two, you see that pus has begun to form in the wound, remove the cloth that you placed over it with the astringent solution, and then use poultices and ointments, as we usually treat wounds, such as the quartian poultice and others like it. You should also loosen the bandage.
You should examine the wound every evening and morning until it heals and closes up. You should also position the limb in such a way that the pus can flow downward easily. If many days have passed and the wound has not healed or the pus has not stopped, then you should know that there are still small fragments of bone inside.
You should probe the wound with a probe and extract any foreign body that is easily removed, but if you find something that is deeply embedded and causes pain when it is probed, then cut it into smaller pieces and remove them piecemeal as best you can.
If the wound develops a cold abscess, or any other type of decay or infection, you should treat each case according to the treatment described earlier in this book.
It is important that you pay attention to what I am about to say, and keep it in mind when dealing with a broken bone, especially a large one such as the thigh or forearm. You should not attempt to pull it out or extract it. In many cases, this can lead to death, so it is better to leave it until it becomes infected, for often it will fall out by itself after twenty or thirty days.وإن عرضت عظام الأصابع واليدين والقدمين والذراعين والفخذين الكسور الجذبة فنكشها ونزعها بآلة النكاش حتّى تخرج كلّها دفعة
However, if the smaller bones of the fingers, hands, feet, arms, and thighs become dislocated, then they should be probed and removed with a probe until they are all extracted at once. Then the wound can be treated if there is room for treatment, otherwise, it should
Chapter Twenty.في السهام والجراحات التي تعرضها.
On the treatment of complications that may occur after a fracture.فى علاج التعقّد الّذي يعرض في أثر بعض الكسور.
This complication often occurs after a fracture has healed, especially those close to the joints, as it can cause an unsightly appearance of the limb and sometimes prevent the limb from performing its natural function.
If the complication is fresh, then you should use astringent medications such as myrrh, gum mastic, galbanum, and aloes, either alone or in combination, by mixing them with astringent drinks, egg white, or vinegar.
You should apply this as a poultice to the complication, wrapping it tightly with a bandage and leaving it in place for several days before removing it and replacing it with a new one, until the complication goes away, if God wills it. Alternatively, you could use a lead plate to provide firm support.وإن عرض التعقّد عظيما فافتح فيه فتحات واخضبه بكبريت الغار وخلوقه وافرك ما حوله من العضو بزعفران مقطر في خلّ واكتحل بصبير مقطر في ماء.
The lead has a property that removes all what is formed in the organs. If the complex has hardened and become more intense, and necessity urges to remove it, cut it from above and cut off the waste produced or draw it out with some probes until it is removed, and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter 21.
The treatment of fractures if it is healed and the member remains after that fragile, unlike its original nature.
If a fracture is healed and the member remains after that weak and fragile, it can be due to many reasons. One of the reasons is due to excessive looseness and binding of the ligaments in a way that is not appropriate, or due to over-tightening of the ligaments so much so that nutrition cannot reach the member, or due to excessive movement at the wrong time, or due to lack of blood in the patient's body and its weakness.
The treatment for this is to nourish the patient and enrich his body so that blood increases in him, and to use the bath and bring joy and happiness to him, and similar things. Then apply pitch on the member to attract a lot of nutrition, or continue applying liniment with lukewarm water. until nutrition flows in it and it returns to its normal shape.
Chapter 22.
The treatment of fractured bones that are healed crooked and prevent their action as they should.وكل عظم من العظام له حدبان منحنيان، أحدهما عريض نازل والآخر صاعد رفيع وهما اللذان يشبهان الحدّين المنحنيّن ف
Each bone has two curved edges, one of which is wide and sloping, the other is slender and rising. These are the ones that resemble the two curved edges. So whenever a member becomes crooked or deformed after healing, or if there is a complex and ugly appearance of the bone, due to the fracture. However, if the member does not refrain from its natural action, it is not appropriate to accept the claim of one who claims to break the bone at its head. Many ignorant doctors and setters used to do this in our country.فإنّ الكسر الممنوع من أن يبرأ إذا كسر صار مفسدة فى العضو.
This action is highly reprehensible and leads to great danger, the least of which is injury. But if the crookedness and complexity are recent, one should apply water in which relaxing herbs have been cooked, such as rose leaves, their roots, and king's crown, and the like.
And it is bandaged with soothing dressings, such as the diapulum prepared with great skill, or the sap of rose leaves is collected and mixed with chicken fat and castor oil, and bandaged with it, or fig juice is ground with pigeon droppings and other remedies which are called wound-disrupting.
And the complexity may be dissolved by constant gentle massage, which is done with the hands, and the movement of the member in every direction at all times; if the crookedness has become chronic and severe, and hardened, and there is a necessity to treat it with iron.
So, you should split it above and release the bone connection, and cut away any excess complexity or bone with delicate cutters, and be very careful in doing so, then treat the wound as already mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
Dislocation is the exit of a joint from its place, which prevents movement, disfigures the member, and inflicts severe pain and discomfort on the patient; therefore, whenever this occurs in anyone, he should be treated immediately.
Do not delay it at all; for if it is delayed, the place will swell and become swollen, which makes it difficult to reduce the dislocation; therefore, it should not be delayed, nor moved nor extended while it is still swollen, because it often causes cramping and painful spasms in the patient.
However, if this happens, the patient should be bled immediately; then he is left until the swelling subsides a little, then the member is bathed with hot water and oil, then reduced gently, and each member is treated as mentioned in its place.
And the chapters on jaw fractures have also been arranged according to the location of the fracture, from the upper part of the body to the lower.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of fractures of the lower jaw.
Rarely do the jaws dislocate except in rare cases, and their dislocation occurs in one of two ways: either they move slightly out of position and relax a little, or they completely dislocate and relax fully.وإذا كان تخلّعهما التامّ كان علاجهما بأن يُقبض على الذقن بيَد ويُمدّ الفكّ إلى الأعلى بيَد أخرى حتّى ينفصل الفكّ عن موضعه ولا يعود إلى موقفه، ويكون ذلك بعد أن يَسكن الألم. If the dislocation is complete, its treatment is to hold the chin in one hand and extend the jaw upward with the other hand until the jaw becomes separated from its position and does not return to its place; this should be done after the pain has subsided. The patient's saliva will flow towards his chest and he will not be able to hold it back or speak without slurring his words. If, however, the dislocation is slight, in most cases it may return to its proper position with little effort.وإذا كان تخلّعه يسيرا وكان علاجه بأن يُقبض عليه من الذقن بيَد ويطبّق الفكّ إلى الأسفل بيَد أخرى حتّى يرجع إلى موض
If the dislocation is complete, it should be reduced quickly and not delayed; the assistant should hold the patient's head while the surgeon inserts his thumb into the jaw joint from inside the mouth on the affected side if the dislocation is on one side only.وإن كان من الجانبين معا كان علاجه أن يُقبض على الذقن واللبّة بأيد متنوّرة ويُسحّب الفكّ إلى الأعلى وإلى الأسفل ويستمرّ فى ذلك حتّى يرجع الفكّ إلى موضعه ويكون ذلك بعد أن يَسكن الألم، فإن عاد فى الحال وكان علاجه بأن يستاك العليل بثو
If it is on both sides, its treatment is to hold the chin and mandible with the hands of several people holding a light source and pulling the jaw up and down until it returns to its proper position; this should be done after the pain has subsided. If it returns immediately and its treatment is for the patient to chew on his thumb if the dislocation is on one side, or both thumbs if it is on both sides, while the rest of the fingers from outside adjust the jaw and push it back into place.وإن كان فى أوّل النهار ولم يُداوَ فى الحال وكان علاجه بأن يدخل الطبيب إصبعه الواحدة فى داخل فم العليل ويأمر العليل أن يفتح فمه ويرخى فكّه ويدفع الفكّ إلى موضعه
If it is difficult to move them, especially if both jaws are affected, then apply a poultice of hot water and fat until they can be moved more easily. Do not delay in moving them at all as we have said. When they have moved back into alignment and the mouth of the patient has closed and is not relaxed, then place on them bandages made of torn fabric along with a cerate made from wax and fat.
Then tie it gently with a loose bandage, and the patient should sleep on his back with his head elevated between two pillows so that he does not move to the right or left, and he should not chew anything but have his food as a soft porridge.
Until the pain goes away and the jaw is healed, he can eat whatever he likes, but he should be gentle and not force himself to open his mouth wide when eating, drinking, or yawning, until the jaw is fully healed and closed.
If the jaws are difficult to move back into place when they have become dislocated, and if this happens at any time and they do not return to their proper position, then there will often be fever and constant headache. Sometimes the patient's abdomen may also become distended and he may vomit repeatedly. If you observe these symptoms, know that it is a serious issue.
Many patients die from this within ten days,.
Chapter 25.
On moving the jaw and shoulder joint.
As for the collarbone, it rarely dislocates on the inner side due to its connection to the chest, but it may dislocate outward, and this can be felt by touch. To relocate it, the patient should lie on his back and extend his arms.
Then press the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return to place. Then apply a bandage and a cerate, and tighten it. As for the end that is connected to the shoulder joint, it rarely dislocates, but if it does, on any given day, it should be moved back into place as we have described, in whatever way you can manage.
Then place the dressing, bandages and splint on it, and order the patient to rest and be still until he recovers. With this very treatment, you can also reduce a dislocated shoulder joint back into its socket.
Chapter 26
On reducing a dislocated shoulder joint.
Know that the shoulder joint can dislocate in three ways: one is that it dislocates towards the armpit, downward; the second is that it dislocates towards the chest, and sometimes it dislocates above the shoulder joint, which is a rare occurrence.وأمّا علاج الفكّ الى الإبط فلا بدّ من أن تضع يدك على المنكب وتجعل إبهامك تحت المفصل وتضمّ أصابعك عليه ثمّ تميله الى جهة الكتف فتقطعه يقطين.
As for the treatment of a dislocation towards the armpit, you must place your hand on the shoulder joint and place your thumb underneath the joint, then wrap your fingers around it and tilt it towards the shoulder, as if you were cutting an onion. It does not dislocate behind the location of the shoulder, nor in front of the location of the nerve, but most often it dislocates and comes out downward towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh on their bodies, because it comes out and goes back in quickly for them.وإن كان المنكب قد زال الى فوق فلا بدّ من أن تضع يدك تحت الكتف وتجعل الإبهام من تحت المفصل
And as for those who have a lot of flesh, it is the contrary; that is, it comes out and goes back in with difficulty. Sometimes people might experience a blow or a fall that causes swelling and heat in the shoulder joint, and they may think it has dislocated. You should examine it carefully to determine its true condition.وإن كان المنكب قد زال الى فوق فلا بدّ من أن تضع يدك تحت الكتف وتجعل الإبهام من تحت المفصل وتجعل الأصابع فوقه ثمّ تميل المنكب نحو الصدر حتّى يتوجّه المفصل الى موضعه.
If the shoulder joint has dislocated upward, you must place your hand under the shoulder joint and place your thumb underneath the joint, then wrap your fingers over it and tilt the shoulder towards the chest until the joint returns to its proper position. Then you can proceed with the treatment. You will recognize a dislocation towards the armpit if you compare the dislocated shoulder joint with a healthy one; you will find an obvious difference between them. You will feel a depression in the head of the shoulder joint, and under the armpit, upon palpation, you will feel the head of the shoulder joint as if it were an egg.وإن كان المنكب قد زال الى جهة الصدر فلا بدّ من أن تجعل يدك على المنكب وتجعل الإبهام فوق المفصل والأصابع تحت المفصل ثم تم
The sick person cannot raise his hand to his ear, nor move it in any way; and if you open the chest towards the heart or upwards, you will find that this is evident to the touch.
This dislocation may be reduced if the joint is flexible or if the patient is a child. To reduce it, a servant should raise his hand above, while you place your thumbs under his armpit and lift the joint firmly upwards to its proper position, while the servant lifts his hand and stretches it upwards.
Then he should lower it again, and it will return quickly. However, if it has been dislocated for several days and does not return with the method mentioned above, the patient should take a hot bath and use a poultice that softens and relaxes, such as cooking the roots of wild rosemary, fenugreek and royal garlic in water and applying it.
Then the patient should lie on his back, and a ball of wool, which is moderately firm but not too hard, should be placed under his armpit. The doctor should then press his heel on the ball and hold the patient's hand with his own, stretching it downwards.
Then, with his foot, he should push the ball, and it will return to its place. Or, if you wish, you can reduce it in this way: bring a man who is taller than the patient and stand him on one side, with his shoulder under the patient's armpit, lifting his armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in the air. And another servant should pull the patient's hand down to his abdomen. If the patient is light, something else should be attached to him to weigh him down, and the dislocation will return at once. It may also be reduced in another way."وإن لم يرجع الفكّ من ذلك فليستحمّ العليل بماء دافىء ويستعمل النطول الذى ذكره، ثمّ يضطجع على ظهره ويرفع رجله الى فوق حتّى يكون موقفه كموقف المتولية، ويكون الطبيب تحت إبطه ويستحثّه على الكحة فإنّ
And that you focus in the ground a long stick, its head is round like the pestle of a mortar, neither thick nor thin, then place it under the armpit of the patient after you put on top of the stick a soft cloth, and the patient standing upright along the length of the stick.
Then he extends his hand down from the other side and also extends his body from the other side with force, then the joint will return to its place quickly. If it is difficult to return it with all that we have mentioned, then use this treatment, which is to take a stick about two arms long. Its width is about four fingers and its thickness is about two fingers, it has a round head to facilitate its entry into the depth of the armpit in this way:.
Then tie a soft cloth on the round head so that the stick does not hurt the patient, then place it under the armpit and extend the whole hand, arm and forearm over the stick, and tie the stick to the arm, forearm and end of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on a horizontal beam, and the hand is extended down, and the rest of the body is left hanging from the other side, then the joint will enter at once in any way it can. When it has entered in any way, a ball of moderate size made of wool should be placed under the armpit.
Then carry the bandage prepared from flour mill dust with frankincense and egg white around the whole shoulder, as it turns from above, then tie the ball tightly under the armpit, wrap the bandage around the bandage from above, and hang his hand over his neck.
And leave it not to move his hand for seven days, and the patient's food should be reduced until the member becomes strong, then after seven or five days it is unwrapped and exercised with movement, if it is firm and does not relax, then it has healed.
If a joint is frequently dislocated due to moisture or another ailment, one should use cauterization with the three iron brands as previously described in the section on cauterization. If you do all this and dissolve the ligament after seven days and the joint still does not heal, then you should cut off the end of the bone.
You have re-bandaged and tightened it several times, but it still does not heal and falls down and is loose, and you cannot lift it up, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder has been cut, extended or relaxed. Then know that the joint will never hold in its place.
As for the jaw which is towards the chest and breast, and to the back, its return is by pushing and extending with the hands until it goes back, and all binding and treatment should be used until it heals. If stiffness occurs in the member after healing, and movement is slow,
The patient should take baths frequently until that stiffness softens and returns to its original state..
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of the jaw of the elbow.
The elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty, and it is also returned with difficulty. It dislocates in all directions, especially forward or backward, and its dislocation is not hidden from you, because it lies under your sight and under your touch, no matter what shape it is dislocated.
If you compare the dislocated elbow with the healthy one, this will be clear to you through the concavity of the joint, and it cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder. You should respond quickly and return the jaw before a hot swelling occurs.وإن لم تفعل وأسأت الردّ وسقيت العصب المقطوع بشراب الذئب أو بدهن الأبيار، وكان العصب قد انقطع لا يسكنه الورم بل يكون كالصخرة، فينبغى أن تقطعه بالمقصّ وتقلع منه ما زاد على قدر الحاجة.
If you do not, and you misuse the response and give the severed nerve the wolf's drink or oil of a wild cat, and if the nerve has been cut, the swelling will not settle in it but will be like a rock. You should then cut it with scissors and remove from it what is more than the necessary amount. For if a hot swelling occurs, it is difficult to respond and it may never heal, especially if the jaw is at the back, for it is the worst of all types of dislocations and the most painful, and death often occurs with it.وإن كان المفصل ينخلع مرارا كثيرة لرطوبة تعرض له او لعلّة أخرى فينبغى أن يستعمل فيه الكى
And if it is something that can be reduced, have the assistant extend his hand with both hands and outstretched arm, and the doctor's hand above and below the elbow, and he pushes the joint with the thumbs of both hands or with the base of his palm until it returns to its position.
If the jaw is forward, it can be reduced by bending the hand once and striking with the base of the palm on the shoulder joint next to it. If the jaw does not return, then use strong extension, which is that two assistants extend the arm.
The patient is also held by two assistants so that it does not move during extension, then the arm is rotated in every direction after wrapping a folded cloth or a wide bandage on his hand. If the doctor directly manipulates the joint with his hands, he should lubricate it with oil to facilitate the slippery of the joint easily.
Then the joint is pushed hard until it returns. After it returns, the bandage that has been compressed and dried with egg white should be placed on it and tightened tightly, and the arm should be suspended from the patient's neck and left for days.
Then it is released, if the joint is fixed in its place, then release the bandage and leave it alone. If you see that the joint has not healed well, then re-apply the bandage and ligament and leave it for a few more days until it strengthens, and then release it.
If there is difficulty in movement, then use moisturisation in the bath, gentle massage and compression until it softens, or place a fat lamb's tail on the joint, then tie it and leave it for a day and night, then remove it and take him to the bath. If he sweats, then rub the joint gently.
Then put the tail on him again, once, twice and thrice, along with taking baths until it softens. If you wish, you can also put raw cow' s dung on him with some butter and tie it to him, do this several times as it softens and returns to its original state,.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the Treatment of a Wrist Fracture.
The wrist joint is very prone to dislocation, and its reduction is easier than that of other joints; however, it is essential to reduce it quickly, as soon as it is dislocated, before the area swells or a hot swelling occurs.
To reduce it, the patient's wrist should be placed on a board, and an assistant should extend the hand, while the surgeon places his palm over the joint's protuberance and pushes until it is reduced. However, one should take care that the dislocation has not shifted towards the palm of the hand.وإن زال إلّى فوق فلا بدّ من استخراج الزائد.
If the dislocation has shifted upwards, then the excess must be removed. The patient should place the back of his hand on the board when extended and reduced; if the dislocation is protruding towards the back of the hand, then the patient's palm should be placed on the board so that the surgeon's hand rests directly on the protuberance of the joint. If it is reduced immediately, then good; otherwise, it should be immobilized with a bandage to reduce swelling.وإن احسست أنّه قد رجع ومددت فلم ترَه، فدعه وشدّه بضماد مسكن للورم وأبق على ذلك أربعة أيّام.
If you feel that it has been reduced and yet when you extend it, you don't see it, then leave it and immobilize it with a bandage to reduce swelling for four days. Leave it be; do not try to reduce it again after a few days have passed, as the joint will remain misaligned, and it will not harm the patient except that the hand may become weak and unable to grip anything.وإن احسست أنّه قد رجع ومددت فلم ترَه، فدعه وشدّه بضماد مسكن للورم وأبق على ذلك أربعة أيّام.
At that point, you will know that the nerve has been severed or crushed, and there is nothing to be done about it except to apply a splint; perhaps it will help, and perhaps it will not. When the wrist has been reduced, apply the bandage which we have described, then immobilize and leave for five days.وإن كان الفكّ الى فوق فلا بد من استخراج الزائد.
Then loosen and train the hand, if movement is difficult and there is some stiffness in it, soften it with warm water and massage several times until it softens.
Chapter 29.
In the treatment of finger dislocation.
Fingers may dislocate in any direction, so when a finger dislocates to the palm or the back of the hand, extend the finger and push on the knuckle with your thumb until it pops back into place. Then tie off the tip of the finger and hang it towards the direction it dislocated.
Let it rest for two days, then release it and extend it until it is straight on the same day. If it is at night, tie it in the same way, do not stop moving it during the day and training it with movement, and tie it at night, doing this for several days until it strengthens.
You should also do this if it dislocates to the palm of your hand, tying it towards the same side and doing as you did before until it heals. You should do the same if it dislocates in any other direction.
Chapter 30.
In the treatment of dislocated vertebrae.وإن كان فكّ خرز الظهر من قبل الرجلين فليكن
If the dislocation of a vertebrae or neck vertebrae occurs from the legs, then let it be. When a complete dislocation of a vertebrae or many vertebrae move from their position there is no treatment for it because death quickly overtakes the patient.وإن كان من قبل الرأس فلتسكن وتدرّب اليد فإن تعذّرت حركتها وعرض فيها شىء من الجسا فليّنها بالماء المسخّن والعرك مرّات حتّى تلين، وإن كانت الحركات قليلة
If it is from the head, let the patient rest and move his hand; if movement is difficult and there is some stiffness in it, soften it with warm water and massage several times until it softens. If movements are few, then the sign of this is that the patient's waste exits without intention, he cannot hold it back, and often one of his limbs becomes relaxed, either his legs or arms, or just one of them. But if only one vertebrae moves from its place, it often happens.وإن كان الفكّ من قبل أحد الشقين فإن أمكن إرجاع الخرزة التى انفكّت الى موضعها فعّل وأمسكها بإبهاميك حتّى تلتئم وإن تعذّ
And its disappearance is in four directions, so that which disappears to the back is called a hump. As for its treatment, you should look, and if the hump occurred from adolescence, there is no treatment for it, nor will it heal at all. But that which happened because of a fall or a blow, and the like.
The earlier generations mentioned it in various treatments with a lot of long talk, most of which does not return with any benefit. I have abbreviated from that what is enough for the meaning and explained it to them, and illustrated the machine contrary to what they explained.
I say that the hump that occurs from the front in the chest, there is no way to treat it or heal it, as well as that which occurs on both sides. Only those that occur in the back can be treated with what I am describing, namely, that you extend the patient on his face.
On a flat table near a wall, and spread out under it wet padding so as not to hurt his chest, then put a vertical board planted in a hole in the ground at one end of the table towards his head, and another board towards his legs at the other end of the table.ثمّ تميل به نحو الخشبة التى عند رأسه حتى يلصق بها صدره وظهره وتكون الخشبة التى عند رجليه تحت ركبه وفخذه فإن لم تدن منه إلى الخشبة فضع تحت وركه وساقه قدر ما يتقرب به منها.
Then tilt him towards the board that is by his head until his chest and back adhere to it, and let the board which is by his legs be under his knee and thigh; if it does not come close to the board, put something under his hip and leg as much as he comes closer to it. And a servant holds the board, which should not be tied in the hole, and another servant holds the other board in that position, then wrap around the patient's chest and under his armpits with soft, tight bandages, and extend the end of the bandage to the board by his head and tie it to it.ثمّ يحرك الخشبة التى عند رأسه نحو نفسه شيئا فشيئا ويطول بق
Then move the board that is by his head towards himself little by little, and lengthen the bandage by his feet and tie it to the other board, then stretch each servant to his side of the board with the bandage, and do not move the boards from their positions.فإنّه بعد مدّة يسيرة يتغيّر موضع الحدبة ويذهب عنها ولتكن العليلة فى ذلك قائمة فإنّها إن كانت واقفة لم تزل الحدبة عنها.
But as we have said, they are not documented, and the physician places his hands on the pearl with force until it returns, or he places a board on it and then leans on the board with his feet until it returns; if it does not return with this treatment, take a board about three arms in length.
And dig in the wall which we said should be near the patient a place to enter the end of the board, then put the middle of the board on the protuberance, and the doctor puts his feet on the other end and pulls hard until he compresses the hernia.
And it returns to its place, and if you want to make it with the screw that is twisted by hand, it is that you insert in the ground at the head of the patient at the end of the shop two beams, whose length is a cubit, and at his feet at the other end of the shop also two beams.
And let there be a distance of one span between each beam, and a hole is made in each beam for the screw to pass through, and the wood is secured firmly in the ground so that it does not move at all; then insert a rotating stick, which is the screw that the bond is twisted in, into the holes in the two beams.
And at its end is a hole that has been secured with a stick whose length is one cubit, by which the bond is twisted; and in the other two beams there is also such a thing. Then tighten the bond that you tightened on the patient's chest on the screw that is at his head, and the bonds that you tightened on his legs on the screw that is at his feet.
Then a servant stands at each screw, twisting his hand with the twister by which the screw is twisted, and the physician smooths the hernia as we have presented. And this is the picture of the screw, the dais, and the patient: .
Then, after the fracture has returned and the place is smooth, you should carry the dried bandage with egg white and then the plaster, then put over the bandage a splint of a board whose width is three fingers or about it, and whose length is sufficient to cover the hernia.
And on some of the correct beads, then tie with the band that is appropriate and let the patient use a soft diet until he recovers. If some protrusion remains in the site at the end of recovery, it is appropriate to use medications that relax and soften, along with the use of the board we described for a long time.
A lead plate may be used for this purpose, and sometimes a protrusion occurs in the last beads of the back, which is thought to be dislocation, but it is an extra bone that has protruded, so do not expose it to this treatment, because death might occur.
Chapter 31.
On the treatment of dislocated hips.
Know that only the hip and shoulder joints are subject to dislocation, and they do not have the slight displacement and concavity that other joints do. The hip joint is dislocated in four ways.
This is because it dislocates inward, outward, forward, and backward, and most often it dislocates inward, while it rarely dislocates forward or backward. The sign of its dislocation inward is that when you join the healthy leg of the patient with the sick one, the latter is longer.
The knee is bent more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg at the groin, and the area next to the groin is swollen and obviously swollen because the head of the femur has gone there.
The signs of the dislocation that occurs outward are the opposite of these signs, and the sign of a dislocation forward is that he can fully extend his leg except that he cannot bend it without pain, and if he tries to walk forward, he cannot.
His urine is retained, and his groin becomes swollen, and when he walks, he lands on his heel, and the sign of a dislocation backward is that he cannot extend his leg or bend it before bending his groin, and his leg is also shorter than the other.
The armpit is relaxed and the head of the thigh is at the level of the waist, and as for the reduction of this dislocation, you should look: if the dislocation is old and has been chronic in its owner and he has not tried to reduce it and it has remained as it is, then there is no treatment at all.
You should not expose it, and as for the dislocation which is recent, whether it is from one of the four directions of the dislocation, you should quickly twist the joint and stretch it inward and outward and move it to the right and left, for perhaps.
it will return and will not need any other treatment, but if it does not return like this, you should prepare a strong servant who extends his leg from below either with his hands or with a bandage tied to his leg above the knee, and another servant extends him from above.
by inserting his hands under his armpits and then tightening a soft bandage at the base of the thigh, and another servant, a third one, holds the end of the bandage, and extends it either from the front from the armpit towards the collarbone or from behind towards the back.
They should all extend him at the same time so that the patient rises from the ground and remains suspended, for this type of extension is a common type for the four types. If the dislocation returns with what we said, otherwise it is necessary for each type to have what I mention of the special treatment.
As for its special reduction, if the dislocation is towards the inside, the patient should lie on his healthy side and then a bandage is made at the base of the thigh between the head of the thigh and the place under the armpit.
Then the ligament is extended upwards from the armpit side to the top of the body towards the collarbone, then another strong servant takes hold of the thick part of the patient's thigh and extends it outward with great force, for it will return to its place.
This type is easier than other types of treatment, with which this member is restored. If you find it difficult and do not respond to you by entering this type of treatment at all, you should tie the patient's legs together with a strong, soft bond on the ankles and knees.
And after each one of his companions is about four fingers, and the sick leg is stretched more than the other by two fingers, then the patient is suspended on his head from a board in the house, and he is away from the ground by two arms.
Then you order a strong servant to hug the head of the thigh and another servant to hold the patient, and the other servant pushes the thigh of the hugger with force, then the joint returns to its position quickly, but as for its return when the jaw is turned outward
Then the patient should lie on the bench as we described in the case of the hump, and the bond is tightened on his sick leg especially and on his chest, then the two boards are placed, one at his feet and the other at his head, then an additional board is placed in the middle of the bench, very secure.
It may be wrapped in wet rags so that it does not hurt the patient, so that the board is between his thighs so that he does not pull down when stretched, then each servant stretches to his side and the doctor adjusts the hip with his hands, if it responds to return.
Otherwise, put the board on him and compress it as we mentioned in the case of hump, except that the patient should lie on his healthy side, and if the dislocation is forward, then the sick leg of the patient should be stretched with a stretch while he is in this position on the bench.وينبغى أن يكون مدّه شديدا ليرجع المفصل الى موضعه، وإن لم يمكنه ذلك فليشدّ الرباط على ساقه العليلة ويكون مدّه خفيفا حتّى يرجع مفصل الورك الى موضعه، ويستحقن أيضا بدواء نافع فيوضع على الورك وعلى الموضع الذى يظهر فيه الحكة.
The physician places the palm of his right hand over the affected groin, then compresses it with his left hand while extending the pressure downward toward the knee. If the dislocation is posterior, the patient should not be extended downward.
He should be elevated off the ground, but placed on a firm object, and also turned slightly to one side as we described earlier regarding his reclining position on the table with his ligaments stretched.
As we mentioned earlier, compression with a board should also be used on the location where the joint was dislocated. When the hip joint is completely reduced and its reduction is evident to you, it is signified by extending the patient's leg.
When you see them flush and the patient can flex and extend his leg without difficulty, then you will know that the joint has been reduced properly. At this point, you should bind the thighs together and apply a bandage tightly so that the hip does not move to one side or another.
The patient should then remain at rest for three or four days, after which the bandage and ligament should be removed and the leg measured against the other. If they are the same length, you will know that the reduction has been successful, so release the patient to walk. If, however, you see any relaxation
then go back and re-bandage and tighten it as you did the first time, then leave him for another three days. After that, remove the bandage and allow him to walk slowly for a few days until he regains his strength, God willing.
Chapter 23
On Treating a Knee Dislocation.
The knee joint can dislocate in three ways: inward, outward, and backward. It cannot dislocate forward. The sign of a dislocation is when you instruct the patient to flex his leg toward his thigh.
If it does not adhere to the thigh, know that the knee is dislocated, and the remedy for all aspects of its dislocation is for the patient to sit with his legs outstretched, if he is strong enough to do so, and for an attendant to sit behind him and hold his waist, pulling him back slightly. Then you should sit on his thighs.
You should lean your back against his face, and place his leg between your legs. Then grasp his knee with both hands, interlacing your fingers around it, and press firmly on the sides of his knee with your hands. At the same time, another attendant should straighten his leg until the knee returns to its proper position.
The sign that it has returned is when the leg adheres to the thigh without any resistance, then bandage it and adhere the leg to the thigh, then tie them both together with a band for three or four days, then release them. He should only walk a little for a few days until he regains strength.
If it is impossible to return it using the method described above, then use strong extension with the bandages which I have previously described for treating the hip, until it returns.
Chapter 33.
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle may dislocate slightly or completely. Its dislocation may be towards the inside or the outside. The sign of its dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen and protruding towards the direction in which it has dislocated.وعلاجه أن تجلس المريض قاعدا وتجعل خادما خلفه يلويّه الى الجهة التى يقوى عليها ويمدّ رجليه وان تلزم ركبته الى فوق بكفّيك على جهتها، ثمّ تجعل الخادم الآخر يمدّ ساقه حتّى يرجع الكعب الى موضعه وتلصق الساق بالكعب وتضم
Its treatment is easy when it dislocates slightly; it can be returned by gently extending it with the hands and adjusting it until it returns. However, if it dislocates completely, the patient should sit down and a strong attendant should hold him from behind by his waist.
Then you should hold his foot with your right hand from above, and with your left hand from below at the ankle, then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it with your left hand and push the instep of the foot with your right hand gently towards the leg.
You should do this twice as described, then push the instep of the foot towards the leg in the third time while you pull at the ankle. If it returns once or twice in this manner and you see that the foot is straight, otherwise, do the operation again, for it will return.
If it refuses to return as described, then you should lay the patient on his back on the ground and insert a spike in the ground, very secure, so that it falls between his thighs, and wrapped with a cloth so that the patient is not hurt, then the assistant should hold his thigh.
Then, another assistant should extend the leg either with his hands or with a rope that is tied to the neck of the patient, then each assistant extends in the opposite direction of his companion, and the spike standing between the thighs of the patient holds it so that the body does not pull down when extended, then the doctor equalizes the jaw with his hands.
And another assistant should hold the healthy leg down, for the jaw will return quickly. When the jaw returns and you see its return, carry the bandages and the crutches and tie them with tight ligatures, and the foot should be tied to the bottom by the ligament, and you should beware of the nerve that is above the heel from behind.
So that the ligament is not too tight and hurt him, then leave it for two or three days, if the ligament relaxed, tighten it then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and the patient should abstain from walking for forty days.
If he wanted to walk before this period, you cannot be sure that the jaw will not return and ruin, nor will it accept treatment after that. If a hot swelling occurs, you should use what we have previously described in other places of treatment and massage until it goes away.فإن استحكم الورم وعزّ العلاج وأضرّ به فى مشيته واستمرّ به الوجع ولم ييأس من الحياة فلا بدّ له من قطعها، وقد تقدّم ذكرها فى موضعها من كتاب الأمراض.
Chapter XXXIV.
Treatment of the Dislocation of a Man's Fingers.
The patient should be made to extend the dislocated finger gently, without force, which is not difficult but easy; and if the dislocation is in one of the joints of the back of the hand, the patient should place his foot on a level surface.
Or on a board while standing, as if walking; then you place your foot on the protrusion of those joints and press hard with your foot until they return to normal and you no longer see a bump in that spot.
Then place a board under the bottom of his foot, which covers the entire foot and has two ends; then tighten it firmly for three days, then loosen it and rest from walking for many days until it strengthens and you are safe from recurrence, if God wills.
Chapter XXXV.
On the types of dislocation that occur with a wound or fracture, or both.وكلّ فكّ جرح أو كسر فإنّه يقوى ويشتدّ ببرء الجرح وشفاء الكسر،
And any dislocation that is a wound or fracture, it strengthens and becomes stronger when the wound heals and the fracture mends; and often, death follows when this occurs and its treatment is neglected.وكلّ مفصل فى الرأس واليد والرجل وال
And no one should attempt to treat such a case except one who is adept at the craft, experienced, gentle, cautious, not rash or daring; and in the beginning he should use remedies that only soothe hot inflammations and spare the patient.ثمّ إذا استسقى الجرح أو الكسر وترطبا ورمت أطرافه ولم يبق فيه إلّا القليل من الورم الحار فإلى ذلك الوقت ينبغى أن يدلف فى علاجه ويتوثق من عظامه ومن مفاصله،
Then, when the wound or fracture has drained and become moistened, and its edges have softened, and there is not much inflammation left except for a little hot inflammation, then it is time to begin treatment and to tighten his bones and joints firmly; except in cases where you hope he will be safe from harm with slight illness and some hope appears in him - then return him to your care at the first sign of hot inflammation before it becomes established.فإنّ الورم الحار هو الذى يدخل مع الدم والوريد فيصير الجرح به ألم شد
If the member returns to what you want, use the method that reduces hot tumors and treat the wound with suitable ointments to dry it. If the jaw is broken and there are splintered pieces of bone, remove them. And in that regard, follow what we mentioned in simple diseases, which was presented in its place.
And do your best and abstain from entering into the path of danger, as I have advised you before. That will preserve your honor and protect your reputation, if Allah wills.
