The author of this book, when I completed for you, my sons, this book which is a part of the science of medicine in its entirety and attained the utmost clarity and explicitness, I deemed it complete for you with this article which is a part of manual work.
For manual work in our country and in our time is completely absent, to the point that its knowledge is almost extinct and its trace gone. Only a few traces of it remain in the books of the early scholars, and the hands of people have altered it, and errors and confusion have crept into it, so that its meanings have become obscure and its benefit distant."ولمّا رأيت ذلك أخذت على نفسي أن أجمعه وأوضح ما غلب عليه الإشكال وأبيّن ما خفى من أحواله وأقسّمه إلى فنون وأبواب وأضرب له أمث
When I saw this, I resolved to assemble it, clarify what was obscured by doubt, explain what was hidden in its condition, and divide it into arts and subjects; and to provide examples of iron tools for cauterization and other instruments of work, since this is an increase in explanation and a cunning device for what is needed."ولم أقتصّر على هذا بل زدت عليه من الأبواب التى يحتاج اليها فى هذا الفنّ والتى لم يتقدم بها غيرى شيئاً مع أنّه من جملة الطبّ
I have not limited myself to this, but I have added to it the doors that are needed in this art, which no one has preceded me in, although it is part of medicine." And the reason why there is no skilled practitioner by hand in our time is that the practice of medicine is lengthy and its practitioner should first be exercised in the science of anatomy, as described by Galen. until he understands the benefits, structures, temperaments, connections and separations of its members, and knows the bones, nerves, muscles, their number, outlets, veins, pulsating and stationary vessels, and their locations."وأن يختبر ذلك كله باليد فى الجثث ويستعرض منافع الأدوية المباحة التى ينبغى أن يستعملها مع هذا الفنّ ومعرفة أمراض العظام وعللها والآفات التى تعرض لها من الكسور والنزلات والصداع وسائر ما يعرض للبدن من الآفات
And he should test all of this by hand in corpses and examine the benefits of permissible drugs that should be used with this art, and know the diseases, afflictions, and defects of bones; and for this reason, Apocras said that there are many physicians by name but few in reality, especially in the art of the hand. We have mentioned some of that in the introduction to this book."وأما ما يتعلق بأمراض الإفراط فى الشهوة والعل
Because whoever is not an expert in the anatomy that we have mentioned, it is certain that he will make mistakes that kill people, as I have seen a lot of those who imagined this science and claimed it without knowledge or expertise.
This is because I have seen an ignorant doctor who incised a swine tumor on a woman's neck and cut some of the neck arteries, causing the woman to bleed to death right in front of him.
I have also seen another doctor who was experienced in removing a large stone from an elderly man who had been stabbed. The stone was big, and the doctor was rash enough to remove it with a piece of bladder wall. The man died about three days later, and I was called to remove the stone. I saw the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, and I realized the extent of his mistake.
I also saw another doctor who made a living as a physician in our town by working for some local pimps.
A young black man had a broken leg near the heel with an open wound. The doctor, in his ignorance, quickly splinted the fracture over the wound with bandages and splints, tightening them firmly without leaving any room for the wound to breathe.
Then he sent him on his way, and the man went about his business for several days, with the doctor telling him not to loosen the bandages. As a result, the man's leg and foot swelled up and he came close to dying.
I was called to see him, and I quickly loosened the bandages, and he found relief from his pain except that the damage had already been done to the limb, and I could not repair it.
The damage continued to spread through the limb until he died.
I also saw another doctor who treated a cancerous tumor; it ulcerated after a few days, and the patient suffered greatly. This is because, when a cancerous tumor is pure black bile, one should never use iron on it.
Except in a member that can be entirely removed.
And for this, my son, you ought to know that manual operations divide into two sections: operations accompanied by safety and operations accompanied by injury in the majority of cases.
And I have indicated in every place in this book the operations that are risky and frightening, so you ought to beware of them and reject them.
So that the ignorant may not find a way to talk and complain: take care of yourselves with vigilance and guard, and of your patients with gentleness and caution.
And use the best path leading to safety and a good outcome, and avoid dangerous illnesses that are difficult to heal.
And purify yourselves from what you fear may bring suspicion upon your religion and worldly status, for that is more enduring for your reputation and higher in the hereafter for your ranks.
Indeed, Galen said in one of his commandments: Do not treat an illness badly and become known as a bad doctor.
This treatise has been divided into three chapters.الاول فى الاستدلال على معرفة مواضع العاهات والمزمنة والأ
The first is on reasoning to know the locations of diseases, chronic and
The first is on cauterization with fire and with sharp medicine, arranged methodically from the head to the feet, and images of instruments and cautery tools, and everything needed for manual operations.
The second is on:
In incisions, hollows, phlebotomy, blood-letting, and surgery, as well as the removal of arrows and similar matters, all arranged methodically with images of instruments.
The third is on:
In setting bones, dislocations, and the treatment of bandages, as well as similar matters, all arranged methodically with images of instruments.
The first chapter:
On cauterization.
Before we mention how to perform it, it is fitting that we mention its benefits and harms, and in what temperament it should be used.وذلك انّ الكّى نوعان.
The discussion of the benefits and drawbacks of cauterization is a lengthy subject, a precise science, and a hidden secret about which several philosophers have spoken.
They disagree on this topic, and I have abbreviated their words to avoid a long discussion.
I say that cauterization in general is beneficial for any bad humor with or without a material substance, except for two humors: the hot humor without a material substance and the dry humor without a material substance.
As for the dry humor with a material substance, they disagreed on it. Some said that cauterization is beneficial in it, while others said the opposite: that cauterization does not work in a disease caused by heat and dryness because fire has both heat and dryness in its nature.
It is impossible to be cured of a hot and dry disease by a hot and dry remedy. Those who say otherwise argue that cauterization with fire can indeed benefit those suffering from a hot and dry disease.وأمّا المزاج الحارّ من غير مادّة فقد أجمعوا على أنّ الكّى لا يصلح له لأنّ النار حارّة بطبعها فلا تصلح لمرض حارّ وأمّا ما سلك الكّى فيه من الأجزاء فليس إلاّ بعدّة شروط ذ As for the hot humor without a material substance, they all agree that cauterization is not suitable for it because fire is hot by nature and therefore unsuitable for a hot disease. When you add the body's humidity to the nature of fire, you make the body cool.
I agree with him because my experience has shown me this many times, but it is important to note that one should not attempt this without proper training and expertise in cauterization.وأمّا الخبرات والتجارب التى تحدّث بها الحكماء فى باب الكّى فقد وقع لى من ذلك أمر عظيم ولم أر مثله قط وقد أنبهت عليه فى كتاب مفردات الأدوية. As for the expert knowledge and experiences that philosophers have discussed regarding cauterization, I have witnessed something truly remarkable in this regard, which I have also mentioned in my book on single remedies. It involves understanding the different humor of people, the nature of diseases within themselves, their causes, symptoms, and duration over time.وأ
As for the other humors, you have nothing to fear from them, especially cold and moist diseases. All doctors agree on the benefits of cauterization in such cases without disagreement.والنفع بالكّى فيها أكثر من غيرها.
And know, my sons, that the secret of treatment is cauterization with fire and its excellence over cauterization with a burning remedy, for fire is a single substance whose action does not extend beyond the member which is cauterized, nor does it harm another connected member except for a slight injury.
And cauterization with a burning remedy may extend its action beyond the members, and perhaps it will cause disease in the member that is difficult to treat, or even kill. But fire, because of its nobility and the dignity of its essence, does not do this except when it is excessive.
This has become clear to us through experience for a long time, with attention to the profession and knowledge of the truth of the matter.
And for this reason I have dispensed with long words, and if it were not improper for my book, I would tell you a deep secret about fire, its action on bodies and how it eliminates diseases, in philosophical and demonstrative words that are too subtle for your understanding.
And know, my sons, that they have differed in time which is suitable for cauterization, and they made the best time the spring season.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times because the harm caused by time is consumed in the benefit obtained from cauterization. Especially if the cauterization is for urgent and strong pains that cannot be delayed due to the fear that it will be followed by a calamity greater than the slight harm caused by time.والمقصود أنّ الكّى فى الربيع وإن كان افضل الازمنة فقد يتفق أن يكون فى غيره أفضل منه على ما سنذكره إن شاء الله تعالى بعد هذا الفصل، والله عز وجل هو الموفّق للصواب.
And the intended meaning is that cauterization in the spring, although it is the best season, may sometimes be better in other times, as we will mention later, God willing. And the true intention of this is that cauterization, which cures a particular disease, should not be blamed and thought to have no return at all.
And it is not as they supposed, because cauterization is like a medicine that changes the humor and dries the moistures which are the cause of the pains.
But cauterization is preferable to medicine in its rapid success, the strength of its action and the intensity of its power.
And the disease may return after a time, depending on the temperament of the patient, the extent of his illness, his strength, and what has accumulated in his body due to neglecting himself and consuming excessive food and other causes.
Except when the disease is mild and located in a member with few humors and moistures. Such as cauterizing a tooth for pain and the like; it is possible that the pain will not return, and this is the least likely outcome.
And as for the common people's saying that cauterization is the end of medicine, it is a true statement, but not for the reason they believe; because they think that no treatment will be effective after cauterization, but the matter is different.
The meaning of cauterization being the end of medicine is that when we use various treatments for a disease and they are not effective, then we resort to cauterization as a last resort, and it works. Not in the sense that the common people and many ignorant doctors believe.
The early scholars mentioned that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron; they said this because of the mildness of gold and its noble nature, and they said that it does not cause inflammation in the site of cauterization, but this is not absolute."وإنّما الكّى على قدر الحاجة.
It is true that cauterization depends on the need; I have experimented with this and found that it works better in some bodies than others, and cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, as they said, except that when you heat a piece of gold in fire, it is difficult to determine when it has reached the temperature you want due to the redness of the gold."فان كان مكواة من فضّة احماها فى النار ثمّ سلّطها على القوّة التى تريد لم يضر ذلك شيئا وان وجدته قد أحرق القوّة التى تحت المكواة.
And because it rushes to him cold, and if you increase on him in fever melted in the fire and melded, so that the maker of that in which is busy, therefore became branding with iron our faster and closer to the truth of the work, if God wills.
And I have arranged this door in branding on chapters organized from the head to the foot to be easy for the student what he wants, if God wills.
Chapter one.
In branding the head is a single brand.
This brand benefits from the predominance of moisture and coldness in the brain, which are the cause of headache and multiple descents from the head to the eye and ear sides, and excessive sleep, toothache, and throat pains. In summary, for any condition caused by coldness, such as paralysis, epilepsy, aphasia, and similar diseases.
The image of this cauterization is that you first order the patient to purge with a purifying medicine that clears the head, for three or four nights, according to whatever the strength of the patient, his age, and his habit dictates.
Then you order him to shave his head with a razor, then you sit him before you in a squatting position, having placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the heel of your hand at the root of his nose between his eyes, so that where your middle finger ends, mark that spot with ink.
Then heat the olive-shaped cautery iron, which has this shape:
The amount of bone exposed should be as much as the width of a skewer or the size of a clove of garlic, so raise your hand, otherwise, reheat the iron, because it will have cooled down. Until you see the bone as I have described to you, then take some ammonium salt and dissolve it in water and soak a piece of cotton in it and place it on the spot for three days.واقطّر في احد اقنية انفه دهنا طريا واطلب له الادوية الملطفة للرأس وليكن المكيال الذى يأكل فيه ويشرب ويجعل فيه ما يشاء من الادهان الملطفة ويستنشق ما يس
Then pour a little vegetable oil through one of his nostrils and ask him to take the medicines that soothe the head, using the cup he eats and drinks from and puts whatever he wants of soothing ointments in it, and to snuff what he likes; then hold a cotton wick soaked in fat on the spot until the sting of the fire goes away, then treat him with the quartan ointment until he recovers, if Allah wills.
They have said that a wound, however long it remains open and suppurating, is better and more beneficial.وإن كان به خرج فلا تعتدّ له بل اكتحل بمرهم الحمرة واكتحل به من العين الاخرى ا
And if there is an abscess, do not pay attention to it but use the ointment for red eye and use it on the other eye as well; some have said that the skin should be cauterized to the bone, and the iron held until some of the thickness of the bone burns, then the burned part of the bone is stripped off and treated.وإن عاوده الوجع فاعلجه بماء الكبريت والشونيز والزرنيخ الاص
Others said that the cautery should be applied strongly so as to affect the bone deeply, so that a portion of it would come off like a small pebble or a clump, and they claimed that this would draw off the vapours from the head and leave the wound open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it heals. I don't consider these two types of cautery at all, except in some people and as a last resort; leaving it alone is better, for when the natural connection of the head is disrupted, as we have seen happen in other limbs.
The first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; follow this method and you will be safe, God willing.
CHAPTER 2.
ON THE CAUTERY OF THE HEAD.
If a chronic headache occurs in the head and affects the patient, and if he has tried all sorts of remedies, such as potions, poultices, snuff, ointments and bandages, especially if he has had the cautery once already, as described, without any benefit, then you should take care. If the patient's head is naturally strong and not weak, and he feels intense cold, then cauterize him again on top of the previous cautery.وإن كان به برد شديد وكان ضعيفا، فإن لم يكن يشتكى من ألم شديد فاكوه على الحاجب والجدالين واتركوا الكىّ على الجمجمة والصد If he has intense cold and is weak, then cauterize him on the eyebrow and the temples; avoid cauterizing on the skull itself. Then cauterize each temple until the thickness of the skin is removed and a portion of the bone is exposed as described.وإن كان المريض صحيح البنية ولم يشتكى بردا شديدا، فإن كانت If the patient is healthy and does not suffer from intense cold, then cauterize the back of his head in the place known as the axe, but go easy on this one and do not expose the bone; for the patient will find it very painful compared to all other cauteries on the head. I will describe this cautery in its proper place.وإن كان به ألم شديد فى رأسه وكان ذلك الألم يشتدّ عليه من موضع عينيه.
The iron used for cauterizing the front and back of the head should be gentler than that used for the middle part, and it is thus described:
CHAPTER III.
On the treatment of non-chronic migraine.
If a pain occurs in the temporal region, accompanied by headache and extending to the eye, let the patient first be purged with remedies that clear the head, and let him employ all other remedies which I have mentioned in the sections on diseases; if these fail, cautery must be employed, in two ways. Either with a sharp drug that burns, or with iron.وينبغى أن تكون المكواة التى يكوى بها قرنا الرأس ومؤخّره ألطف من المكواة التى يكوى بها وسط الرأس
Now, as regards cautery with a burning drug, this is done in the following way: take one clove of garlic, peel it and cut its ends off on both sides; then make an incision in the temporal region with a broad lance, so that there may be beneath the skin, at the place of the pain, a space large enough to admit the clove.ثمّ أدخل السنّ فى الموضع تحت الجلد وأدخل فى موضعه حراملا ثمّ حرّكه حتّى يصير تحت الموضع كله فإن لم يقدر على تحريكه كلّه تحركت الاوردة التى تحت الجمجمة وتحركت معه فينشأ عن ذلك انفطار وتسكن
Then insert the clove beneath the skin, and with it a pair of tweezers; then move it about until it lies under the whole place: if he cannot move it all about, he will move the veins that lie under the skull, and they will move with him; thereupon there ensues a suppuration, and the pain is relieved. Let him then enter beneath the skin, till the clove is quite hidden; then tie it up tightly with ligatures, quite tightly, and leave it for fifteen hours; then untie it, take out the garlic, and leave the wound for two or
three days; then dress it with cotton dipped in butter, until the place suppurates, and then treat it with ointment till it heals, if God will; or, if you like, you may do it with some of the burning drugs which I have given in the eighteenth article on burning drugs.وإن كان الوجع فى وسط الرأس فهو أخفّ من ذلك فإنّه لا يحتاج الى الكىّ بالثوم بل يكفى فيه الكىّ بالحديد وذلك بأن تأخذ مكواة معتدلة وتجعلها على جمر الفحم حتّى تتوهج فتنال منها بخرقة وتكشط بها وسط الرأس حيث تجد الوجع إن شاء الل
And as for cauterization with iron, it is done in this manner: the heated iron is shaped thus,.
and is called a nail-shaped cautery because its head is shaped like a nail with some indentation, and has a small protuberance in the middle.
Then you place it on the affected area and hold your hand, turning the iron a little at a time, until you have burned through half the thickness of the skin. And then you lift your hand so as not to burn the artery beneath and cause bleeding, after which you soak a cotton swab in salt water and place it on the spot for three days. Then treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing.
If you wish, you can cauterize this migraine with the sharp edge of the iron, being careful not to cut the artery in this type of non-chronic migraine.
Chapter 4
On the treatment of chronic migraines.
If you have treated the migraine with what we have already mentioned, and if the treatment has not been effective and you see that the condition is not improving, then use either of two treatments: cauterization with a medicine or cauterization with fire. So you should heat the cautery iron until it turns white, after marking the affected area with a line about half a finger in length. Leave your hand on it for a moment as you press hard enough to cut through the artery and reach the bone.
However, you should be careful not to burn the jaw joint that moves when chewing, as this could cause you to burn either the muscle or the nerve controlling it, resulting in a spasm.وأمّا الكىّ بالنار فعلى هذا الوجه: تحمى المكواة التى هذه صورتها:.
And as for cauterization with fire, it is done in this manner: heat the iron shaped thus,. But be cautious and vigilant against bleeding from the artery that you have cut, for there is great danger in doing so.فإنّها اذا قطعت فى الحال اش And especially for those who are ignorant of what they are doing and have not had prior experience; it is better to leave the job undone.
I will mention the treatment of arterial bleeding in its proper place in this book, if God wills. If you see that the ailment cannot be treated with this cauterization method.
And if you see that the patient can tolerate it, perform the cauterization in the middle of the head as we have described. Treat the wound until it heals, if God wills.
If you prefer, use the cauterization method with the double-bladed instrument that we mentioned in the section on arterial ligation; it is a better and more effective cauterization method.
Chapter Five.
On cauterization for ear pains.
If ear pain occurs due to cold and is treated with laxatives and other treatments mentioned in the taxonomy without relief, heat the cautery instrument called "the point," which has this shape.
Then, use it to dot around the entire ear as it rotates, or around both of them if the pain is in both ears.وإن كان الوجع فى أذن واحدة فليبدأ من موضع الوجع إلى فوق ومن فوق إلى أسفل ومن الأسفل إلى فوق ومن الجانبين إلى وسط الأذ If the pain is in one ear, start from the area of pain and move upward, then from above downward, and from below upward, and from the sides toward the center of the ear. Keep the cautery a little distance from the root of the ear after marking the spot with ink. The cauterization should be about ten dots or so in each ear, then treat the areas until they heal, if God wills.
Chapter Six.
On cauterization for jaw pain.وأما الكىّ للّقوة فإن كان عن برد
As for cauterization of the jaw, if it is due to phlegm, as mentioned in the disease taxonomies,...
...and avoid cauterizing the type that occurs from dryness and spasticity of the nerve.ويكره الكىّ فى اللقوة الحادثة عن برد فى المعدة والأمعاء والمصعدين.
When you have treated this type of hernia with poultices, fomentations and clysters, and your treatment has not been successful, then the patient should be cauterized with three cauteries. One at the base of the ear, the second a little lower down on his temple, and the third at the junction of the lips.
Make your cautery from the opposite side to the affected area, because it is the healthy side that becomes relaxed.
The shape of the cautery is that you cauterize him with one cautery at the tip of the upper ear, a little below the horn of the head, and another on the temple, and its length should be equal to the length of your thumb."وأما الثالثة فاجعلها تحت الشفة السفلى على قدر نصف الإبهام وأنت تقول فى كلّ كيّة عند إشعال النار إن أمكن
And as for the third, make it under the lower lip, about half the thickness of your thumb. And in every cautery, when you light the fire, you should press down on the skin with the cautery until you burn through half its thickness. This is the shape of the cautery; it is a type of scalpel, only slightly thinner as you will see."وإن لم ينفع هذا الكىّ فى برءه فأكثر من الكيّات فى مواضعها حتى يسكن الألم ولا يزيد، لأنّه إن زاد الألم ولم If this cautery does not help to cure him, increase the number of cauteries in their places until the pain subsides and does not increase, because if the pain increases and
Chapter Seven."فى علاج الرضوض والج
In the treatment of chronic stroke."وإن عالجت رضة الرأس أو السكتة المزمنة بالكّى ف
Now, if you are treating a chronic head injury or stroke and your treatment is not effective, and the patient does not have a fever, cauterize him with four cauteries."وإن كان به حمّى فأكثر من الكيّات على قدر الحاجة، فإنّ الحمّى انّما تكون من اتّساع الأوعية، والكيّ يق If he has a fever, increase the number of cauteries as needed, because a fever is caused by dilated vessels, and cautery constricts them."And you should cauterize him on every horn of his head, one cautery, and one in the middle of his head as we mentioned before, and one at the back of his head as we previously mentioned.
A recipe for cauterization as mentioned above. It can also be cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, which is more effective, then treated as mentioned above.
Chapter 8.
In treating forgetfulness.
When it is due to phlegm, the patient should first be given large doses of astringents and purifying blood remedies for the brain.
Then, shave his head completely and apply a mustard plaster, as mentioned in the article on plasters. Apply it several times, for it is a form of cauterization.
Do this in the same manner as mentioned there. If he recovers from that, then do not cauterize him anymore. But if not, cauterize him three times on the back of his head, the cauteries running from the top of the head to the nape of the neck.
Make each cautery as thick as a finger, and then treat the cauterization as mentioned above. If you wish to increase it, and if the patient can tolerate it, cauterize the middle cautery.
If you wish to increase it, cauterize on the temples and then treat it until he recovers. The cautery should be olive-shaped in the form that has already been described.
Chapter 9.
In treating hemiplegia and paralysis of the entire body.وصفة المكاوى على ما تقدم، وقد يكوى ايضا كيّ
A recipe for cauterization as mentioned above. It can also be cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, which is more effective, then treated as mentioned above.
And three on the vertebrae of the neck. If you need more in treating paralysis of the whole body, and if the patient can tolerate it and the disease is severe and stubborn, cauterize four cauteries on his vertebrae.وصفة المكاوى على ما تقدم، وقد يكوى ايضا كيّة على فم المعدة فيكون ابلغ، ثمّ تعالج بما تقدّم. A recipe for cauterization as mentioned above. It can also be cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, which is more effective, then treated as mentioned above.
Chapter Ten.
On the Treatment of Epilepsy.
The treatment for epilepsy should only be applied to those whose condition is caused by phlegm. First, the brain should be purged using large-sized leeches and other remedies mentioned in the previous section, provided that the patient is an adult who can tolerate medication.
As for children who cannot tolerate medication, they should use the gharghur and the mamlidagh that cleanse the brain, while also improving their diet for several days prior.
Then he should have his head shaved, and he should be branded with a single brand on the crown of his head, as previously described in the instructions, as well as another brand at the back of his head.وإن كان صرعه من قبل الدم فليس له الكىّ ولكن ينقى دماغه بالادوية والمراهم المنقية له مع الحجامة. If the cause of his epilepsy is due to blood, then branding is not suitable for him; instead, he should use remedies and poultices to cleanse his brain, along with bloodletting. He should also be branded on each horn of his head. If the patient is strong and can tolerate it, he may also be branded using the brands described earlier for patients with paralysis and bodily weakness, applying the branding iron in the shape of an olive tree on the neck and back vertebrae.وإن كان صرعه من قبل الريح فإنّه يكوى تحت أظلاف الرأس وعقبه الكىّ الذى تقدّم فى الفالج ويستعمل الغراغر والمملضغ ويشرب المنضج من الاد
If the cause of his epilepsy is due to wind, then he should be branded under the horns of his head and on his heels using the brands described earlier for paralysis. He should also use gharghur and mamlidagh, and drink
Chapter Eleven.
On Branding for Melancholia.وصفة الكىّ للمالنخوليا أن يكوى تحت أظلاف الر
The branding prescription for melancholia is to brand under the horns of the head if the cause is due to corrupt humors and thick phlegm; apply the brands described earlier for paralysis patients.وإن كان من قبل الدم فلينقى دماغه بالادوية المنقية للدم وليكوه الكىّ على الصفة التى تقدّمت فى الصرع مع الحجامة.
If the cause is due to blood, then cleanse his brain using remedies that purify the blood, and brand him as described earlier for epilepsy patients, along with bloodletting. If the cause of melancholia is an excess of black bile and the patient's body is moist, then administer remedies that cleanse the brain as mentioned in the previous section.وإن كان سببه فضول الصفراء فليأكل الموز والبطيخ
Then shave the patient's head and then make a firm pad of linen like a disc, then place it in the middle of his head while he sits cross-legged and holds it from all sides. Then take one pound of old mutton fat.
Then heat it over the fire to a moderate heat as long as the finger can bear, then pour it into his head in the circle and leave it until it cools. Do this for the patient once a week with all other good care until he recovers, if God wills.
And if you want to brand him, do so with many small brands without holding your hand to the branding iron; rather, it should be a sniffing brand. For this type of branding moderates the brain.
Then put on cotton wool soaked in butter or chicken fat.
Chapter 12.
On branding water that flows into the eye.
If it is clear to you that water is flowing into the eye by the signs mentioned in the division, then act promptly and make the patient drink what purifies his head and sweat him in the bath on an empty stomach for several days.ثمّ احلق راسه ثمّ خذ رطلا من السمن واخلطه بوزن خمسة دراهم زعفرانا ثمّ اسقه العليل ما عدا وزن درهم منه، فإنّ هذا يضادّ ما فى رأسه من الماء وهو من أفضل ما يتطبّب به فيه.
Then have his head shaved and take one pound of butter and mix it with the weight of five drams of saffron, then give the patient to drink all but the weight of a dram from it, for this opposes what is in his head of water, and it is one of the best remedies for it.Then order him to have his head shaved and brand him in the middle of the head and two brands on both temples if the water flows into both eyes or from one side only if it is in one eye.
Then cut with the branding iron all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and let the brands be long and wide on both temples, and beware of blood letting.وإن تبيّن لك ابتداؤه من الكلية قطعت الوريدين اللذين فى الاذنين واكويتهما، وأمّا الأوردة التى تحت العينين فإنّها مواضع الماء فيجب أن تكواها كيّات مست
If you see any of it, cut it off on the spot with whatever treatment you can manage, and we will come to the wisdom of cutting and tying off arteries and preventing bleeding.
Two severe burns may be applied to the back of the head, below the bones.
Chapter 13.
On cauterizing chronic tears.
If the tears are chronic and continuous, and result from the veins and arteries on the surface of the head, and you are certain that this is due to a cold, thick humor reaching the tear gland, then perform the cauterization I have described earlier in relation to the descending water. Cauterize in the middle of the head, and cauterize twice on each side of the temples, and cauterize twice at the back of the head below the bones. If necessary, add another cauterization on each side of the eye, at the tail of the eye, at the edge of the eyebrow, using a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
On cauterizing putridity of the nose.
If treatment with what we have mentioned in the section on diagnosis does not work, then act quickly and give him three nights of cauterization, then shave his head, and cauterize the central artery with an olive-sized cautery. Then cauterize with the nail-shaped cautery two cauteries above the eyebrows, a little under the hair, and be cautious of the artery, do not cut it. This is the image of the nail-shaped cautery.
Chapter 15.
On cauterizing a drooping eyelid.وإذا كان من فضول باردة بلغمانيّة فاكوه كيّة
If the eyelid droops due to a humor reaching the tear gland, cauterize the eyelid with this crescent-shaped cautery.
Or, if you wish, cauterize above the eyebrows, a little on each side, and space them out from the temples. The length of each cautery should be the same as the length of the eyebrow.
Do not overdo the cauterization with your hand, but only to the extent that it burns a third of the skin. The pattern of the cautery should be like this.
Chapter Sixteen.
On cauterizing the eyelid.
If the eyelids turn inwards and press on the eyeball, there are two types of cauterization that can be performed. Either cauterization by fire or with a chemical agent that burns. If the patient has the habit of pulling his eyelids, you should first ask him to leave them alone so that they can lengthen and straighten out.
If they are growing inwards, then tie the patient's head with a bandage so that his eyelids don't move until they grow and straighten out. When this happens, place the patient's head on your lap, and make a mark on the eyelid with ink in the shape of a leaf.
The beginning of the mark should be close to the lashes, then place a cotton ball soaked in egg white or the saliva of a locust bean under the eyelid and heat up a cautery that looks like this:
Then cauterize it, bit by bit, in many passes until the surface of the skin that is shaped like a leaf is burned all over its surface, especially its edges. A sign that you have done this correctly is to see that the eyelid has turned inside out and the hair has moved away from the eyeball.
Then lift your hand and leave it for three days, then apply a cotton ball with butter until the crust comes off, then treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing. If something of the hair returns after some time and the eyelid becomes lax again,
then cauterize that spot again as you did the first time. If the hair is in the lower eyelid, then cauterize it until it returns to its natural position and does not press on the eyeball. As for cauterization with a chemical agent that burns: you should first ask the patient to leave his eyelids alone so that they can grow and straighten out.
Then you make a paper image of the leaf of the apricot tree, then take from the usual soap and from unslaked lime, from each one the weight of a dirham or thereabout, and crush them all together, crushing them well, and do this on a wheel so that they do not dry out. Then you spread some of it on the paper which you made into the shape of a leaf, and place it on one or both eyelids, and place under the eye a cotton ball soaked in egg white, and keep the patient's head in your lap.
And place your index finger over the medicine and squeeze it slightly while you move it around, as the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine; for as long as he feels the stinging, leave the medicine in place and move your finger over it. When the stinging subsides, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
Then examine, and if you see that the eyelid has risen as it does when it is pulled up by fire or a sharp object, then repeat the treatment on the area where the medicine did not take effect and did not turn black, until your treatment is complete and the eye is fully opened, then place cotton wetted in fat over it to soothe the burn.
Then treat it with a mixture of honey or something else until it heals. It is important to be extremely careful during the treatment that no part of the medicine falls into the eye, for if the eyelid becomes loose again after a few days and some hair gets into the eye.
Repeat the treatment specifically on that area where the eyelid became loose again, as you did first; then treat it until it heals. This is the image of the leaf of the apricot tree.
Know that people's eyes may vary in size and shape, so the extent of your treatment should be according to that. The correct way is not hidden from one who has experience in this craft.
Chapter 17
On the treatment of fistulas that appear in the corner of the eye.
If you have treated the fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases and your treatment is not effective, you should cauterize it in this way.
You should order the patient to put his head in your lap, and an assistant should hold his head steady between his hands so that it does not move or twitch.
Then you should place a cotton pad soaked in egg white or the saliva of the brizqutuna on his eyes, then heat the cautery iron which is in this shape.
It should be hollow like the shape of a quill pen, with only one end for cauterization. You can also make it perforated on the other end or solid like a rod, but the hollow one is better for your work, if God wills.
Then you should squeeze the fistula if it is open and push out its content, or if it is closed, you should open it and drain its pus. Then you should apply the hot cautery iron and hold it firmly until it reaches the bone.
And move your hand away from the eye a little towards the nose during cauterization so that your hand does not slip or the patient gets disturbed and the cautery iron falls into the eyeball and destroys it. If you reach the bone on the first cauterization, then well and good; otherwise, reapply the cautery iron if needed.
Then leave it for three days, and then apply a cotton pad soaked in butter on it and treat it with the drying ointment until it heals. If it has not healed after forty days, then apply the sharp caustic medicine until the bone is exposed and treat it as will be mentioned in its chapter, if God wills.
Another method of treating fistula mentioned by some early scholars is to split the fistula and then place a narrow tube in it, as shown in this illustration.
And pour into it as much lead as the weight of a dirham, melted, and hold your hand firmly on the funnel so that the patient does not move at all, lest the melted lead flow into his eye. It is proper to place on the patient's eye a cotton ball moistened with egg white or water.
The lead burns the place of the fistula and heals it miraculously. If the fistula is healed by what we have mentioned, then it is fine; if not, then there is no choice but to use a nasal incision and return the fistula to the nasal passage as will be explained in its own chapter.
Chapter 18
On cauterizing a lip fissure.
Many fissures occur in the lips, especially in children's lips, and it often happens. If you treat this fissure as mentioned in the division and the treatment is not effective, heat a small scalpel on this picture.
The inside of the blade is on the thinness of the blade, then you put it hot by the wheel in the same fissure until cautery reaches the depth of the fissure, then treat it with cerumen until it heals, God willing.وإن كان الشقّ فى الشفة السفلى صعب عليك استعمال المكواة لأنّه يصعب عليك رؤيته، فإنّك تطلب مرآة صغيرة وتضعها على فتحة الشقّ وترفعها الى فوق حتى تراها فى المرآة وتسلكها بمكواة حاميّة على ما ذكرناه
And if the fissure is in the lower lip, it is difficult
On cauterizing a fistula that occurs in the mouth.وإن كان الناصور فى فم الرجل أو المرأة وكان لا يمكن استعمال المكو
If a fistula occurs in the mouth of a man or woman, and it is not possible to use the m
Then you enter it hot in the hole of the fistula and hold your hand until the iron reaches the depth of its depth, and do that once or twice, then treat it after that as we have mentioned until it heals, God willing.وإن لم يدخل فى الناصور حديد المكواة بل منعها اللحم او الاضراس من الدخول فيه فعليك ان تقطع لحما وعضوا أو ضرسا يعوق دخول المكواة فى الناصور.
If the bleeding stops and he recovers, then there is no need to examine the site. But if not, then one must certainly examine it, and remove any dead bone according to what will come in its chapter, God willing.
Chapter 20.
On the treatment of teeth and relaxed gums.
If the gums have relaxed due to moisture and the teeth have loosened, and you have treated them with remedies but they have not worked, then put the patient's head in your lap, and then heat up the instrument whose image comes after this, after putting the tube on the tooth.
And you insert the hot instrument with its wheel, and hold your hand for a little while until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth; then you lift your hand, and then re-insert the instrument several times according to what you want. Then the patient fills his mouth with salt water.
And he should hold it for an hour and spit it out, for the loose tooth is fixed, and the relaxed gums strengthen, and the bad moisture dries up.
Chapter 21.
On treating toothache.إن كان وجع الضرس من قبل الرطوبة الفاسدة والين أمسك
If the toothache is from putrid moisture and softness, then there are two ways of treating it: either by cauterizing with fat, or by cauterizing with fire.وإن كان وجع الضرس من قبل الرطوبة الفاسدة والين أمسك
As for cauterizing with fat, take buffallo butter and boil it in an iron ladle or a shell; then take a cotton wick, wrap it around the tip of the probe, immerse it in the hot butter, and place it on the aching tooth with pressure and hold it until it cools down.وإن كان وجع الضرس من قبل الرطوبة الفاسدة والين أمسك
Then you repeat this several times until the strength of the fire reaches the root of the tooth. If you wish, you can also take a woolen or cotton wick, immerse it in cold butter and place it on the aching tooth; then place the hot iron above it so that the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth.وإن كان وجع الضرس من قبل البرد او كان فيها دود ولم ينجع فيه العلاج بالأدوية فالكىّ فيها على وجهين إمّا الكىّ بالسمن وإمّا الكىّ بالنار.
And as for cauterization with fire, it is that you take a tube of copper or iron, and it has some thickness in its body so that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient. Then heat the hot iron until its shape appears, and place it on the same tooth, and hold your hand until the iron cools down. Do this several times.
And the pain will go away either on that very day or the next day. After cauterization, the patient should fill his mouth with good fat and hold it for an hour, then spit it out. This is the shape of the hot iron.
You can cauterize with any tip you want, and as much as possible. This is the picture of the tube.
Chapter 22.
On cauterization of pigs.
If the pigs are affected by phlegm and cold moisture, and do not respond to remedies, and you want a quick remedy, heat the hollow hot iron, which is perforated at both ends, in this way.
Let the smoke come out of the other end when cauterizing, place it hot on the same tumor, once and again if necessary, until you reach the depth of the tumor. If the tumor is small, make the hot iron the size of the tumor.وإن كان الورم كبيرا وكثير اللحم فأحرص على أن تصل الى موضع الورم فتفتحه، وإن لم تفعل فاعلم أنّك لم تصل الى عمقه، فإن وجدت حرارة فاحترز من الكىّ وكرر فى اليوم الآخر.
And if the tumor is large and fleshy, be careful to reach the tumor site and open it, and if you do not, know that you have not reached its depth. And if you find heat, beware of cauterization and repeat on the next day. Then leave it for three days and carry a cotton ball soaked in fat until the burnt area heals, then treat it with ointment and wicks until it heals, God willing.وإن وجدت فيور فافعل كفعلت من قبل وكرر الكىّ حتّى تبرأ، وإن كان ماؤها
Chapter 23.On the cauterization of pigs.If the pigs
On cauterization for hoarseness and shortness of breath.فإن كان فيهم بحوح وصوت وضيق فى التنفس ف
If moist humours prevail in the trachea, especially if accompanied by a cold constitution, the patient should first be purged with laxatives, then he should be cauterized at the pit of the neck, at the base of the larynx, in the depressed area.
Beware of reaching the larynx with the cautery, and do not burn more than a half-follicle of skin; then cauterize him again at the joint of the neck, at its last bead, powerfully, and the cautery should be nail-shaped as previously described.
Then treat him as previously mentioned until he recovers, God willing.
Chapter 24.
On cauterization for lung disease and cough.
If the cough and lung disease is due to cold humours, and the patient has no fever or tuberculosis, and if the disease is chronic, cauterize him with two cauteries above the collar bones in the depressed soft empty areas, and a third cautery in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
The cautery should be nail-shaped as previously described, and if you prefer, your cautery can be done by dropping with the cautery which is called 'the dropper', and its image was previously described in the section on ear pain; the drops should be from thirty to similar size.وإن شئت فى وسط الصدر فقط.
And if you prefer, only in the middle of the chest.Then treat him as previously mentioned until he recovers; You can also make a cautery with three prongs in this way and hasten cauterization because you cauterize three cauteries at once with it; this is the image of the cautery:
Chapter 25.
On cauterization of the armpit.وإذا أردت أن تكوى ال
If the head of the humerus has dislocated due to slippery humours, or if it does not fix when reduced at once so that it becomes a habit and dislocates again at the slightest movement as we have seen, it is necessary to reduce the jaw first.ثمّ تكوى الأباريق تحت الكتف عند الموضع المنخفض ويكرع الكىّ فى اللحم لئلا يتعرض للجلد ثمّ تجرّ المكواة على موضع الكىّ مرّتين او ثلاثا. Then the patient lies on his back or on the right side, and the skin inside the armpit is lifted upwards with the fingers of the left hand if the joint has dislocated inwards.
Then heat up the two-pronged spatula that looks like this.
Then brand the skin with it, going right through to the other side. The branding should be done in four places, and for a dislocation of the shoulder joint, use a three-pronged spatula instead, branding in six places, with the prongs on the thin part of the muscle.
This is what the three-pronged spatula looks like.
You may also add one more branding, making a total of eight. Then apply crushed pepper with salt and have the patient rest and not move the limb for some time. This is for an upward dislocation, which is rare.
For a dislocation above the shoulder, apply one good nail-like branding or several small brandings. This will strengthen the joint and dry up any moisture, and the patient will recover.
Chapter XXVI.
On branding the stomach.
If there is a lot of cold and moisture in the stomach, causing it to deviate from its natural state, and treatments have not been effective, the patient should lie on his back with his legs and arms extended, and he should be branded with three brandings. One branding under the nipple, as wide as a finger, with a nail-shaped spatula, and two brandings below it on either side so that the brandings form a triangle. Leave enough space between them so that they do not meet when they become inflamed. The depth of the branding should be two-thirds of the thickness of the skin. The shape of the brandings should be such that
it is in this form and to this extent, without any addition.
If you wish, you may brand him with one large branding in the middle of the stomach, in this shape.
And the iron with which this single cautery is performed should be in the shape of a circle like this.
And the stomach may be cauterized by drops for anyone who is afraid of this cautery; that is, you mark on the stomach with ink to the extent that you want, then cauterize it with a puncturing iron, then treat it with the treatment mentioned earlier until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On cauterizing the cold liver.
If a pain occurs in the liver due to cold and moisture, or due to a thick wind that has exited its natural temperament too much, and the patient is treated as mentioned in the taxonomy, but it does not work. Then the patient should lie on his back, and three cauteries should be marked with ink on the liver below the ribs where the human elbow ends.
After each cautery, there should be a space of the thickness of a finger, and the cautery should be straight along the body; do not press too hard with the iron.
The amount you burn of the thickness of the skin should be about half, no more; and the patient should be standing on his feet. If he is not standing, then he should be lying down with his legs extended and his arms raised; this is the picture of the iron.
You can cauterize these cauteries with the knife-shaped iron if you have gentleness and skill in the craft, and be careful not to overdo the cautery so as to burn all the skin, and burn the abdomen and reach the intestines; for the skin there is thin, so be aware.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
On battering and swelling of the liver with cautery.والبطّ ورم يبطن الكبد من داخل البدن على
Swelling is a swelling that lines the liver from within the body; if there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know whether that swelling is in the meat of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the meat of the liver, the patient will find difficulty and pain without sharpness.
If it is in the lining of the liver, and the pain is very sharp and you see that it has overcome the doctors' treatment, the patient should lie on his back, then the swollen area should be marked with ink.
Then heat the branding iron in the fire; it is the branding iron that resembles a spear, and this is its image. And brand it with one branding, until you burn the skin entirely, and finish the branding to the lining until all the pus comes out; then treat it as a boil until it heals.
This type of branding should not be used by anyone whose experience in the medical profession is not extensive and who has not often treated such diseases through experiment; in my opinion, it is better to avoid it altogether.وأمّا إذا كان الورم تحت الأضلاع فافعل مثل ما فعلت فى الورم الذى يكون تحت الكبد إلّا أنّك تقوى الكىّ وتزيده شدّة على قدر ما تحتاج إليه حتّى تكسر حدّة الألم.
Chapter 29.في علاج الآلام الحادّة التى
On the treatment of severe pains thatIn branding the shoulder-blade.
The early generations mentioned branding with the roots of wild iris for cold shoulder-blades in this way: take one root of the long, dry wild iris, as long as you can find it, and as thick as a finger; then immerse it in oil and heat it in the fire.فإذا احترق أطرافه كان ذلك علامة على أنّه قد اشتدّت حرارته فلا تزال تدله وتردده فى موضع الألم من الشوصة حتّى يحمرّ لونه ويدخل فى احمراره البياض فإنّ ذلك دليل على أنّه قد نضح فيه الحرارة إلى الموضع المطلوب. When its tips become charred, that is a sign that it has become very hot; you should continue to brand and re-brand the painful area of the shoulder-blade until its color turns red and some white appears, for that is a sign that heat has reached the desired spot.Then brand it once between the collar-bone and the neck, twice below the collar-bone, slightly slanted towards the side under the beard, and twice above the breasts, between ribs three and four.وإن كان الورم فى الكتف فلك أن تكويه حيث ترى الألم أعظم فإن لم يكن الألم فى موضع دون
There are also two cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, a little oblique towards the back; one in the middle of the chest, another over the stomach, three cauterizations behind, one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the spine, below the cauterization between the hands.
Your hand should not go deep into the cauterization, but it should be a superficial burn on the skin. Some early scholars mentioned that some people used to use an iron rod similar to iron, heat it and insert it between the ribs until it reached the very tumor itself.
And the length should be as we mentioned in the liver tumor, and there is a risk of cauterization either that the patient dies at the moment or that an ulcer occurs in the site, which has no cure.
Chapter 30.
On spleen cautery.
If you treated spleen disease as mentioned in the division of treatment and your treatment was not effective, then cauterizing it in three ways is all correct. One is to cauterize it with three or four cauterizations aligned along the length of the spleen.
In the form of liver cauterizations, which were mentioned earlier in the shape, and there should be between each cauterization and cauterization the thickness of a finger or more, slightly, and the shape of the caustic is the same as that mentioned in the cauterization of the liver. Do not go deep into cauterization, and the patient's picture is thrown on his back.
The other way is in the elbow, and you lift the skin that faces the spleen where the left elbow of the patient ends, and you lift the skin that faces the spleen where the left elbow of the patient ends, and you lift the skin to the width of the body so that the cauterizations fall along the length of the body.
Then you insert the two hot pokers very hot until they penetrate through the skin from the other side, then take out the caustic so that there are four cauterizations, and if you want to cauterize with the other caustic of three pokers.
Then treat the site of cauterization after leaving it to discharge pus for many days, for this is more effective than all the treatments mentioned earlier.
Chapter 31.
On cauterization for hydrocephalus.
Cauterization is only beneficial for hydrocephalus, especially when you have treated the patient with various remedies mentioned in the divisions and your treatment has not been effective, you should cauterize him with four cauterizations around the navel and one cauterization on the abdomen.
And another cauterization on the liver and one on the spleen, and two behind his back between the vertebrae, one facing his chest and the other facing his abdomen, and the depth of cauterization should be close to the thickness of the skin, then leave the cauterization open to discharge pus for a long time.
And do not leave the patient without treatment after cauterization, with what should be done to bring together for him both the beneficial and the meaningful, so that he may recover quickly. And the shape of the branding iron which is used for the back should be nail-like as previously described, and the one which is used for the abdomen should be olive-shaped.
Chapter 32.
On cauterization of the feet and legs.
If they swell in hydrocephalus and are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot at the point between the little toe and the ring finger.وإن كان الماء أسفل الكعب فينبغى أن يكوى فى أعلى الكعب فوق العقبة، وإن منع القيح عن الخروج فينبغى أن يكوى على الساقين بكلّه حتى يحمرّ لحمها و
And if the water is below the heel, it should be cauterized at the top of the heel above the ankle bone. And if the pus is prevented from discharging, it should be cauterized on the legs completely until the flesh turns red and the branding iron should be held still and not bent, then lift your hand and do not return it again, for the yellow water will discharge, and the branding iron should be in this shape:
Then cauterize two cauteries on each leg, and the cautery should be with the pointed end of the branding iron, and the cautery should be along the length of the leg, one below the knee and the other below it towards the middle of the leg, and two cauteries on each thigh.
And leave the cautery open without treatment for a long time and water will flow from it then treat it with what we have mentioned.
Chapter 33.
On cauterization for diarrhea.
If the diarrhea is from cold and moistness until it weakens the holding and digestive powers that are in the stomach and intestines, and this was treated with various remedies but did not recover, and you see the patient bearing cautery and strong enough, then cauterize him a large cautery on his stomach. According to what has preceded in cauterizing the stomach with a circular iron and four cauteries around the navel with a gentle nail-like iron, a large cautery on the cotton above the coccyx or two cauteries.واترك الكىّ مفتوحا بغير علاج زمانا طويلا يرشح منه الماء ثمّ تعالجه بسائر ما ذكرنا.
Then leave the cautery open without treatment for a long time and water will flow from it, then treat it with what we have mentioned. If you see that the moistness is abundant and the patient can bear it, then cauterize him a cautery on the pubis and a cautery on each hip, and sometimes two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for it is a successful treatment whose benefit will not fail, God willing.
Chapter 34.On cauterization of the stomach for vomiting.وإن كان من أ
If it is from .On cauterization of the hemorrhoids of the anus.واترك الكىّ
And leave the cautery  If it is in the anus, hemorrhoids chronic many or one, and from thick qualities of cold or corrupt moistness, and was treated as mentioned in the division, but the treatment did not work, then cauterize the patient three cauteries on the lower side of the waist under the tailbone a little like a triangle.
And a cautery under the navel like two fingers, and if you estimate that his stomach has become cold and his food does not digest, and you see his face swollen, then cauterize him on the stomach a large cautery as mentioned before, and a cautery on his liver.وإن أزعجك القيء وأقامت معدته فاكوه على المعدة كيّة كبيرة وفى وسطها كيّة أخرى صغار لطاف وربّما أكثروا من الكيّات الصغار حول الكبيرة كما ذكرناه فى الكيّ لأوجاع And another on the spleen with a nail-like cautery, and leave the cautery open for a time, then treat it until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On cauterizing warts.
After you have cut the wart, heat the cautery, which should resemble a nail, and then plunge it hot into the cut wart and hold your hand there until the cautery reaches the mouth of the blood vessel from which the blood is flowing. Do this once or twice.
If there are many warts, cauterize each one as we have described and then treat them with suitable ointments until they heal. If you cauterize it with a large cautery made of cotton, it will be even more effective.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
On cauterizing an anal fistula.وأمّا الناصور فليس شئ أبلغ فيه من الكيّ بالمكواة المسطحة على فم الناصور بعد أن يقطع ما يجب قطعه
However, there is nothing more effective for treating a fistula than cauterizing it with a flat cautery after cutting away the necessary tissue around its opening. If the patient does not respond to this treatment and becomes reluctant to undergo the procedure as described, then cauterization may be the best option. When an anal fistula occurs and persists, producing purulent fluids, you should first examine it with a thin probe.
Then determine the depth of the fistula with the probe, and then heat a cautery that resembles a nail. Insert it into the fistula directly down its axis to the depth indicated by the probe, and cauterize it once, twice, or three times, as needed.
Be careful not to burn any nerves or major blood vessels, especially if the fistula leads to the bladder or intestine.وإن احسّ بالحرارة فى أطرافه فعرف أنّه قد وصلت المكواة الى موضع العصب وإن كان لا يحسّ بشئ وكانت أطرافه باردة فاعلم أنّ المكواة لم تصل
Take heed of all these places; you should only do this if the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it is not permeable, then treat the place until it heals. If the place is closed and the materials stop and remain like that for some time, then know that it has healed completely.
If the materials do not stop, then know that it is permeable or that there is rotten bone in its depth, or something similar to what will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter 37.
On cauterizing the kidneys.
If there is pain in the kidneys due to cold or severe wind and as a result of that, the patient's desire for sex decreases, you should cauterize him on both sides, on each kidney with the hammer-shaped cautery mentioned earlier. Sometimes we cauterize it three times on the same spot, so that there are three cauteries in a row, which is more effective in providing relief.
Chapter 38.
On cauterizing the bladder.وإن كان وجع مثانته من برد او ريح غلي
If the bladder is weak and relaxed due to cold and moisture to the extent that the patient cannot hold back urine, cauterize it with one cautery at the bottom of the navel on the bladder where the pubic hair starts, and another cautery to the right of the navel, and a third cautery to the left.
After cauterization on each side, the size of a thumb joint, cauterize it with one cautery at the bottom of the back or two cauteries if necessary. The cautery should be hammer-shaped as mentioned earlier.
Chapter 39.
On cauterizing the uterus.وإن كان وجع رحمها من برد او ريح
If there is a build-up of cold and moisture in the uterus, causing infertility and impaired menstruation, or if there is pain during menstruation, cauterize three cauteries around the navel as mentioned earlier for cauterizing the bladder. And you heat an iron with two nails underneath it and place cotton on the back and brand twice.
Chapter 40.
On dislocating the hip-joint.
A false humidity may penetrate into the hip-joint, causing it to dislocate from its position; and its sign is that one leg becomes longer than the other when you measure them, and you find a space at the site of the dislocation; so it is proper to brand the patient on the right side of the hip with a branding-iron in the shape of a semi-circle.
After you have marked with ink around the right side as it turns so that the right side falls in the centre of the circle, and let the branding-iron which you will use for this be such as is represented in the figure of the branding-irons for the stomach; but if this iron is not available to you, brand three brands with the large olive-shaped branding-iron.
And make the branding deep enough to go through all the thickness of the skin, and then deal with it until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter 41.
On branding the sciatic nerve.وصفة الكىّ: ليدخل المكواة الى
And the recipe for branding: Let the branding-iron penetrate
Then brand him, and the direction of branding is twofold: either by branding with cauterisation-remedies, or by branding with fire; and branding with fire has several ways, one of which is to brand on the right side of the hip itself three triangular brands in this shape.
And make the branding deep enough to be of use, and the distance between each brand should be the thickness of a finger; and the branding-iron should be olive-shaped; and if you wish, brand one brand in the middle at the top of the hip, so that there are four brands. And if you wish, brand with the circular iron which was mentioned in branding for dislocation of the hip.
To make the circle encompass all of the hip and burn through the thickness of the skin, this is how cauterization is done for sciatica when the pain clings to the hip itself and does not extend down the thigh and leg.
If it extends down the thigh and leg, then cauterize two spots on the thigh in the location where the patient indicates the pain to you, and one spot above the ankle, four fingers' width to the lateral side, slightly towards the outside; the cautery instrument should be a scalpel and the depth of the cautery should only be as deep as the thickness of the skin.
If he indicates that the pain extends towards the toes, then cauterize there with a point cautery three or four times, or more if needed; and if he indicates pain below the knee towards the leg, then cauterize there with one scalpel cautery.
And be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not burn a nerve or major vessel with the cautery and cause an ills or long-term condition for the patient.
I have seen one or two people who cauterized above the ankle and overdid it, causing the leg to swell up until the swelling reached the foot; the entire leg became gangrenous and rotten, then diarrhea and death followed. If the pain is in both sides, cauterize them in this same way.
Some scholars among the wise have spoken of cauterizing the hip in this way: they make a cup-like vessel out of iron, its diameter being half a span; at its mouth it is as thick as an apricot pit or less. Inside that cup is another cup, and inside that third cup.
The distance between each cup should be the width of a thumb joint, and the cups should be open on both sides, their height being about one or two joints; a handle is made for it out of iron that fits firmly into the cups, and this is its shape.
Then it is heated in the fire until it turns red and throws sparks, then it is placed on the right side of the hip joint while the patient lies on his healthy side, and he is cauterized with three round cauteries at once. Then let him be for three days, dress the wound with fat, and leave the wound open for a few days.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals. The author of this book says: "This type of cautery is seldom used due to its severity and the horror of its appearance, and because there are few among us who can endure it. However, for those who can bear it, it is an excellent form of cautery when applied correctly.
As for cauterization with burning substances, it is done by preparing two hollow vessels similar to the rings that hang on the door knocker, made of brass or iron.
They should be about two finger widths apart, with a space between them of about half an inch. They should be held together at this distance.ويشعل فى الجرح كبريت وزرنيخ وأسطركن وجوزة الطيب وتبخر الأسنان واللوزين ولبان ذكر ونبات اليربوع وحنظل وعود وقصب وعاقريش وورق شجر البطم والمر وحنظل وعفص وحنظل وحب
Then you light sulphur, arsenic, asafoetida, pepper, clove, frankincense, myrrh, and camphor, and burn the teeth and almonds, and incense made from male deer musk, and plant named al-Yarabu, and wild pomegranate leaves, and acacia, and myrrh, and sumac, and wild pomegranate, and gourd, and frankincense, and incense made from male deer musk, and plant named al-Yarabu, and wild pomegranate leaves, and acacia, and myrrh, and sumac, and wild pomegranate, and gourd, and frankincense, and incense made from male deer musk, and plant named al-Yarabu, and wild pomegranate leaves, and acacia, and myrrh, and sumac, and wild pomegranate, and
until the burning subsides, then you lift your hand and wipe away the hot water from the entire hip with fresh water, then leave it for three days, carry fat on it until the burn turns black, then leave it for a few days as pus flows from it, it is more beneficial.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals. If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a cast for him in accordance with what you made for the hip, and this is the description of acute water, which I have established in the article on the repair of medicines.
You take an equal amount of potash and unslaked lime and pound them, then put them in a new pot that has a small hole at the bottom, just big enough for the pestle to fit through. You place another glazed pot under the bottom of the first pot.
And you pour fresh water on the potash and lime, enough to cover them by a finger's width, after you have tightly stopped up the pots with your hand, and leave the pot until the acute water passes into the lower glazed pot. Then collect all that water and pour it onto another pot of fresh potash and lime.
For it is then very sharp and effective in many medical applications and for cauterizing various organs, because it acts like fire itself. Among the remedies there are some that can also be used to cauterize the hip, such as thapsia, honey of privet, lime with soap, all ground together.
Galen relates an account, on the authority of an ancient author, of a treatment for hip pain and sciatica which he greatly exalts, and claims that it requires no other treatment and heals in a single application.
It is even said that sometimes patients are carried into the bathhouse and come out healed, because they use green shittar. If green shittar is not available then dry recent shittar should be used instead, ground up with a little fat and placed on the hip, leg or thigh where there is pain.
And it is left for three hours or as long as the patient feels a burning sensation, and then he should go to the bathhouse. If his body sweats then he should go into the swimming pool, for the pain will go away and heal with God's permission. If it does not heal then the bandage should be reapplied after ten days once more.
If he recovers, it is by the will of God. Know that no one should use cauterization with these remedies except after purging the body. Dioscorides mentioned that if the excrement of a goat is cauterized on sciatica, it will be beneficial.
The cauterization should be in this way: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the deep spot between the thumb and the wrist, closer to the wrist, then take a dry goat's dung.
Light it on fire until it becomes a ember, then place it on the wool and let it burn out, then take another one, and keep doing this until sensation is restored through the middle of the arm to the hip, and the pain subsides by the will of God. This type of cauterization is called goat dung cauterization.
Chapter 42.
On cauterization for back pain.
Pain in the back can occur for many reasons, such as a fall, a blow, excessive vomiting, and so on, and it occurs due to the discharge of a cold, moist substance, and cauterization only occurs in this type.
For those who have pain due to the discharge of a cold substance, after the patient has vomited due to hellebore or something similar, one should cauterize his back where the pain is, in three rows across the width of the same table, after marking the spot with ink in each row, with five cauterizations or more, depending on the patient's endurance and strength.
The cauterization should be done with a pointy cautery iron, or if you prefer, three or four cauterizations can be done with a medium-sized nail cautery iron in this way.
Chapter 43.
On cauterization for the beginning of a hump.وأما ابتداؤها فينبغى ان يكو
As for its beginning, it often occurs in young children. The sign of its beginning in a child is that he experiences shortness of breath when standing and moving, and you will find at the end of his vertebrae a bead that has protruded more than the other beads.وإذا وجدت ذلك فى الطفل فأكثر الكىّ على موضع الحدبة من غير أن تفرط فيه وإيّاك أن تنفذ فى الكىّ الى الموضع الذى بعده فإذا ذهب البأس واستفرغت البدن ممّا فيه وأراحته فلا
If you see this and want to stop it, cover it with a round iron instrument in this shape. Take the cautery on each side of the vertebra evenly, and if you want to cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed instrument, do it in two or three rows, and let the points be close to each other. Then treat the area until it heals as mentioned.
Be careful not to use cautery on the hump that is due to nerve spasms,.
Chapter 44.
On cauterization of gout and joint pains.
When joint pains are due to cold humors that flow to any part of the body, if the pains occur in the legs, physicians usually call it gout, especially.وعلاجه إن كان فى الرجلين أو اليدين من النقرس أن يُدقَّ قيراطان وزنهما خمسة مثقال أوقية ويدخّنان مع شحم العجل ويصنع منهما رصاصة تلصق على موضع الألم عند العرض بدهن.
And its treatment, if it is in the legs or hands due to gout, is to grind two carats weighing five mithqals, an ounce, and smoke them with calf suet and make a bullet from it to be plastered on the site of the pain when needed with fat.If the pains of cold gout have not been relieved by the types of treatment mentioned in the division, cauterization will relieve them. This is done by cauterizing around the joints of the legs with many cauteries, the instrument being olive-shaped and medium-sized, as shown in the figure.
And if you need to dot the face, do so with a pointed instrument; if the pains ascend to the knees or to any of the joints, and this often happens, cauterize each knee with three or four cauteries on each side with this same olive-shaped instrument.وإن صعدت الى الحوض وكثيرا ما يعرض ذلك فاكوه على كلّ ركبة خمس كيّات او ستّة بهذه المكواة الزيتونيّة بعينها.
And if it rises to the pelvis, and this often happens, cauterize each knee with five or six cauteries on each side with this same olive-shaped instrument. If you need more cauterization than this, do so, but do not go deep with your cautery, but only as thick as the skin itself; if it rises to the hips or back, use what we have mentioned in its chapter.وإن احتجت الى أكثر من هذا الكىّ فاكوه ولا تعمق يدك بالكىّ بل يكون نحو ثخن الجلد فقط، فإن صعدت الأوجاع الى الوركين او الى الظهر فاستعمل
If the pains are only in the hands, then prick around the wrists as two rows circle, if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick a point on every joint and on the palm of the hand, if the pains ascend after days to the elbows or to the shoulders.
Examine them from every side, and the patient will not be free from careful treatment and taking medicines, because if he improves his diet and expels the phlegm then with this cauterization he will recover, God willing.
Chapter Forty-five.
On cauterizing hernias.
If a hernia occurs in the groin, and some of the intestine and serous membrane descend into the scrotum, and this is a recent occurrence, then you should order the patient to abstain from food for his day, and to use laxatives which will evacuate his bowels.
Then have him lie on his back between your hands, and order him to hold himself until the serous membrane or intestine protrudes; then push it back with your finger. Then mark with ink under the hernia, on the pubic bone, a mark that looks like a half-circle with its points facing upwards.
Then heat an iron which is shaped thus.
Then the servant should hold his legs apart and a pillow placed under him, and another servant should hold his legs.
And another on his chest, holding his hands, then the iron is applied to the mark, your hand holding the iron straight and still, until it reaches the bone or you return it once more if it does not reach the bone at first.
And be careful to prevent the intestine from protruding while you are cauterizing, lest you burn him and cause either death or a great affliction; know that if you do not reach the bone with your cautery, your work will not be successful. The irons for boys should be delicate, suited to their size, and those for men suited to theirs.
Then treat the site of cauterization after three days with fat until the fire's prickle goes away, then treat it with other ointments until it heals. Let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is closed.
You should make his diet during treatment one that softens the abdomen, so that the intestines do not protrude when he belches and defecates. Then, when he wants to get up after the forty days, you should use a tight bandage and hold him for another forty days, and reduce his exertion and fullness from food and drink and loud crying.
If you use this treatment in this way, he will heal completely, God willing. I will mention the treatment of hernia by incision in its place, God willing. As for the hernia that occurs elsewhere in the abdomen and is new, if you want it to not increase, then cauterize a circular mark on it according to its size. Let what you burn of the skin be like two thirds of it, then treat it as we have mentioned; it will not increase, God willing. Some of the early scholars mentioned that the hernia should be cauterized with a tri-pronged iron in this way:
After you mark the hernia with ink and the horizontal line is on the upper side of the hernia and the other line is on the lower side, and your hand goes down in the middle with one nail-like cautery, and the first cautery is easier and better, God willing.
Chapter 46
In cauterizing the scrotum.
If a pain occurs in some organs from a fall or blow, and that pain lasts for a long time and treatment with medications is ineffective, you should cauterize it with a point iron. The cautery of each organ should be according to its size, big or small, weak or strong.
And if it becomes chronic and the scrotum is affected, if it heals from the first cautery, otherwise you should cauterize it again, because it is the custom of these pains to move from one organ to another nearby, so you should follow it with cautery until the patient heals.
Chapter Seven and Forty.
On the treatment of leprosy.
As for lepers, they may benefit greatly from cauterization, especially those with leprosy caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
If you wish to cauterize a leper, first examine the case. If the leprosy is recent and has been treated as described in the taxonomy, and has neither deteriorated nor stabilized, and if you are afraid that corruption might overcome the entire constitution of the patient, then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries. The first cautery should be in the middle of the head, as usual; the second below that towards the forehead at the end of the hair; two cauteries on the temples; and one from behind on the nape of the neck. Make the cauteries with a slight depth so as to affect the bone slightly.
And you should remove any scabs from him so that the heavy vapours can breathe out more easily, and you should also cauterize him in the same way on the spleen as already described. But if the leprosy has continued with the patient for a long time and has become clearly apparent, then you should cauterize him with these cauteries which we have mentioned in the head. And one cautery on the tip of the nose, two on the cheeks, two on the vertebrae of the neck, six on the vertebrae of the back, a large one on the coccyx at the base of the tail, another above it in the same region, and two on the hips, one on each. And two cauteries on the knees, one on each knee; two on the shoulders, two on the elbows, two on the breastbone, and you shall cauterize him on every joint of his fingers and toes, and on each heel and wrist.
And be careful of the nerves at the back of the heels lest you burn them. He may also be cauterized on the bone of the groin, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver. Know that the more cauteries you perform, the more beneficial and effective it will be.وإذا أردت أن تكوى الجذامى بالزئبق فعليك أن تعرف مواضع الكيّات التى ذكرناها ثم تسحق زئبقا أصيفر رقيق الحلقات وشيئا من المسك وتخلط ذلك بالكبريت الأبيض والزعفران حتى يصير كالطرثيث الرطب ثم تضع منه على كلّ كي
Know that the sick person does not feel pain from cauterization as much as the healthy person, because his body is numbed. The cauteries should be of a size according to the members and joints, as previously mentioned in the qualities of the irons.
Then treat the cauterization with fine ground alums mixed with honey and other remedies until it heals, if God wills.
CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT.
In the case of numbness, when a member becomes numb and is treated with remedies, ointments and bandages, but does not heal, cauterize the same numbed member according to whether the bone is large or small. Let your cautery be deep, penetrating slightly into the thickness of the skin.
Then treat it with the ointment until it heals. Sometimes, cauterization may be performed for some numbness that occurs in the hand or foot in the vertebrae of the spine, at the exit of the nerve that moves that member, to remove the numbness.
This should only be done by one who is proficient in anatomy and the exit of nerves that move the body.
CHAPTER FORTY-NINE.
IN CAUTERIZING LEPROSY.وذلك أن يكوى موضع البرص
And when leprosy has persisted and no medical treatment has been effective, cauterize the affected area deeply, to a little depth, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness changes and its color is altered.وإن عولج بمرهم الكىّ مع العسل والزعفران وجميع الأدوية التى تليق بهذا المرض فلم ينجع فيه شيئا، فاكو عليه كيّات على قدر ما ذكرناه.
And if it is treated with cautery ointment, with honey and saffron and all remedies suitable for this disease, but nothing is effective, then cauterize it as we have described above.Then treat it with lentil flour with rose oil, stork's bill leaf and pigeon or cuttlefish blood, one part each, mixed together and spread on a cloth which is applied to the affected area until it heals.وإن عولج بمرهم الكىّ مع العسل والزعفران وجميع الأدوية التى تليق بهذا المرض فلم ينجع فيه شي
Chapter 50.
In which we discuss cancer.
If the cancer is in its early stages and you want to stop it, cauterize it with a circular iron around it as it rotates. Some wise men have mentioned that it should be cauterized severely in the middle, but I do not agree with this because I expect it to become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
The correct method is to cauterize around it in a circle as we mentioned, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter 51.
In which we discuss the cauterization of an abscess.وأما الكيّة فى الد
When an abscess occurs in a person and it is slow to mature, due to either the excess of the agent causing it or the age of the patient being elderly with little blood, or due to the passage of time, and you want to hasten its maturity, then cauterize around it with many small cauteries.وإن كانت الدبيلة فى موضع لا يمكنك فيه الكيّ كالعانة ونحوه اكشط ما حولها وأدخل فيها مكوة صغار
If the abscess is in a place where cauterization is not possible, such as the groin or similar areas, scrape around it and insert small cauteries into it. Then leave it, as it will hasten maturity. If you want to flatten it with cauterization, heat the iron to this shape.
Lower it into the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the skin, and let the cautery be from below so that the pus can flow easily. Then treat it as appropriate until it heals.وإن استعصى عليك بطّها بالكىّ فلتحقنها بزيت الأسد أو زيت ال
And if you are unable to flatten it with cauterization, inject it with lion's oil or oil of
In which we discuss the cauterization of gangrene.وأما الكيّة ف
Gangrene is a type of tissue damage that spreads through an organ, consuming it like a fire consumes dry wood. If you observe gangrene in an area that can withstand cauterization with fire, heat iron instruments of various sizes according to the affected area.وأدناها ما يلى الآكلة وأقصاها ما يلى الجلد فإن أحرقت الآكلة وحدها ولم تحرق الجلد الذى عليها كان أحسن وإن استحال عليك الكىّ بالنار فلتحقنها بزيت الأسد أو زيت ال
Then scrape it from all sides until all the corruption is removed and nothing of it remains at all, then leave it for three days and carry on the burned places powdered sulfur with oil until the whole ulcer and all the corruption is removed.
Then treat it with ointments that promote the growth of flesh. If after three days you see that the flesh is growing healthily without any corruption, and if not, reapply the cautery to the remaining corrupt places. You may also treat the ulcer with a sharp remedy.
It acts more quickly than fire and its treatment is mentioned in the section on sharp remedies, so take it from there whenever you need it.
Chapter 53.
On cauterization of ingrown nails, whether inverted or not.
This ailment often occurs on the soles of the feet, and there are two types of cauterization for it: cauterization by fire or by a sharp instrument.
The cauterization by fire is done by heating up a hollow, bird-feather-like iron instrument that is made of thin iron and is the size of the nail from all sides. Then you place the hot instrument on the nail and rotate your hand around the nail with the instrument until it reaches the depth of the nail.
You leave it for three days to discharge pus, then you dress the wound with wild fennel crushed with salt and leave the dressing on overnight, as it will pull up from its roots. Then treat the wound with an ointment that promotes the growth of flesh until it heals. If the nails are not inverted:
And this often occurs on the surface of the body, especially on hands and feet. You should take a tube made of brass, iron, or bird feather, and place it over the nail or wart, then pour a small amount of sharp water into the tube.
Take hold of the hand and as you turn it, give a slight twitch with your hand to make the rim of the tube act on the head of the nail, and the sharp water finds its way down to the root of the nail; let the patient bear the sharp sting of the water for a little while.
Then leave it, for the nail will come out by its roots; do this to each one until you have dealt with all those in the body; then treat their sockets when they are pulled out, using ointments that promote the growth of flesh.
Chapter Forty-Fourth
In treating trembling.
If someone has trembling due to a cold in the nerve, or a quarter fever, or anything else, you should brand him with four or five brands on the spine, one brand between each vertebra, and one brand in the chest. And one brand on his stomach with the olive-shaped branding iron, for trembling is subdued and cold diseases are quickly cured.
Chapter Forty-Fifth.
In branding blisters that occur on the body.ويكوى موضع البثر بالمكواة الزيتونيّة او المكواة المخروطي
Blistering blisters may occur in the body due to thick, viscous, cold, putrid materials. At their first appearance, a gentle brand should be applied to the top of each blister with a burning twig, or the end of a long sprig of wild rosemary, or with a lenticular branding iron.
And blisters should be branded in this way at their first appearance, so that they do not increase and the cause of them is dispersed, and the patient recovers from them, except that it is appropriate that this should be done after phlebotomy has been performed on the patient.
Chapter Forty-Sixth.في كىّ السدادة من الأذن.
In branding a clot in the ear.If bleeding occurs when an artery is cut, you should brand it with a red-hot iron, and make the brand as hot as possible
Bleeding of blood from an artery that has been cut often occurs due to a wound on the outside, or due to incising a tumor, or branding an organ, and so on; it is difficult to stop it.وإن كان النزف شديدا فلا يزال يكوى على موضعه كيّة بعد كيّة حتّى يتوقف النزف ويجب ان تكون الك
If this happens to anyone, quickly put your hand over the mouth of the artery, place your index finger on it and gently squeeze until the blood is trapped under your finger and nothing comes out. Then put in the fire small and large olive-shaped cauteries and blow on them until they are very hot.
Then take one, either small or large, depending on the wound and the location where the artery has ruptured, and apply the cautery to the same vein after you remove your finger quickly and hold the cautery until the bleeding stops.
If, when you remove your finger from the mouth of the artery and put out the cautery, the bleeding starts again, take another cautery quickly from those in the fire that are ready, and keep doing this with one cautery after another until the bleeding stops.وإن رأيت بعد أن تمسك المكواة على موضع الجرح شيئاً يظهر وينبض فوق المكواة فى موضع النبض ويشبه اللحم الرطب فعند ذلك لا تأمن أن يكون عرقاً آخر نازلاً من موضع آخر فإذا وجدت ذلك فأزل المكواة وأ
If you see, after you apply the cautery to the wound, something that looks like wet meat and pulses above the cautery in the pulse area, then be careful not to burn a nerve there and cause further harm to the patient. Know that if blood flows from an artery, it cannot be stopped, especially if it is a large artery, except in one of four ways: by cauterization as we have said, or by cutting it off if it has not already been cut. When an artery is cut, its ends contract and the bleeding stops, or it can be tied tightly with threads, or compression bandages can be applied firmly to stop the bleeding.وإن وقع ذلك فى موضع لا يمكن الوصول اليه كالوريدين من ذراعيه وأصابعيه وكعبيه ومواضع الوريد الذى فى الصدر والمعدة والمراق والوريد الذى فى الرجلين فى المتن والقدمين والكاحلين والأصابع فإنّ الأدوية التى توقفه وتقطعه هي: الادريسية والحمّصية ودو
If this happens in a place that is difficult to reach, such as the veins in the arms, fingers, ankles, and feet, or the veins in the chest, abdomen, neck, and legs, then the remedies that can stop and cut it off are: theriaca, pepper, and their like. But if someone tries to stop the bleeding with a ligature, compression bandages, or by burning, it will not stop at all, except rarely. If this happens to someone and they do not have a doctor or medicine available, they should quickly put their index finger over the mouth of the wound as described above.
And you tighten it very tightly until the blood stops and flows out of the wound, and on the artery and the finger, do not remove it from it with very cold water, always until the blood freezes and thickens and stops. And in the meantime, look at what it needs from cauterization or medicine.
Chapter 2.
In incision, cupping, phlebotomy and similar surgeries.
Khalf said that in the first chapter, we have mentioned all diseases that are suitable for cauterization by fire and burning medicine, their causes and reasons, their tools and the images of the cautery instruments, from the horn to the foot.
And in this chapter, I will follow the same path so that it is easy for the student to find what he wants...
Before I begin, you should know, my sons, that this chapter contains more pitfalls than the first chapter on cauterization...
And for that reason, the warning in this chapter should be more severe because the work in this chapter is often accompanied by a risk of death when opening a vein or incising on a tumor or treating an abscess or wound or removing an arrow or incising on a stone and so on, all of which are associated with risk and fear, and in most cases, death occurs.
I advise you to avoid falling into suspicion, as you may encounter in this profession various types of people with different illnesses. Some are weary of their illnesses and do not fear death...
Because of the severity of his illness and long suffering, and because of the disease, there is something that indicates death. Some people will give you all their money in hopes of getting better from their fatal illnesses. You should not assist such people at all.
Your caution should be greater than your desire or greed, and you should not proceed with anything until you have certain knowledge of what will happen, and use all your treatments to inform your patients about the outcome of their health.
You will thus be aided in acquiring praise, glory, remembrance and thanks. May God inspire you with the right path, my children, and not deprive you of success and wisdom, for He alone holds the power to do so. There is no God but Him.
I have arranged this chapter in accordance with what has preceded in the chapter on cauterization, from the horn to the foot, so as to lighten for you the search for what you want, if God wills.
Chapter 1:
On the treatment of water gathered in children's heads.
This ailment often occurs in children at birth when the midwife applies pressure to the child's head without caution, and it may also occur due to an unknown cause.The treatment of this is as follows:First, if the water has gathered little by little, there is no need for worry, as it will eventually dry up on its own without any treatment. If, however, it gathers rapidly and in great quantity, it is then considered a serious ailment.
I have not seen this ailment in anyone other than children, and everyone I have seen with it has quickly met their death, so I have found it best to leave it untreated. Indeed, I once saw a child whose head was filled with water, and whose head swelled larger every day.Now, if the water has gathered little by little, there is no need for worry, as it will eventually dry up on its own without any treatment. If, however, it gathers rapidly and in great quantity, it is then considered a serious ailment.The treatment for this is as follows: The child could not bear to sit up due to the size of his head, and the moisture continued to increase until he died.If, however, the water has gathered rapidly and in great quantity, then one should apply a poultice of fried onions mixed with honey over the affected area, which is usually at the crown of the head
The moisture can either gather between the skin and the bone or under the bone on the peritoneum. If the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the swelling is small, then one should make an incision in the middle of the head, transversely, about two fingers in length, so that the moisture can drain. This is how the blade should be positioned.
If, however, the moisture is greater and the swelling larger, then make two incisions that intersect in this manner:And if the moisture has gathered under the bone on the peritoneum, then one should make an incision along the crown of the head, from one ear to the other, so that the moisture can
If the moisture is beneath the bone and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head open from all sides, and the water goes down when you squeeze it with your hand into the interior, and this is not hidden from you, then you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner.
After the incision, all the moisture should come out, then you should tie the incisions with bandages and dressings, then rub it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day, then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and do not leave the head tightly bound, and feed the patient with all dry food with little moisture.
until the member becomes strong and healed. Another recipe for incision is to look where the bone of the tumor and the accumulation of water appears, because it may be in the back of the head more or in front of it, or on the right or on the left.وإذا كان فى مؤخّر الرأس فلانجب الى اليمين او الشمال ما بين الأذن والعين اليمنى، فان خرجت رطوبة فهى من الورم والا فشقّ فى موضع آخر الى أن يخرج الماء ثمّ تشدّ الشقّ بالخرق والز
If it is in the back of the head, lean to the right or left between the right ear and eye; if moisture comes out, then it is from the tumor, otherwise incision in another place until the water comes out, then tie the incision with bandages and ga
Chapter 2.وأما إذا كان فى مقدّم الرأس
If it is in front of the headCut the two arteries behind the ears, known as the pulsating arteries.وان خرج الدم منهما فهذا هو المراد وان توقّف الدم فشق
If blood comes out of them, that is what is desired; if the blood stops, make an incision in that place until the water comes out.And when one experiences acute attacks in the eyes or chest, and that treatment with medicines does not help, then the best treatment is to cut these arteries.وإن كان الشقّ فى مؤخّر الرأس فلانجب الى اليمين او الشمال بين الأذن والعين اليمنى فان خرجت رطوبة فه
If the incision is in the back of the head, lean to the right or left between the right ear and eye; if moisture comes out, then it is from the tumor, otherwise incision in another place until the water comes out.Then, when you want to cut them, shave the patient's head with a razor, then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the artery appears, then tighten the patient's neck with the end of his garment, then look where the pulse beats; their locations are the two depressed places behind the ears, and they are seldom hidden except in some people.
Then mark them with ink, then cut them with a sharp scalpel to the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head. If you wish, insert the scalpel under the artery and lift it up by cutting, and the length of the cut should be about two folded fingers.
When the vein is cut, the blood flows in a pulsating manner, lifting up and down in waves. If the artery cannot be felt by touch, you should estimate three finger widths from the ear and mark it with ink then cut to the bone. What one should do.
Send six ounces of blood at a time, and sometimes more or less depending on the strength of the patient and the fullness of his arteries. Then look at the wound, if there is any peritoneum remaining on the bone, cut it off.
So that a hot swelling does not occur. Then bind the wound with a strip of linen and treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter 3
In cutting the two arteries in the temples.
If a person has chronic migraines, or acute attacks from before strong humidity and heat in the muscles of the temples, or chronic severe headaches, and has been treated with various remedies of medicine without success, we have tried in these diseases cutting the arteries in the temples or cauterizing them as described.وإنّما نعنى بشريانى الأصداغ ما مرّ ذكره من الشرايين التى تصعد من تحت الصدغين الى فوق وهى التى يعنى بها جالينوس فى كتاب السلاقط وسمّاها السلاقطة ومضارها معروفة وقد سبق ذكرها، وأمّا ما خالف ذلك من شرايين الصدغين التى هى فرع من العرق الدّرقيّ فلا تعالج بسلّه ولا كيه لأنّه.
And the way to cut them is that the patient shaves the hair on his temples and intends the artery visible in the temple; it will be apparent to you from its pulse, and seldom hidden except in individual people.فإنّه يتبيّن لك من نبضه وقلّ ما يخفى الّا فى الفرد من الناس، ثمّ تعلّم عليهما بالمداد ثمّ تقطعهما بالمبضع النشل قطعا الى العظم ويكون ذلك بعرض الرأس وإن شئت أدخلت المبضع من تحت الشريان وتنتره الى فوق
Or when it is extremely cold, if you cannot see clearly, then let the sick person tighten his neck with a loose garment, and then rub the area with a cloth or compress the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible and apparent. Then take the blade which has this shape. Then you gently strip the skin until you reach the artery, then insert a hook into it and pull it upwards until you extract it from the skin and free it from the adhesions underneath it on all sides. If the artery is thin, then twist it with the tip of the hook. Then you cut off a portion of it, as much as its ends can be separated and contracted without causing bleeding. If it is not amputated or severed, then no blood will flow at all. Then you should let out six to three drachms of blood.
If the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with a strong doubled thread, and the thread should either be made of silk or of sinews of the bowstring tree so that putrefaction does not quickly reach it before the wound heals, causing bleeding.
Then you cut off the excess between the two ties. You should do that in that moment or after some other time. Or, if you prefer, you can brand it with a hot skewer all the way to the bone so that its ends are amputated and it performs the same function as what we said before, or better.
Unless the patient has a fever or is overheated, because branding is something that helps to eliminate moisture and is more beneficial. After cutting the arteries, the wound should be stuffed with old wool and tightly bandaged. After healing, it should be treated with dry remedies that promote meat growth and by twisting until it heals, if God wills it.
If during your procedure bleeding occurs from the artery, quickly cut it off either by branding or by filling the area with alum and tightening your hand until the bleeding stops. If you don't have anything to hand, then put your finger on the spot until the blood clots.
Soak the wound in very cold water until the pain subsides, and then tie it up as it should be tied. It is also easier to cauterize the artery with this double-bladed instrument after marking the two spots with ink than it is to cut the artery with a scalpel.
And heat it very hot until it reaches the bone and the artery is cut in two places so that its two ends can be separated, for this cautery will never join them. This is what the cautery should look like.
The two blades should be sharp like little knives, but less sharp than a real knife, because if they are as sharp as a knife, they will be quickly cooled by the cold and the flesh will not be cut through quickly. If they are a little blunt, they will retain the heat of the fire better.
And it cuts through the flesh quickly; this is the best, lightest and easiest method. The distance between the two blades should be about the thickness of a finger.
Chapter 4.
On the treatment of hot, continuous tears flowing from the eyes.
If the tears are continuous and they flow from the veins on the skull, outside the head, and there is no benefit to be gained from any medical treatment with medicines, and you see that the patient's face has turned red, and he feels an ant-like crawling sensation in his forehead, and his eyes are swollen and watery, with their lashes worn away and their eyelids chapped from the tears, then the first line of treatment is to this: you order the patient to shave the hair off his forehead.
Then make three parallel incisions on the forehead, about two fingers in length; the first incision should be parallel to the length of the nose and in the middle of the forehead, the second one a little distance away from the movement of the muscle at the temple, and the third one on the other side.
And beware of cutting the two arteries on the sides, and keep your hand away from the junction of the jaws, and after each incision make it three fingers length, and have with you pieces of sponge or dry rags to stop the bleeding.
Then insert the sharp-tipped scalpel, which has this shape. From the incision near the temple to the middle incision, and strip off all the skin between the incisions with the peritoneum on the bone; then do the same from the middle incision to the third incision, and remove this scalpel. And insert into the first incision also another instrument called a spatulate sharp on one side and smooth not sharp on the other, and this is its shape: .
And make its sharp side towards the flesh sticking to the skin and its smooth side towards the bone, and push it until you reach the middle incision, and cut off all the vessels descending from the head to the eyes without cutting into the surface of the skin.
Then do the same in the middle incision to the other, and when a moderate amount of blood has flowed, squeeze out the clotted blood from the wounds; then in each incision you shall put a wisp of cotton soaked in oil or vinegar and oil, and place on it a dressing that has been moistened with water.
So that a hot swelling does not occur; and on the third day, loosen the bandage and use plenty of cold water, then treat it with basilicon ointment in rose oil, or other ointments for wounds, until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of tears and discharges into the eyes from the interior of the head.
When someone experiences copious, acute, virulent and persistent discharges, and you see the eyes are emaciated and small, with weakened vision, and the eyelids ulcerated and the eyelashes falling out. And there is in the depth of the head a sharp, painful ache and consecutive sneezing; so know from these symptoms that those materials and discharges come from many deep veins, and the best treatment for them is this treatment: that you order the sick person to shave his forehead, then make an incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there is in the depth of the head a sharp, painful ache and consecutive sneezing; so know from these symptoms that those materials and discharges come from many deep veins, and the best treatment for them is this treatment: that you order the sick person to shave his forehead, then make an incision in the middle of the forehead. Or lift a little across and begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, and the incision is to the bone and keep your hand away from the moving muscles of the temples when chewing, so that when the bone is exposed and all the blood is wiped with a sponge.
Then separate the lips of the incision with old cotton or a twist of linen, then tighten above by bandages and soak the bandages in wine and oil so that no hot swelling occurs. And when you remove them and see that the hot swelling has receded, it is fitting to scrape the bone until the growth of meat begins.
Then treat it with the drying regimen that grows meat, such as to take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of chalk, prepare an ointment from them and use it in the growth of meat in such wounds.
Chapter 6.
On the treatment of what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone or شبه الحجر كالحديد والزجاج وإمّا حّب نباتىّ كالحمّص والنواة ونحو ذلك وإمّا شىء سيّال مثل الماء والخلّ ونحوه.
Or it is an animal; so when a stone or the like of a stone, which does not increase in the ear, falls into the ear, face the sun with your ear, and if you see the stone only, drop something into it from Camphor oil or سیرج then try to get it out by moving your head or using a candle. When you feel the urge to sneeze, block both nostrils. Place a piece of cloth or wool around the ear and pull the ear upward. This treatment often works. If it doesn't, try removing the object with a soft instrument like this.
If it doesn't come out with the instrument, try using a small, flexible bronze tube. If that doesn't work, make a tube of copper and insert one end into the ear canal.
Seal the area around the tube with a mixture of pitch and oil so that there is no other passage for the wind except through the tube, then draw it out with your breath strongly and frequently. This often works. If it doesn't come out with what we have described, take some gum from the resin of trees or prepared gum used to catch birds, put a small amount on the tip of the rod.
After wrapping it tightly in cotton, insert it gently into the ear canal once the ear is dry. If it still doesn' come out with what we have described, act quickly before the hot swelling or cramp occurs.
The procedure for the incision is to bleed the patient first in the head and then release some blood depending on his strength. Then have the patient sit between your hands, tilt his ear upward, and make a small incision at the base of the ear, in its lowest part.
The incision should be crescent-shaped so that you can reach the stone. Then remove it with any instrument you can, and then stitch the incision quickly and treat it until it heals.
If the object in the ear is a swelling grain, try to remove it as mentioned above. If it doesn't come out, take a thin, flexible blade.
Try to cut that type of grain that has fallen into the ear with that, but only if you are sure that the grain has been moistened by the ear's moisture so that it becomes many small pieces and then remove them with a blunt instrument or a soft instrument or by suction."فإن لم تفعل ذلك والّا فحاول إخراجها بآلة حادة على هذه الصورة، فإن لم يمكنك إخراجها والّا فاخضغه واعصره حتى تخرج منه.
As we have said, it is easy to extract it; and as for the water that has entered the ear, the patient should yawn while using a syringe first, and having filled his ear with some old cotton, while lying on that ear in which there is water, if it comes out by doing so.
If not, take many small pebbles the size of fingers, smooth and thin, heat them over fire slightly, and let the patient insert one into the hole of his ear, and hop on one foot from that side, and hit another stone against the stone in the ear.
He should continue doing this with one pebble at a time until all the water is discharged; and the water may be discharged by taking a reed or a feather, inserting one end into the ear, and burning the other end with fire until most of it is burnt, then reinsert another feather.
Do this several times until all the water is discharged, or pull it out with the tube as mentioned earlier for pebbles; and as for removing an insect that has entered it, look and if it is small like a flea or similar, treat it as mentioned in the division, and if.
If its body is large and perceptible to the senses, try to remove it with a forceps and pins; its removal is easier than that of anything else that becomes embedded in the ear. And as for removing the worm that develops in the ear, if you have treated it as mentioned in the division in the article on cataracts, and your treatment was not effective,
You should look into the sun, and if you see something of the worm, remove it with a forceps or fine pins; if you do not see anything, take a tube like this: [image of tube].
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, insert the thin end into the ear as much as the patient can bear it, then suck it out with a strong suction; do this several times until all the worm is discharged. If it does not come out when sucked, seal around the tube with wax as mentioned for pebbles.وكلّما احتاج الى أن يسدّ الشمع حوله فأخرجه وادخله ثانية حتّى يخرج جميع الدود واعلم أن هذا الطبع يتولّد فى الأذن إذا كان بها رطوبة كثيرة أو عفونة، وأمّا.
If the above methods do not work, use the catheters I have mentioned which the ancients tried in killing worms and you will find that in the article on catheters. The tool for pouring oils and medicines into the ear is as follows:
As you see, make it of silver or brass, narrower at the bottom with a small hole and wider at the top. If you wish, make the tip inside the tube out of solid brass. Or take a stick and wind cotton tightly around it.
Then pour the oil or tincture, or whatever medicine you want into the tube while it is in the ear, and then insert the rod with the cotton from above and squeeze your hand gently until the oil enters the inner ear and causes a sensation.
Let the medicine you pour into the ear be slightly warmed over fire, but beware that the object used for instillation is not too cold or too hot, as the ear cannot tolerate these extremes.
Chapter 7.
The treatment of ear blockages
Some children are born from their mothers' wombs with their ears not pierced.
People may also suffer from blockages in the ear canal due to injuries or tissue growth. This blockage can be deep within the ear canal and out of sight.And if you see a white puss flowing from the ear, this is an indication that there is a wound inside the ear and it must be cleaned and treated as mentioned earlier.
And if it occurs just outside the piercing and is visible, then it can be seen by the eye; however, blockages that occur deep within the ear canal and are out of sight are usually difficult to treat. If it can be seen by the eye, you should expose the affected ear to sunlight.وكل سدّ عارض يجب أن تضع عليه من خارج القطورات التى ذكرناها وقد ذكرت لك ما يستعمل إذا كان فى داخل السمع لحم ميتة أو داء، وأمّا إن كان عن دم متجمد فعند ذلك ينبغى أن تعالج الدم المتجمد بنواحي And if a blockage occurs, you should treat it with the catheters I have mentioned. I have already told you how to treat blockages caused by dead tissue or disease within the ear canal. However, if the blockage is due to congealed blood, you should first
The instrument should be somewhat broader at the end, limited in part, and the rest of the trocar smooth-sided so as not to injure the ear. If the obstruction is due to flesh which has grown in the auditory canal, seize it with a delicate probe and cut it away very gently until all the flesh is removed.
If the obstruction is deep in the ear, take a smooth, slender instrument and heat it gently over a fire, then insert it into the auditory canal. If you feel the obstruction, along with the patient experiencing difficulty in hearing, gently probe it.
Be careful not to injure the tympanic membrane, then insert a plug into the ear according to the size of the opening, which you have moistened in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed. You may also moisten a wick in water and sprinkle powdered sulphate on it.
If you see that the ear is swollen and hot, you should remove the wick and replace it with another one that has been moistened in cerotum made with rose oil, until the hot swelling subsides, then treat it until it heals.
If there is bleeding, moisten a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear; also employ the treatment mentioned in the article on cauterization that stops the bleeding.
Chapter 8.
On the treatment of warts which occur on the eyelids.
These warts, which occur on the eyelids, may be moist or dry. You should grasp them with a probe or forceps and cut them at their base with a trocar, then apply sulphate powder to the site.
If bleeding occurs, stop it with a mild lenticular cautery after cutting; often, they return if any of the roots remain, and if you cauterize with fire, you burn those roots and they do not return.
Chapter Nine.
In the treatment of cold-induced eye problems.
It is not uncommon for something akin to a cold to occur in the eyelids, characterized by severity and hardness.
This is called a "cold," which occurs when thick moisture gathers in the upper and lower eyelids. The treatment for this is to examine the eyelid, and if the swelling is prominent on the surface of the eyelid and movable from side to side, then it is an easy matter. Make a horizontal incision through it.
Then, gently strip it from all sides until it is removed, and then hook it with a hook and cut it; if you are unable to cut it except after you have made an incision through the entire eyelid, this will not harm the patient at all. If the incision is large, bring it together with sutures and treat it until it heals.وإن كان البرد فى داخل الجفن مع الاوعية فأمرها أشدّ لأنّه لا يمكنك أن تمسكه وتشقّه بالمقصّ، بل تأخذ إبرة مدببة وتثقب الأوعية كلّها حتّى تتخلّص.
If the cold is within the eyelid, along with the blood vessels, then it is more severe because you cannot hold and cut it with a scissor; instead, take a pointed needle and pierce all the vessels until they are removed. If it is small, it is no problem for you, as ointment will heal and join it; if the swelling is inclined towards the inside of the eyelid towards the inner surface, then turn over the eyelid and hook the swelling with a hook without needing to make an incision and cut it from all sides.وإن كان البرد فى داخل الجفن مع الاوعية فأمرها أشدّ لأنّه لا يمكنك أن تمسكه وتشقّه بالمقصّ، بل
If the cold is within the eyelid, along with the blood vessels, then it is more severe because you cannot hold and cut it with a scissor; instead, if you have made an incision through the entire eyelid, this will not harm the patient at all. Then wash the eye after cutting out the swelling with saline water and treat the site with healing remedies until the patient recovers.وإذا أردت أن تتخلّص من البرد فى الأجفان وأنت بالطريق ف
Chapter Ten.وصف مرهم يكون لعلاج البرد فى الأج
A description of an ointment for treating cold in the eyelids.وصفة المرهم الذى يعالج الشرناق.
The "sharnak" is a fatty tissue that occurs in the layers of the upper eyelid and mostly affects boys, weighing down their eyelids and causing them to have discharges in the mornings, and they are unable to look at the sunlight. In order for the tears to flow quickly towards them.
And so you will see them leaning on their faces all the time and sleeping on it, and their eyelids under the eyebrows are moist and swollen, and the "sharnak" is visible to the eye. When you press the area with your fingers, you can feel the "sharnak" between them. The patient should place his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth, prepare a wick from it, and make a circle with the wick to fit around the  "sharnak" on all sides, then place it over the  "sharnak" and press with your fingers from all sides to gather the  "sharnak" in the middle of the circle.
Then you make an incision in the middle of that moisture with a sharp blade, and the incision should be no larger than the incision made in phlebotomy. As for its depth, you should cut through the skin all the way down to reach the   "sharnak.
In most cases, the   "sharnak" will protrude from the incision like a piece of white fat, so you pull it out with a cloth that you have wrapped around your fingers while rotating your hand right and left until it is completely removed. Be careful not to overdo the incision so that the blade doesn't slip and harm the eye.
If the    "sharnak" does not appear at the beginning of the incision, you should make the incision a little deeper gently until the    "sharnاك" appears and then pull it out as mentioned before. Then soak a cloth in a mixture of vinegar and water and place it on the wound, and some people use salt instead.
And place it inside the incision to dissolve what remains of that moisture, then treat it until it heals. If a hot swelling occurs in the area, treat it with soothing poultices until it heals.
Chapter XI.
On various operations for the eye.
When excess skin grows on the eyelid, below its natural course, and persists, it damages the eye and causes various ailments such as constant tearing, ptosis, opacification, and thickening, which can ultimately lead to the loss of vision.
There are four types of eyelid correction: cauterization with fire, sharp instruments as previously mentioned in the section on cauterization, surgical incisions and sutures, or with a needle as I will describe below.
You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it does not turn, insert a needle with thread into the eyelid from below; the needle should pass through the thread above, near the hair itself, and you should pull the thread upwards along with the eyelid.
You should then turn it with a stick, make an incision in the underside of the eyelid, just below the excess hair, using a scalpel starting from the larger punctum to the smaller one. Then, you should withdraw the thread and place a small pad of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and mark the eyelid with ink.
It should resemble the shape of an ace of spades, except that the shape should be adjusted according to how much you want to lift the eyelid, as people may differ in this regard; some may require a larger portion of the eyelid to be cut according to how relaxed the eyelid is.وينبغى أن يكون القطع مع الجفن وإلّا فقد يفسد بصره وإن كان ينبغى أن ترى موضع القطع فإن كان فى موضع يضرّ العين لم تقطعه، وقد ذكرنا فى كتاب الفصد عن المواضع التى تجعل فيها القطع على الجفن
Some people may require less cutting, depending on how relaxed the eyelid is; you should consider the location of the incision as well, since an incision in a damaging location can impair the vision. We have discussed in the book on phlebotomy the locations where incisions should be made on the eyelid.Then, using a scalpel, make an incision along the two lines you marked, starting from the larger punctum to the smaller one; the incision should be made close to the natural hairline, about as thick as a stick.
Then the hook is inserted into one of the corners of the skin, then it is stripped off entirely. Then the two lips are brought together by a needle and fine woolen thread, the blood is wiped away, and what remains of the threads is glued to the eyebrows with some sticky substance.
You may do that or not, then the stitches and threads remain for about three to four days, then you treat it. If you wish, leave the wound without stitches and treat it with something that dries and contracts, as the eyelid rises when the wound is closed and stitched, and stitching is better.
This method of resection was mentioned by the ancients, except that it requires effort from the patient. It is a good and safe method. Another method of resection is to draw an outline on the eyelid in the shape of a laural leaf, as we have described. Then the eyelid is lifted with three hooks, which are either separate or joined in this way:..
Then you cut off the excess of the eyelid with a small pair of scissors in this way, making even cuts:.
If you cannot hold the hooks and it is not convenient for you, take a needle with thread, insert it in the middle of the shape, and insert another thread near the larger punctum and a third thread near the smaller punctum, then gather the threads evenly between your fingers and lift them gently.فان رافقتك يدك الى فوق ومشيتها مع الجفن الى فوق حتى توازى الجفون وتجتمع ثمّ خيط ما بينها بخيط صوف رقيق فذلك هو المطلوب، فإن لم تفعل ذلك فأدخل اصبعيك السبابة والوسطى من تحت الجفن وحرّكهما على الشكل كأنّه الخيط الرفيع الذى يدخل فيهما، وأسقط الجفن بمقدار ما
If your hand accompanies the eyelid upward and moves it so that the eyelids become parallel and meet, then stitch between them with fine woolen thread, that is what is desired. If you do not do that, insert your index and middle fingers under the eyelid and move them on the shape as if they were the fine thread that is inserted in them. Then drop the eyelid by as much as a
The lower eyelid may also be inverted, in which case it should be treated as we have described with incisions and sutures, cauterization with fire or with a sharp medication, or cauterization with fire or with a sharp medication is more effective and gentler on the patient than incisions and sutures.
Cauterization with a reed is done in this way: the eyelid is turned inside out, and an incision is made on the inner side as described before. Then, two thin reeds or pieces of wood are made, their length equal to the length of the eyelid, and their width less than the width of a knife blade.
The edges of the reeds are notched on both sides so that the sutures can be tied to them, then they are gently gathered and tied around the remaining eyelid tissue and the reeds are tightly bound on both sides for several days. The stretched skin will die, turn black and rot away.
Until it falls off on its own. If this is slow, trim it with a pair of scissors and then treat the wound until it heals. Once the wound has healed, the eyelid will rise and the eyelashes will not sting the eye. This is how you should make the reeds: their shape and dimensions should be as follows:.
Chapter 12.
On removing irritating eyelashes with a needle.
If it is one or two eyelashes, the procedure is as follows: take a thin needle and thread a length of smooth silk thread through it, about 4 inches long. Then tie the ends of the thread together in a very gentle knot.
Then thread another thinner thread through the loop, shorter than the first one, and tie its ends if you like. Then have the patient rest his head on your lap so that he is facing the sun to make the procedure easier to see. Insert the needle with the loop into the root of the unwanted lash.
Pass it through the eyelid quickly so that it comes out above the natural lashes, then pull the thread up through the loop and thread those lashes into the loop if there is one or two or three, no more. Then tie the ends of the thread together and cut them off close to the knot.
Then pull it with your hand until the hair comes out of the lid along with the loop, with the natural hair. If you pull the loop and do not get the hair out with it, pull the loop down with the thread that you installed in it until the loop comes out of the upper hole.
Then put the hair back in and pull them until it rises in the upper hole and you see it with your eyes, then release the loop and thread and take them out and tighten the eye and leave it tightened for two or three days until the hair sticks to its place and the meat grows on it.
If the hair is short, either add a long hair to it from natural hair so that it rises with it, or leave it until it gets longer after a while and then lift it,.
Chapter 13.
On the treatment of Entropion occurring in the upper eyelid.
The cause of this entropion is called Bunny and this entropion is either natural or accidental, the accidental one being from a wound or incision or burning and so on.وعلاجه بأن تأخذ خيطاً من الحرير أو الكتان أو الصوف أصفر أو أبيض أو أسود فتقطبه وتجذبه الى أسفل الجفن حتّى يبرز الخيط من ثقب أعلى الجفن، ثمّ تجذب يدك بها حتّى تخرج الشعرة مع الأنشوطة فى الجفن مع الشعر الطبيعىّ فإن
And the way to deal with it is to split that union and separate its lips and put a flax wick between them and tie it until it heals, and one should not use in treating it things that dry out and contract.وإن كان من كىّ او شقّ فلتقلع الأنشوطة والخيط كما فعلت فى الشترة التى فوق، وإن لم يبرأ بعد أيام عالجته كما عالجت أختها وربّيته حتّى يلزم موضعه.
And if it was from burning or cutting, then pull out the loop and the thread as you did in the entropion above, and if it does not heal after a few days, treat it as you treated its sister and nurse it until it sticks to its place.For indeed, if you do that, the entropion will return even stronger than it was, but rather use in treating it things that relax, such as the ring and anointing with water in which linseed and linseed oil have been cooked, and smear the thread with it and treat it.
And the treatment of this is to use every means possible to prevent it from healing in its original shape, and this action that we have mentioned is only part of the repair of the hernia, not for the area to return to what it was before at all.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of hernias that are in the lower eyelid.
This hernia which is from below is called a true hernia and is natural, and the natural ones are those that occur from a wound or incision or burning and the like.وأما التى تكون فى الجفن الأعلى من جرح او شقّ يعالج بها على ما ذكرناه فى علاج الشرة فى الموضعين اللذين وصفناهما، وكلّ شتره من جرح او شقّ.
And as for the one that is in the upper eyelid from a wound or incision, it is treated as we mentioned in the treatment of the hernia in the two places we described, and every hernia from a wound or incision [is treated] in this way. And the way to do this is to take a needle with a doubled thread and pierce the meat and pass it from the left pupil to the right pupil until the thread is at both ends of the meat, then pull the meat up with the needle and cut it with a broad scalpel.ثمّ تسحب الخيط حتّى يضيق مكانها ثمّ تأخذ مبضعاً وتفصل الشتره من الجفن بكلّه وترجعها الى موضع
Then pull the thread until the place is tightened, then take a scalpel and separate the hernia from the eyelid altogether and return it to its place; if the shape of the eyelid returns to what it should be, otherwise, take a rod and place it over the incision site on the eyelid and flip it up with the rod and make two incisions on the inside of the eyelid, and the ends of the incisions will meet at an angle. So that when they come together, they become like this shape:  .
This is the Greek letter lambda, then remove that meat as much as the acute side of it is below what is next to the eyelid, then gather the dispersed parts with two sutures, stitch it with a wool thread, then treat it with what we have mentioned of soothing remedies and twisting until it heals.وإن كان من عرضيّة فلا بأس إن شاء اللّه تعالى ان تمضى على العادة التى ذكرناها فى علاج الشتر.
And if the foreskin is torn from a tear or a stitch or a burn, then it should be made a simple incision without the hair of the foreskin also, as mentioned earlier, then separate the lips with a twist, as mentioned above.
The bottom line in the treatment of phimosis, whether it is from above or below, is to perform the procedure according to what you see as the appearance of ​​phimosis, because it may be very different in appearance, and the experienced surgeon devises a way to do it whenever possible.
Until it returns to its natural shape or approaches it, and the disease itself will guide you to what is suitable for it in most cases,.
Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
This adhesion may occur in many people, when the upper eyelid attaches to the white of the eye and prevents it from moving easily and hinders it from its natural actions, so you should insert the tip of a probe under the eyelid..
and lift it up or extend it with a hook, then cut the adhesion with a sharp scalpel, not as sharp as other scalpels but a little blunt so that the patient is not distressed when operating and the scalpel slips and hurts the eye with its sharpness. Your cutting should be as if you were peeling off that adhesion.
And expect when the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all adhesion is healed, then pour into the eye salt water to wash it or drip into it from the shawaf al-Zingari solution diluted with water, then separate the eyelid and the eye with a cotton thread.
and place a piece of wool wet with egg white over the eye, and after the third day use compresses until it heals,.وإن عرض هذا الالتصاق للقرنية فى موضع الحدقة فينبغى ان تمسح القرنيّة بمرهم الزئبق الأحمر او الاخضر أو النيوتون، ثم
Chapter XVI.
In cutting the palpebral skin and suturing the inner canthus.
The palpebral skin is of two kinds; it may be nerveless, and in this case it resembles a thin, tough membrane; or it may contain nerves, and then it is like a hard white membrane, which when pricked by an instrument, or cut with a knife, will readily separate.
And it does not take a hook well, and both kinds begin from the inner canthus, and spread out little by little so as to cover the eyeball and prevent light and motion of the eye; and the manner of operating on them is to place the patient's head in your lap.
Then open his eyes and raise the eyelid with your hand, then catch hold of the palpebral skin with a slightly curved hook, and draw it up towards the upper eyelid; then take a needle, pass through it a horse-hair or a strong thread, bend the end of the needle a little, and stick it into the middle of the palpebral skin.
And draw it through with the thread, and tie the palpebral skin with it, and draw it up to the upper eyelid, and strip off, with the hair, the side of the palpeبرال skin next the pupil, as if you were spreading it with the hair to its utmost extent; then cut off the remainder at the root of the inner canthus with a delicate knife or small pair of scissors, and leave the natural flesh of the canthus intact.
Lest by cutting it the constant flow of tears should occur; and the palpeبرal skin may be drawn up with a hook alone, or with the thread as we have said; then strip off with a smooth knife the end which is thus formed:.
And beware of hurting the horny membrane with the knife, lest you cause a tear in it and thus injure the pupil; after the cutting, throw into the eye some powdered salt, or the alumen-plaster, and leave it till the next day, then treat it as is proper until it heals.
If the nail is not sensitive and a needle cannot penetrate it, nor can a hook be stuck into it, then this type of nail is often treated with remedies, and it heals as described in the section on classification. If you want to cut it, open the patient's eye.
Take a sharp, smooth, fine-edged blade in this shape: Gently scrapes the nail from above, and if you see that it becomes loose and crumbly and the scraping has taken effect, then drop a few drops of your eye-dropper into the eye from the solution of arsenical powder or red lead, or powdered salt, and hold the eye shut until the next day.
Then return to the nail and continue until it is all gone, unless a hot inflammation obstructs your view of the eye; then leave it and treat the hot inflammation until it heals, then return to the nail and scrape away at it until it heals. As for the protuberance of meat on the eyelid,.
If the protuberance hurts the eye terribly, then fasten it with a hook and cut off some of it, but do not cut too deeply so that it does not cause a flow of tears; then drop the red or arsenical solution into the eyes until it heals.
Chapter 17.
On the cutting of warts and the growth of excess flesh in the eye.
In some people's eyes, red flesh grows in layers until it covers the eyeball or comes close to it, or protrudes beyond the eyelids; sometimes, the eyelids turn outward as well. It resembles a rosebush.ويمكن أن ينبت لحمٌ أبيض في العين، ويكون نتوءًا صغيرًا أو كبيرًا، أو يكون متساوي الاستدارة أو مفلطحًا أو منحرفًا. وقد يظهر هذا اللحم الأبيض على شكل وردة، أو يرتفع كالتل فوق بقية لحم العين، أو يبرز
White flesh can also grow in the eye, as a small or large protuberance, either spherical or flattened or oblique. It may appear as a white rose, or rise like a hill above the rest of the eyeball, or protrude. The treatment for this is to have the patient tilt his head back onto your lap and open his eyes, after which you use appropriate forceps to grip and remove
Then hold it with a pair of forceps or a blade, and cut the first piece of flesh, then the next, until it is all cut away from the eye so as not to harm it while operating. You may cut it using the scalpel we described for cutting the nail, or with small scissors. Such as those used to pick up splinters, as will be shown in the chapter that follows this one.
When you have finished cutting and the two eyelids are fully cut away, fill the eye with powdered salt, or use a red powder or similar caustic medication, and apply to the exterior of the eye a cotton pad soaked in egg white to prevent inflammation from the heat.
If any of the eyelids remain, and you are troubled by bleeding and fear inflammation from heat, leave the eye and treat it with a remedy to soothe the inflammation; then return to operating on it until it is healed. Do the same for any excess flesh that appears in the eye from this type of injury.
However, you should avoid treating a weak eye either by nature or due to the injury with iron, and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that that organ can tolerate the operation.
Chapter 18.
On picking out splinters from the eye.
Splinters are red veins that grow over the eye, preventing sight and weakening the eye if they persist for long. First, you should examine the eye. If it is strong and does not have any other disease apart from the splinters,
in that case, proceed to pick them out. Have the patient tilt his head onto your lap, then use a pair of fine forceps, one or two according to your skill, to gently grip and pull the veins out:
or you may use a pair of double forceps joined at one end as shown here:
Then use fine scissors to gently cut the veins and wipe away the blood from time to time until you have removed all the veins and the blood has stopped flowing. Take care not to hurt the eye with the tips of the scissors, and perform this operation in the morning when the sun is facing you.
And be careful in your work not to cut any other vessels, so that when you are finished, you can drip the green or red eye-drop into the eye to eat with its sharpness what remains of the veins. If you cannot catch it all at that time, then bandage the eye with something that relieves the pain of the eye.
And leave it for several days until the pain subsides and you can be sure of the hot swelling, then repeat the operation on this way until it is healed. This is the form of the scissors of pain.
And leave it [and the head of the patient is in the lap of the student, and another dries the tears and follows the gaze at the front and back of the eye; you] the original in the operation to open the eye with openings that are fixed or triangular, held by a student.
Looking sharply and the head of the patient is in the lap of the student, and another dries the tears and follows the gaze at the front and back of the eye; you have the option to start with the tweezers from the top of the eye or from the bottom, but it is better to dry two strings on the upper side, one at the end of the crown and the other at its beginning.
And hold it between the middle and index fingers, then hang hooks under them, then hold them between the little finger and ring finger, and lift your hand lightly until you see all the veins have risen, cut from the smaller vein on the west if you cut with scissors or with a delicate scalpel.
And insert the needle into the eye and explore all the veins until they rise on the sclera, do not cut the tear duct, as the tears and blood will smear on you.
Then cut with scissors what is left on the crown above and below so that nothing remains embedded except in the cornea, if you can lift it off the cornea, peel it off with a needle, this is better. Sometimes this happens in some people.
And if you cut it, it will soothe the pain and calm the hot tumor for a few days, then return to work on it.
Chapter 19.
On restoring the feather to the nose.
The physicians call the feather "nasur", when you treat it with cauterization or with a sharp, burning medication as previously described, and it does not heal, there is no trick to it except that you should cut into the tumor when it is mature and extract all the moisture inside it or the pus.
Until the bone is exposed, if the bone is exposed and you see in it corruption or blackness, then extract it with a tool that looks like this:.
And they call the rough-headed tool, made from Indian iron, with a rounded head like a button, engraved with an engraving like a file or chisel, and you place it on the site of corruption in the bone, then you rotate it between your fingers while you squeeze your hand slightly until you know that the corruption has been removed.
And you do this several times, then close the site with drying astringent medications, if the site is closed and the meat grows, and the flow of time stops and it does not renew itself or hurt or anything else happens to it.
Know that it has healed, otherwise there is no trick to it except to return the nasur to the hole in the nose in this way, which is to expose the bone again with iron or with a sharp medication, and when the bone is exposed, take a fork in this image:,.
The tip of the iron is triangular and its shaft is conical, bent towards the tip as you see, then place it on the bone itself, this must be done near the nostril, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then turn your hand with the fork until the bone penetrates and the patient feels it.
By holding his hand to his nose, the patient will feel that the wind comes out of it, then close the site with drying astringent medications as I have told you, when the meat grows and the place hardens, the matter that flows outside returns to the nose, which is lighter for the patient, God willing.
Chapter 20.
In treating the protrusion of the eye.
If the whole eye protrudes, and no defect or deficiency occurs in the sight, you should first ease the patient's pain, then bleed him in the scalp, and then place a cupping-glass on the back of the head without any restriction, and suck gently. Then you should apply cold to the eyes with cotton wool soaked in rose water.
Then you should apply a poultice made of acacia gum, myrrh, frankincense and alkanet root to the eye, and then tie the eye firmly with bandages, using many bandages. The method of preparing the bandages is as follows: take some very soft linen cloth and fold each piece in four folds. Make many such pieces.
Then place them one on top of the other, to whatever thickness is required by the eye, and then tie a tight bandage around it with a stiff cloth, and reapply the cupping-glass for gentle suction, without any restriction. Then remove the cupping-glass and leave the eye bound up for a day and night. If you find that the eye has not returned to its normal position, you should apply the cupping-glass once more on the following day, and leave it in place for two days, keeping the patient quiet and resting in bed.
If the bandage becomes slack during this time, it should be tightened again. Then remove the bandage after a day and night as we have said. If you find that the eye has returned to its normal position, otherwise reapply the poultice, bandages, compression and cupping-glass until it does return.
Chapter 21.
On cutting the vitreous humour.اذا كانت العنبية قد انقطع بعض
If a fissure occurs in the vitreous humour, and the humour protrudes and bulges out beyond the eyelids, taking on the appearance of a grape, disfiguring the patient's features, you should treat it as I describe below.اول العمل أن تسهل العليل، ثمّ تفصده فى القيفال، ثمّ تعطيه شيئا من شرب الحبة السوداء مع السكر المسبّع والماء البارد فيغسل به موضع العنبية، وذلك قبل
The first step is to ease the patient's pain, then bleed him in the scalp, and then give him a drink made from black seed with seven times its weight of sugar and cold water, which he should use to wash the affected eye. This is a prelude to the following operation: insert a needle at the base of the vitreous humour, below and towards the top, then insert another needle with a doubled thread through the pupil, and leave the first needle in place.ثمّ تأخذ الخيطين وتج
Then cut the place where the thread is folded and tie some cotton around the needle and tighten it well, then pull out the needle and put on the eye some wool moistened with egg white and leave it until the threads fall off with the cotton, then treat the eye with what strengthens it.
until the wound heals, and you may tighten the cotton on each side with a circle of cloth so that the eye protrudes nicely, then you should gently press with a thin scalpel to reach the bottom of the eye, so that the fluid flows out and the eye sinks and shrinks for as long as it takes to heal, then you should tighten it until it heals.
Chapter XXII.
Treatment of strabismus.
This condition, which is called strabismus, is a film that gathers in the eye, resembling water but not being water. The procedure for this is to have the patient sit upright on a chair, then take his head in your hands from both sides.
and move it until you see the film go down in your eye, then hold it in place without moving and the light will return and the patient will be able to see things as he used to. If the film does not go down with what we have mentioned, then we know that it is water.
Otherwise, sit the patient between your hands and take a thin scalpel and make a small incision above the corneal membrane at the point where the bulbar conjunctiva joins the corneal membrane in the limbus so that the substance is released.
When it comes out, instil warm water into the eye that has been mixed with honey or water in which a ring and honey have been boiled, then treat it with the other treatments until it heals.
Chapter XXIII.
If you see the discharge of water in a person's eye, its treatment is that we have mentioned the types of water in the division and which one is suitable for the discharge with clear speech explained, so you should take it from there in good health. Then you should sit the patient between your hands, crouching facing the light close to the sun.وتأخذ حوضا من فضّة أو ماء حارّا وتضعه تحت عينه، ثمّ تأخذ قسطا من ماء حارّ مزجت فيه عسلا وترفعه الى عينه حتّى يرقد على موضع قدح الماء.
Then tie and hold tightly his healthy eye, then lift the eyelid with your left hand if it is the left eye which has water, or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
Then you should place the tip of the spoon close to the edge of the cornea with a thick rod in the white part of the eye on the side of the pupil, then push the spoon with force while turning it with your hand until it penetrates into the white part of the eye and you feel that the spoon has reached an empty space.
The depth that the spoon should reach is equal to the distance from the boy to the edge of the black part, which is the iris of the eye. Because the copper can be seen by the person looking at it due to the clarity of the cornea, then you move the spoon upwards to the place where the water is located.
Then press it down repeatedly, and if the water comes out immediately, then the patient can see what is in front of him, while the spoon remains in his eye. Then the pain subsides a little, and if the water rises again, lower it again without removing the spoon.
If it does not rise, then remove the spoon gently while twisting your hand slightly, then dissolve a little pure salt in water and wash the eye from the inside, then put a wet bandage or cotton on the outside of the eye.
With rose oil and egg white, and tie the healthy eye with it. However, we and the people of our time put ground cumin with egg white on it. If the spoon does not enter the eye due to its hardness, as some people have very hard eyes. In that case, you should take a scalpel called "barde", which looks like this:.[A figure of a scalpel appears here]فإن أمكنك الدخول به ووجدت ماء تحت الأجف
If you can insert it and find water under the eyelid, then puncture only the conjunctiva with it, not making a deep puncture. Instead, gently tap the spoon on the surface of the eye, then insert the spoon as mentioned before. When you finish, prepare a comfortable bed for the patient to sleep on his back in a dark room.
He must abstain from all movements and coughing, and his food should be something that softens his nature. He must not move his head to the right or left at all, and the bandage must remain in place until the third day, after which it can be removed in the dark room, and his eyesight tested.
You should show him things, then re-apply the bandage until the seventh day. This should not be done during treatment or immediately after winding your hourglass, but you should avoid it before the water rises quickly due to intense gaze.
If a hot tumor appears, the bandage should be removed before the seventh day, and the tumor should be treated with something to reduce it. Once the tumor has subsided, his eyesight can then be released, and a veil should be placed over his face to train his eyesight for several days in the dark room.
He should then gradually leave the house and take care of the cause, and know that in the case of an apprentice, observation is not enough; he must also practice. I have heard from some Iraqi people that they make perforated vessels to absorb water.
I have not seen anyone in our country make this, nor have I read about it in any books of the ancients. It may be a modern invention. Here are some types of vessels for you to know about:
They are made especially of copper, and the tip should be as thin as this picture, triangular and sharp.
Chapter 24.
In the treatment of nasopharyngeal tumors.
Different types of tumors can grow in the nose, some resembling a scorpion with multiple legs, others being hard, dark-colored cancerous tissue, and still others being soft, non-dark-colored tissue.
If the tumor is soft and not malignant or cancerous, you should have the patient face the sun, open his nostril, insert a hook into the tumor, pull it out, and then cut away what you can reach with a sharp, delicate blade from one side only.
Until you know that all the flesh is gone, if some remains that you cannot cut, then gently remove it with one of the fine instruments so that nothing remains. If blood resists you or a hot tumor appears,
then treat it as appropriate or if it is a malignant tumor, then quickly remove it so that the blood stops and all the flesh is gone. Then drop into the nose after the cut vinegar and water or drink. If the nose opens and moisture passes from it into the throat.
know that it has healed. If the moisture does not pass as it should, know that there is flesh inside growing on top of the loose bones that the instrument did not reach by cutting. In this case, you should take a flax thread with some thickness.
and tie many knots in it, and between each knot is the size of a finger or less. The patient tricks the end of the thread into his nose with a stick or whatever he can after he has made it like a button, and pulls his breath until he reaches the nasopharynx.
and it comes out of his mouth, and often boys in school do this action, and it is easy for whoever wants to do it. Then gather the two ends of the thread, one end that comes out of the mouth and the other that remains in the nose.
Then use the flesh to spread the knots in the thread, do this until you know that the flesh is cut by the knots in the thread. Then take out the thread and insert a cotton swab that has been soaked in Egyptian ointment, do this for three days or more.
until the ointment eats all that remains of the flesh. Then insert a lead tube into the nose for a few days until it heals. If it needs to be dried, then you should use this method.
This is a picture of the pipette used to drip oils and medications into the nose: [Image: A drawing of a pipette with a long, thin shaft and a round bulb at one end, with a smaller opening at
He places a small silver or copper lampstand, open at the top and with an opening in the side.
If you prefer, make the tube closed like a reed, and the applicator flat.
It has a handle at one end, as you see, which you hold when you heat the oil or any other liquid or flowing substances within it.
Chapter XXV.
On warts growing at the tip of the nose.
Often a wart will grow at the tip of the nose, and increase in size over time, becoming unsightly.وإن كان صلبا أو لينًا فأدناه وأقربه الى الأرنبة فاعلاجوه بما ذكرناه آنفًا من النّار والفضّة والزئبق الأحمر ونح
If it is hard or soft, and located near the tip of the nose, treat it with one of the methods mentioned above using fire, silver, or red mercury. Therefore, you should cut it off as soon as it appears and remove all of it, then apply either cauterization or a burning medication that serves the same purpose as cauterization. If you fail to cut it off early on until it becomes large, examine it. If it is hard, discolored, and has reduced sensitivity,
do not use iron on it, as it is a type of malignant tumor, and I have often seen that cutting this tumor results in a great misfortune for the person affected by it. However, if the tumor is soft to the touch, not discolored, and you think that complete removal is possible, then treat the patient and cut it without caution or delay, then treat the wound with a medication that dries and constricts until it heals.وإن كنت تحذره من الكيّ فاعمل له دهن النفتلين المعرّق واستدخل به الموضع كلّه واجعل مع دهن النفتلين زئبق حمرا وح
If you are wary of cauterization, make a mixture of petroleum jelly and
stitch the nose, lip, and ear.وكلّ مكان فى الوجه شقّت فيه الشفرة ودم When a cut occurs in any of these cartilage structures, such as the nose, lip, or ear, and there is a separation of the tissues, know that it is rare for treatment to be effective in such cases, except in some individuals.وأولى الأماكن بالعمل موضع التفرّق لأنّه أسرع فى الاتّصال ولذلك ينبغى أن يكون العمل فيه أوّلًا، ومتى اتّصلت الغضاريف عن جرح فاعمل فى الموضع بدهن الن
When any of these symptoms appear, examine whether the wound is soft and bleeding; if so, you should close the lips of the wound with stitches and then treat it until it heals. If the separation has caused the lips to part and each incision is healthy, you should strip off the thick outer skin of each incision until it bleeds.
Then stitch the lips together and tighten them, and sprinkle powdered mastic and gum on them, and apply a poultice of plum-tree balm or any other healing balm on top, and leave it in place for two or three days, then remove it.
Change the dressing and leave it until the stitches fall out on their own, then treat it with balm until it heals. The technique of stitching is to close the separated edges, either with needles as we have described for abdominal stitching, or with thread, as we have already explained.
Chapter XXVII.
On removing nodules that appear on the lips.
Many people may develop small, hard swellings inside their lips, some resembling little carnations, others smaller or larger. You should turn the lip inside out and slit each nodule, then hook it with a probe.
Cut it from all sides, then stanch the bleeding with powdered rosin, and have the patient gargle with vinegar and salt, and treat the wounds with astringent remedies until they heal.
Chapter XXVIII.
On cutting off excess meat in the gums.وأمّا إن كان مابين الأسنان من لحم زائد على حدّ
However, if there is excess meat between the teeth on the gums, a condition known as hyperplasia, you should hook it with a probe or grip it with forceps and cut it at its base, then allow the gum to bleed, and finally apply powdered rosin to the wound.
If one of the constricting astringents or the drying cauterizations is repeated and the flesh comes back after treatment, it often returns, so cut it out again and brand it, for it will not return after branding.
Chapter 29.
On filing teeth with iron.
There may be accumulated on the surfaces of the teeth, within and without, and between the gums, rough, unsightly scales, which become black, yellow, or green, and this may cause decay to reach the gum and make the teeth unsightly.
So you should have the patient sit in your lap, with his head in your lap, and file the tooth or molar in which you see the scales and the thing like sand, until there is nothing left of it; likewise do for the blackness, greenness, yellowing, and anything else, so that it is purified.
If what is in it goes away after the first filing, then you should file him again on another day, and a second and third time, until you get the result you want; and know that the molar needs different files of different shapes according to what your work requires.
Because the file with which the molar is filed from inside is not the same as the file with which it is filed from outside, and that which is used to file between the molars is of another shape; these are several forms of files that you should have all prepared.
Chapter 30.
On tooth extraction.وأما إن كان فى اللثة ضرس قد انك
And if there is a tooth in the gum that causes you pain, you should treat the tooth with every trick and delay pulling it out, because there is no problem with pulling it out if you have to.
So when the patient resolves to pull it out, you should make sure that the aching tooth is stable.وأن تمنعه من الأكل والشرب والحارّ والبارد ساعة بعد ساعة ومدّة بعد مدّة فان لم ينصلح فلا بأس عليك إن شاء الله تعالى، فإنّك لم تؤ The sick person is often deceived by the pain and thinks it is in the correct tooth, so they extract it, but the pain does not go away until the diseased tooth is extracted. We have seen this happen many times with bloodletters.
If you are sure which tooth is causing the pain, then you should cut around the tooth with a strong blade to loosen the gum from all sides, and then wiggle it with your fingers or with fine tweezers, little by little, until you loosen it.
Then, when you have a good grip on the tooth with the tweezers, hold the patient's head firmly between your knees so that it does not move, and then pull out the tooth straight so as not to break it. If it doesn't come out, take one of those instruments and insert it under the tooth from all sides gently, wiggling it as you did before.
If the tooth is hollow or worn down, you should fill that cavity with a cloth and seal it tightly with the tip of a thin rod so that it does not crumble when you pull on it with the tweezers. You should also cut around the gum carefully from all sides.
Use caution so as not to break the tooth and leave a portion of it behind, which would cause an even greater affliction for the patient than the original pain. Avoid doing what ignorant bloodletters do by rushing into extracting it without following the methods we have described.
They often cause great afflictions for people, the least of which is breaking the tooth and leaving all or part of its roots behind. Sometimes they extract some of the jawbone, as we have seen happen many times. After extracting the tooth, the patient should rinse their mouth with a drink or vinegar and salt. If there is bleeding from the site, which often happens, then crush some alum and pack the wound with it.
And if the astringent does not benefit you, the image of the fine forceps with which you move the tooth first, should have long tips and short handles, thick so that they do not bend when you grip the tooth with them, and this is the image of the large forceps.
It should be as you see, thick handles so that when you grip it, it does not give way or bend, short tips, and made of Indian iron or steel, well-tempered and tipped, and at its end teeth that interlock so that they can grip tightly and securely.
The tips may also be made in the shape of a file, so that they are also strong and secure.والمقصود من هذه الكلاليب أن تقبض على الضرس وتشدّه وتخرجه،
The purpose of these forceps is to grip the tooth, tighten it and pull it out.Chapter XXXI.في الكلال
On extracting the roots of teeth and removing bones from broken jaws.
If, when a tooth is extracted, a fragment remains behind and is broken, you should apply a cotton pad with grease for a day or two until the area softens, then insert the probe or forceps into it.وإن استعصى الموضع فاكوه بالزاج حتّى يلين ثمّ اقبض عليه بالكلاليب وحرّكه، فإن لم ينفعه الزاج ولا الحركات فأكرهه على الخروج بالحجامة على الموضع، وإذا خرجت الحجامة فادخل الي If the area is stubborn, treat it with astringent until it softens, then grip it with forceps and move it. If astringent and movement do not help, force him to come out by cupping on the spot. When the cupping comes out,
You have made it like a file from the inside or like a small lever, and this is the image of the forceps. If it does not respond to exit with these forceps, you should excavate the root and expose all the flesh with a scalpel, then insert the tool that resembles a small lever, which has this image:.
Short-tipped, slightly thick, and not tempered so that it does not break. If the root comes out with that, otherwise you should use these other tools, the first of which is a triangular tip, slightly thick: .
A lovely other triangular image:
We may also use this two-pronged instrument, the image of which is as follows:
And we may also use other instruments and iron tools mentioned in the inventory of teeth, and we may also use this large hook-like instrument, the image of which is as follows:And we may also use this two-pronged instrument, the image of which is as follows:.
Triangular and slightly curved, it is somewhat thick so as not to break, and it should be unsmoothed. Know that there are many instruments for teeth and also other instruments that are hard to count, and the skilled craftsman who knows his trade may invent for himself instruments according to what work and diseases themselves indicate to him..
Because there are diseases for which the ancients did not mention instruments due to the variety of their types. If a bone of the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth breaks or decays, then examine it in its place with whatever is suitable for it from one of these instruments and hooks that I have mentioned in extracting roots..
We may also use this spatula, the image of which is as follows:And we may also use this two
It should be somewhat thick so as to hold the bone in place and not let it slip until the bone is removed, and treat the site with suitable remedies. If there is a slight decay in the bone, then remove it from its decay and blackness until it is purified, then treat it until it heals..
Chapter Thirty-two.
On the extraction of teeth that have grown on top of others..
When the molars grow in an unnatural course, this mars that appearance, especially when it happens to women and slaves. You should take note of this, for if a molar has grown in behind another molar,.
and it cannot be extracted or pried loose, then extract it. If it is glued to another molar, then cut it with this instrument, the image of which is as follows:And if it is glued to another molar,.
It resembles a small beak and should be made of hard Indian iron, very sharp at the tip, and you should cut it on many days because of the hardness of the tooth and so as not to disturb other teeth. But if it is protruded and firmly set because of its sharpness, then smooth it with an Indian file that has this shape.
It should be made entirely of Indian steel, its needle-like tip very finely engraved, like the file used to make needles. With it, smooth the tooth a little at a time over many days, gently so as not to disturb the tooth and cause it to fall out; then polish it and strip away any remaining metal with some scrapers.
If a tooth has broken and some of it remains, causing discomfort to the tongue when speaking, you should also smooth it so that the roughness of the break is removed, made smooth, and no longer causes discomfort or impedes speech.
Chapter 33.
On attaching loose teeth with silver or gold thread.
If the front teeth become loose and move with a blow or fall, and the patient is unable to chew anything that is eaten so as not to cause them to fall out, and you have treated them with astringent remedies but the treatment was ineffective.
The trick here is to tighten them with a gold or silver thread, and gold is better because silver will tarnish and rot after a few days, but gold will remain unchanged forever and will not undergo that change. The thread should be of intermediate thickness, thin enough to fit between the teeth.
The method of stitching is to take the thread, insert its bend between two healthy teeth, then weave the two ends of the thread between the loose teeth, one or more, until the weaving reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.وإن وجدت فى موضع النسيج عظاما مكسورة وحجرا عريضا تخلّص منهما حتّى لا يعوقا النسيج ولا يفسدانه، ثمّ إذا فرغت من النسيج فأدخله بين الأضراس المتحرّكة وشدّه بقوّة على أن يكون الخيط أسفل الحجرين العريض
Then you return the tissue to where you started and gently and wisely tighten your hand so that it does not move at all, and you tighten the thread at the roots of the molars so that it does not come loose. Then cut both ends of the excess thread with scissors, bring them together and twist them with a tweezers and hide them between the healthy molar and the loose molar.
so that it does not hurt the tongue, then leave it like this, tightened as long as it lasts. If it comes loose or breaks, tighten it with another thread so that he can enjoy it like this for a lifetime. This is an image of the molars and the structure of the interdentals in two healthy molars and two loose molars, as you see:.
And you can return one or two teeth after they fall into their place and interlock as described and remain. But this is done by a manufacturer of a gentle path. And you can carve bone from the bones of cattle and make it like the shape of the molar and put it in the place where the molar went. and tighten as we said, so it stays and enjoys that..
Chapter XXXIV.
On cutting the ligament that occurs under the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament, which occurs under the tongue, may be either natural, with which a human is born, or it may be incidental due to a healed wound..فأمّا الطبيعى فلا سبيل إلى زواله البتة، وأمّا العرضى فإذا اندمل الجرح واعتدل الشقّ والتصق بالجلد الذى تحته ذهب ذلك الرباط ولم يعد
And as for the natural one, there is no way to get rid of it forever. But if it's incidental, then when the wound heals and the slit adheres to the skin underneath, that ligament will disappear and won't come back. And the way to deal with it is to open the patient's mouth and head in your lap and lift his tongue, then cut that ligament across until the tongue is released from its restraint. If there is some rigidity and complexity due to a healed wound, insert a probe into the slit and cut it across so that the ligament is severed and the knots are untied..وإن كان جرحه جديدا فتشدّ موضعه بخيط وتشدّه إلى الأسفل حتّى يندمل ولا يتحرّك، وإن أبطأ برؤه بعد اندماله خيطه وشدّه إلى الأسفل وإلى الوراء حتّى
Beware that the incision is not made too deep into the flesh, lest you cut a vein there and cause bleeding. Then gargle the wound with rose water or vinegar and cold water. Then place under the tongue a wisp of flax held by the sick person every night.
So that it does not close again, if blood flows, place powdered alum on the spot. If you are overwhelmed by the blood, heat the spot with a lens-shaped iron tool suitable for this purpose. Then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Chapter 35.
On the removal of the frog bred under the tongue.
A tumor may occur under the tongue that resembles a small frog and prevents the tongue from functioning naturally. Sometimes it grows so large that it fills the mouth. The procedure is to open the patient's mouth facing the sun and look at the tumor.If you find the tumor soft, it indicates that there is pus inside, so pierce it with a needle and squeeze out the pus; if you find it hard like a stone, then cut it out with a sharp knife. Then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
If you find it dark or black and hard, with no sensation to the patient, then do not bother with it, for it is a tumor. If it is inclined towards white with some moisture, then pierce it with a trocar and split it with a sharp knife and free it from all sides.
If you are overwhelmed by bleeding during the procedure, place powdered alum on it until the bleeding stops; then return to your procedure until you remove it completely. Then gargle with vinegar and salt.
Then treat it with other appropriate treatments until it heals.
Chapter 36.
On the treatment of tonsil swelling.ويكون علاج ذلك بالتحميث والتدخين بحجر الك
And whatever grows in the throat, such as swellings that occur within the throat, which are called tonsils when treated as mentioned in the division, do not heal.If they are soft and white, then treat them with moistening and smoking with a hot stone, but if they are hard, then cut them out with a sharp knife and free them from all sides; then treat them with other appropriate treatments until they heal.
Look, if the tumor is hard in color and slightly sensitive to the touch, do not use iron on it. If it is red in color and has a thick base, do not use iron on it either, for fear of bleeding; rather, leave it until it matures. Then you can either open it or it will burst by itself.
And if it is white in color and round, and its base is thin, then this is the one that should be cut. And the procedure for it is to look before you operate: if the heat of the tumor has subsided completely or has decreased in intensity a little.
Then, sit the patient facing the sun with his head in your lap. Open his mouth and take a servant between your hands to hold his tongue down with an instrument that looks like this: .
Make an instrument of silver or bronze, thin as a knife. When you press down on the tongue with it and see the tumor clearly before you, take a probe and insert it into the tonsil, pulling it outwards as much as possible without dislodging any phlegm.
Then cut it with an instrument that looks like this: it resembles a pair of scissors, except that its tips are curved towards each other and very sharp. Make this from Indian steel or Damascene steel:.
If you cannot get this instrument, then cut it with a scalpel like this:.
It is sharp on one side and blunt on the other. After cutting one tonsil, cut the other in the same way. After the cutting, make the patient gargle with cold water or a mixture of vinegar and water.
If he experiences any bleeding, gargle with water in which pomegranate peels, or laurier leaves, or something similar to contract the wound until the bleeding stops; then treat him until he recovers. Sometimes tumors may grow elsewhere in the throat besides the tonsils, and you should cut them in the same way as you cut the tonsils.
I have treated a woman of a tumor that grew inside her throat, reaching up to the larynx, slightly reducing sensitivity, and almost blocking the airway. The woman breathed through a narrow opening, and it prevented her from eating or drinking water.
She was close to death, had the tumor lasted another day or two, and it had sent out two branches that even came out through her nasal passages. I acted quickly, inserted a hook into one of them, then pulled, and a good-sized piece came out.
Then I cut it where I reached it through the nasal passage, then did the same for what protruded from the other nostril. Then I opened her mouth, pressed her tongue, inserted the hook into the tumor itself, and cut out some of it. Only a little blood flowed.وبعد أن استخرجت ما استخرجته من الورم سكنت عروقها وذهب عنها الكرب والورم وأكلت وشربت وماتت بعد ذلك فى مرض آخر.
After the tumor was removed, her airway opened up, and she immediately started drinking water and eating food. We continued to cut out pieces of the tumor for a long time, as it kept growing back. She died from another illness later on.
I cauterized the tumor inside her throat, and it stopped growing. Then I left that region and didn't know what happened to her after me..
Chapter 37.
On cutting out a uvula tumor.وقد رأيت فى ورم اللهاة عدّة
I have seen several types of uvula tumors. The one that is called a pillar, when it descends into the uvula and swells up, is white and elongated; if it is thick at the bottom and rounded, it is called a grape. If it doesn't respond to the treatment mentioned in the previous chapter,
I have also seen hot tumors that have subsided; if it is thin and has no length, it should be cut. If it is a solid mass, round with no length, red, or black in color, or if it has no sensitivity, it should be avoided.وإن كان منها مائلا الى الصفة الأولى فبعضه يجب أن يقطع وبعضه يجتنب قطعه وكلّها إن كانت مجتمعة فينبغى أن تجتنب قطعها ويؤمر المريض بالحمية فإنّ الورم إذا أعطى الطعام والشرب الذي يضاده لم يزال بل يزيد.
In this way there is danger to the invalid, so when you see it in the condition described, of its whiteness and length, you should have the invalid sit facing the sun and press his tongue with the instrument whose description has just been given, then insert the hook into the eye.
And pull it downward and cut it with one of the two instruments mentioned for cutting tonsils, and you should not cut from it more than what has increased beyond the natural size, because if you cut more, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then, after the cut, you should use what we described in cutting tonsils and treat it until it heals. If the invalid is reluctant to cut it, you should use cunning in cauterizing it without fear or caution, and the way of cauterizing it is with a sharp drug. This is by placing the head of the invalid on your lap
Then press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned, then take from the sharp water that I mentioned in the chapter on cauterization and knead with it a lime not extinguished and make it neither thick nor thin, and fill it from this instrument. This is its image: .
The end of it, in which you place the drug, has a concavity like the concavity of a spatula, and you place the instrument with the drug on the uvula itself, and the invalid is lying on his side so that the saliva flows from his mouth inside his throat so that nothing of it goes down his throat to hurt him.
Then hold your hand on the drug and squeeze it onto the uvula for about half an hour until you see it turn black and the sting of the drug subsides. If you like, you can take a piece of cotton and wrap it around the end of a spatula, moisten the cotton in the drug.
And insert the spatula with the cotton into a tube from above until you stick the cotton on the uvula, do this repeatedly until you reach what you want to cauterize the grape, then leave it to wilt and fall off after three or four days. If you need to reapply the drug, you can do so again.
And after cauterization, the area around the ulcer is wiped with a cotton ball soaked in lard and used to dry up the surrounding medicine. Then he gargles with cold water and is treated from the outside with ointments and from the inside with syrups until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and further from fear.
The uvula may also be treated more gently than cauterization or cutting. It is treated with fumigation as follows: take rubia, sage, thyme, savoury, camomile, and similar herbs. Collect them all or some of them in a container and soak them in vinegar.
And boil the container with a clay paste, and in the middle of the lid there is a hole through which the hollow instrument is placed, made of silver or bronze:
And you insert the end that contains the pomegranate in the patient's mouth until the steam rises to the uvula on the tube until the uvula softens, then repeat it several times until it shrinks. And beware of making this treatment at the first occurrence of the swelling.
Indeed, it often increases the swelling. You should only do this when the hot swelling has subsided. If you don't have that instrument, take a reed and attach an egg shell to its end so that the patient's mouth doesn't get burned.
Because the egg shell prevents the heat of the steam from burning the mouth, and this is good treatment with its safety.
Chapter 38.
On removing thorns and anything else that gets stuck in the throat.
It is often that bone, fish spine or something else gets stuck in the throat. You should remove what is visible by pressing the tongue with an instrument in the sun.
So that you can see what is in the throat, and if it is not visible and hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before his food is digested in his stomach, because perhaps the protruding object will come out with the vomit, or the patient will swallow a piece of radish or cabbage leaf.
Or he should swallow a piece of dry bread or take a piece of soft sea sponge, tie it to a thread, then swallow it. When it reaches the location of the thorn, he should quickly pull the thread. He should do this several times.
Often, the thorn or bone will adhere to it and come out. If it does not come out with what we have mentioned, then use a lead instrument in this way: .
It should be slightly thicker than the spatula and curved at one end, which the patient can gently insert into his throat while tilting his head up and taking care not to touch his larynx so as not to cause coughing, or the doctor can insert it with his hand,.
And it is better for the patient to insert it himself because he knows the location of the object, and he pushes it downward or pulls the instrument upward as much as he can,.وإن كان الشىء ناحيا الى جانب الحلق فيدخلها الطبيب بيده ويقبض عليها ويدفع الى أسفل كلّ ذلك على قدر ما يتهيّأ له.
Chapter 39.فإن لم يخرج فليعدل الى الاستفراغ فان
If it does not come out, then he should resort to emesis to remove the thorn stuck in the throat..وإذا أخرج الشى
If you have treated the ulcer with the medicines mentioned in the section on medical treatments and it has not been effective, then examine the patient's throat in the sun after pressing his tongue with the instrument described to you..وإن رأيت فى الحلق علقة حمراء أو زرقاء فإنها من أثر الشىء الناشب وقد أنفذت اليه فيجب استخراجها.
If you see an ulcer that is red or blue in the throat, it is due to the impact of the thorn and has penetrated into it, so it must be extracted..فإن وقع بصرك على العلقة فاجذبها بصنّارة صغيرة او بجفت لطيف محكم فإن لم تتمكّن بها وإلّا فخذ أنبوبة مجوّفة فأدخلها فى حلق العليل الى قرب العلقة ثمّ أدخل فى جوف الأنبوبة حديدة محمية بالنار.
This is done several times, and the patient abstains from water all day. Then he takes a bowl filled with cold water, opens his mouth over it, gargles, and does not swallow a single drop, moving the water around with his hand from time to time.
If the blood clot falls into the throat when it senses water, and if it does not come out with what we have described, then you should smoke the back of the throat with urine and hiltit with the instrument that was described in the smoke of the glottis. You should do this several times, as it will fall.
The method of the smoke is to take a bowl with burning charcoal, the bowl being covered with a lid that has a hole in the middle. You then fit the tip of the instrument into this hole, drop the incense, and the patient puts his mouth over the end of the tube and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not come out until he knows that the smoke has reached his throat.
If the blood clot falls into the throat, and if it does not, then the smoke should be repeated several times, and the patient should endure thirst, eat salt and garlic, and not drink water. It will certainly come out with this method. This is the image of an instrument that draws the blood clot from the throat when you see it.
It is similar to a hook, as you see, except that it has this bend that goes into the throat. Its two ends are like the mouth of a bird, with a roughness like that of a whetstone when it grips something and does not let go.
Another instrument is used to press the tongue. It is a wide iron ring, about the size of the mouth, that goes over the tongue and into the mouth in an upright position. The mouth remains open without the patient's will, and he cannot get rid of it until you move it away.
The description of the instrument that opens the mouth to this exact measurement.
Chapter 40.
Here he speaks about the tumors in the breasts and their incision.
There are many types of tumors, as will be mentioned in this book one by one, and they differ in their content and incision in two ways: one according to the type of tumor itself and what it contains of humors.
The second type is due to the location in which they occur in the body, because a tumor that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the anus, and a tumor that occurs in a muscular location is different from one that occurs in a joint; each has its own specific treatment.
Some tumors should not be incised until the pus inside them is mature and complete, while others should be incised before they are fully mature, such as tumors that are close to joints.
Because if a tumor occurs near a joint and its condition persists until it infects the surrounding area, it may damage the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing disability in that limb, or the tumor may be near a vital organ.
Because if you delay incising it until it is fully mature, you will harm that vital organ; instead, you should incision a tumor that is not yet fully mature and is near the anus, so that the infection does not spread to the inside of the anus and cause a fistula.
And it should be in a state where the pain of the tumor subsides, the fever goes away, the redness and heat diminish, the head of the tumor becomes soft, and other signs appear.وأن تعلم وقت بطّ الأورام التى لم تصلب على التمام فمن أماراتها الوجع الشديد والحرارة والحمرة والضربان وعلوق الورم عن الحركة وقلة النوم وزيادة الكيفية من الحمية.
And you should make the incision at the lowest point of the tumor, if possible, to allow the pus to flow downward, or in the thinnest part of the tumor that is most protruded; the incision should be made lengthwise along the body if the tumor is on the hands or feet.وينبغى أن يقلّ ما يبطّ من الورم ويكثر ما يسيل منه، وينبغى أن يكون البطّ على قدر الحاجة ولا يتجاوز إلى أبعد منه، ويقال إنّ أفضل هذا البطن هو الوسط وإنّ أكثره سيلانا هى الأطراف.
And the positions of muscles, tendons, nerves and arteries, and in general all flat positions that have no bend, and as for those that bend, go slowly according to that position, and if the tumor is in the fleshy positions, it is better to leave your pressure.
Until its maturity is completely closed, as we said, because if you press it before that, the pus will flow for a long time and it will be much more harmful and dirty, and sometimes its lips and depths harden. Some tumors may be pressed on the width of the body when necessary or according to what the member needs.
You should use one pressure for small tumors and a wide pressure or many incisions for large tumors, according to the size of the tumor. Sometimes it is necessary to cut the skin and remove it when it becomes like a rag.
It has become as dead as it can be, like what happens in many cases of doubles and hideouts. Some are cut with a three-sided angle, and some have a piece removed from them in the shape of a laurel leaf, like a tumor on the groin.
And some of them are cut with a round incision, a crescent-shaped incision and other similar incisions. If the tumor does not have a head like smooth flat tumors, it should only be pressed simply. If the tumor is large and has accumulated for a long time and you press it, you should not rush to remove all the pus at that time.
But only remove some of it, then tighten the tumor until the next day, and then remove some more pus. Do this repeatedly on a gradual basis until you remove it all.
Especially if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, a small child or an old man, as the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus in one go, so the patient may die without your realizing it. Be very careful about this.
After you have burst these tumors, you should wipe the wound and examine it. If the tumor wound is small or there is only a single simple incision, use a ligature of old linen or cotton. But if the tumor is large and there are many incisions made by the lance, use a bandage of new linen.
You should then insert a string in each incision so that they meet, and if some of the tumor has been cut from the skin or scooped out, you should pack it with old cotton or linen thread, not damp, and tie it tightly until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals. If bleeding occurs while you are working, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a linen cloth in them and hold it over the bleeding several times.
If the bleeding continues, you should use the remedies and treatments that we have described in many places in this book, and from our division of medicine. If you are in winter and the tumor site is abundant in nerves, you should moisten the bandages with a warm drink made of oil.
And put them on the site. If you are in summer and the sites are fleshy, you should soak the bandages in water and oil, or in a drink and oil; all of this should be cold. Then, on the third day as we have said, you should loosen the tumor and wipe it.
You should treat it with what is similar to it until it heals. This is what you need to know about the general treatment of tumors. As for the detailed method, I have mentioned how to treat each tumor separately, categorized and summarized.
Chapter 41.
On incising tumors that appear on the scalp.
Small tumors appear on the scalp, and they are of various types enclosed in membranes that have sacs like a chicken's oviduct. Their types are numerous; some are fatty, and others contain moisture that resembles mud.وينبغى أن تعرف أعراضها وآفاتها لتعرف مواضعها وتعلم ما ينبغى أن يعالج به كلّ منها، وأمّا الشقّ عليها فهى تحتاج الى أن تمسح بالزيت أو الشراب الحارّ او بالماء والخلّ أو الكافور حسبما أشرنا اليه فى علاج الأورام
And some of them contain moisture that resembles the dish and soup and the like, and some are petrified and hard, and all of them are not dangerous to cut and remove unless you encounter an artery when cutting them.
The procedure for splitting them is to probe them first with the instrument whose image appears later in this chapter, which is called the probe, so that you may know what they contain. If they contain moisture, split them lengthwise with a simple vertical incision as follows: .
Begin the incision from line a to line b, and if the moisture is discharged, cut off the sac that contained this moisture, and cut it all without leaving anything at all, for it often returns if you leave any of it behind..
Then soak a cotton ball in the ointment if it is available, or in salt water, and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day; for it will consume what remains of the sac. Then return the cotton with the ointment again and again as needed..وإن كان الكيس صلبا متحجّرا فشقّه من خطّ  ~ب~ الى خطّ  ~ج~ ولا تقطعه بل اقلعه وأزل الرطوبة التى تحته وامسح ما على الحشفة من الدم والقيح بقطنة مغموسة فى المرهم الصرىّ، وإن احتجت الى كشط الرطوبة تحت الحشفة بأداة الكشط فأفعل
If the sac is hard and petrified, split it from line a to line b, but do not cut it off; rather, uproot it and remove the moisture underneath it, and wipe the glans of blood and pus with a cotton ball soaked in the ointment. If you need to scrape off the moisture under the glans with a scraping tool, do so until you are sure that nothing remains of the sac, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals..وإن كانت ورمت على شكل سلعة فشقّها من فوق الى تحت وأنت بالخيار إن شئت اقتلعتها كلّ
If the swelling is in the form of a tumor, split it from top to bottom; you have the choice of either uprooting it with a vertical incision and placing the fingers of the wound on both sides of the incision and peeling it off from all sides and doing your best to remove the serosa that contains it. If you encounter an artery during this process, follow the instructions already given..
And the treatment is the same as I have mentioned, and incising into the tumor that has become calcified is easier because it contains little blood or moisture. Some of these tumors in the head in some people contain no moisture at all. This is because when I incised a tumor in the head, I found it to be hard and dry without any moisture.
I found the tumor as hard as a stone, rough and white, and it was impossible to break it, even if someone threw it at another person's head, it would cause a serious injury. This particular type of tumor is different from other tumors that occur in the heads of children.
At the base of the ears, make an incision all the way through and make a slit at the bottom to facilitate the flow of the material downward. Then treat it with whatever treatment suits it.
Chapter 42
On incising tumors that frequently occur in the neck, these tumors often appear in the neck, under the armpits and in the groins, and they can also appear elsewhere in the body. The ones that appear in the neck are usually singular, but they can be multiple and interconnected.
Each of these tumors has its own peritoneal membrane, just like in the testicles and brain tumors as we have described. There are many types of these tumors; some are calcified, some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Those that I have found to be in good condition upon examination, with a texture similar to the skin and able to move freely in all directions without being attached to any neck nerves, veins or arteries, and not deeply embedded, are the ones that respond well to treatment.وأمّا الخنازير التى تكون متحجّرة وليس معها رطوبة فهى أسهل أمرا، وأمّا الخنازير التى تكون غائرة وقد استوليت على العصب أو الشريان. As for the tumors that are calcified and without moisture, they are generally easier to treat. However, when a tumor is deeply embedded and compressing a nerve or artery, it should be incised with a single vertical incision from above to below the body, along the lines ~j~ and ~h~:
And you should strip it from all sides, and extend the skin lip with a hook or two hooks, or with many hooks if needed as we said in tumors of the head, and pull it out little by little, and be careful not to cut a vein or a nerve, and let the knife not be too sharp.
So that your hand does not overdo the cutting, or the patient is disturbed so that you cut what you do not need to cut. If you cut a vein or an artery and hinder yourself from working, put in the wound a powder of alum, or some of the powders that stop bleeding.
And tighten the wound and leave it until the acuity of the tumor subsides, and the wound relaxes and is about to rot; then return to your work until you are finished. Then examine with your index finger if there are any other small tumors left, cut them out and cleanse them.وإن كان الورم متخلّلا فى العرق والعضلات فأميل الرأس الى أسفل حتّى يظهر كلّه وأسائل الاورام التى تكون تحته واتركها، فإذا خرج الدم وسكنت حدّة الورم فاقطعه كلّه حتّى تفرغ منه.
If the tumor is intertwined with a vein and muscles, then tilt your head down so that it all becomes visible, and probe the tumors under it and leave them; when the blood comes out and the acuity of the tumor subsides, cut it all off until you are finished with it. But if there is at the root of the tumor a great vein, you should not cut that tumor from its root; rather, you should tie it with a double thread tightly and leave it until it falls off on its own without harm; then stuff the wound with old cotton which has been soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
If you cut the tumor completely, then you should bring together the lips of the wound and sew it up immediately after you know that there is no residue at all; if you see that there is a residue due to the size of the tumor،
then you should aim for cutting to its root and foundation, and use sewing and what we mentioned; and as for tumors that contain fluids, flatten them with a simple application where the ripening becomes visible to you, and make the application from below as we said.وإن كان الورم عظيما والجلد رقيقا لا يحتمل القطع كلّه فينبغى أن تعمل فيه ما عملته فى أورام الرأس وتبدأ بالقطع من موضع النضج حتّى تسكن حدّة الورم ويسترخى الجلد ثمّ تقطعه قليلا قليلا.
Then, after the blistering, apply a poultice of Egyptian ointment or similar to eat away any remaining corruption. When you see that the wound is clean, treat it with ointments that promote flesh growth until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-fourth.
On incising the throat for a swelling that occurs inside the throat.
The former generations described this incision in the throat, but I have not seen anyone in our country perform it; that is the nature of their words. As for those with a sore throat, they should avoid cutting into the throat as they will not benefit from it.وكلّما كان الورم فى الحلق رقيقا، وكان الذبح شديدا، والانقطاع فيه مستمرا صار الشقّ على ذلك أقرب الى النجاح وأيسر على المريض، وكلّما كان الورم عظيما، وكان الذبح خفيفا والفساد شديدا صار الشقّ على خلاف ذلك
The smaller the swelling in the throat, and the more severe the sore throat, and the more persistent the obstruction is, the more successful and easier the incision will be for the patient. The larger the swelling is, the milder the sore throat is, and the more intense the corruption is, the opposite is true. This is because all of the windpipes and lungs will be affected by it. As for those with a hot swelling in the mouth, throat or tonsils, if there is no illness in the trachea, then one should perform an incision in the throat to avoid the damage that may result from asphyxiation.
So, if we want to do that, we should make an incision in the throat under three rings of the windpipe or four small incisions horizontally between two rings as much as the incision is in the peritoneum and not in the cartilage. This location is suitable for the incision.وينبغى أن يكون الشقّ من ناحية الفم الى ناحية الحلق والشقّ المناسب هو ما لم ينزل الدم منه بل يكون الشقّ من فوق الى أسفل لئلاّ ينحدر الدم الى القصبة فيفسد نفس المريض، ومتى شققت الحنجرة فأخرج ما فيها من الورم وأبق
And the incision should be from the mouth to the throat, and the suitable incision is one from which blood does not flow but rather from top to bottom so that blood does not flow down into the windpipe and corrupt the patient's breath. And when you have cut into the throat, remove the swelling therein and leave it as it is
Then the peritoneum which we have described is incised, and the incision of the trachea is indicated by the phlegm which comes out of it, together with the punctured wound and the loss of voice. The wound is left open for a while; when the time has passed in which there was fear of asphyxiation, the two lips of the wound are sutured with skin.
And its outline only, without the cartilage, is then sutured; and remedies which promote the growth of flesh are then applied until it heals. The author of this treatise says that the whole of what we have related means that when they see a patient choked by one of these swellings which they have mentioned, they must operate as described.
And when the patient is at the point of death, and his life is in danger, they go to split the larynx so that the patient can breathe through the wound and save himself from death. They are commanded to leave the wound open until the crisis of the disease is over, and this usually lasts for three days or so.
Then they are commanded to sutured the wound and treat it until it heals. What I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting through part of the trachea. She was brought to me for treatment, and I found her gasping like a slaughtered animal. So I exposed the wound.
I found that the blood which came out of the wound was slight, so I knew that she had not cut an artery or a vein, and the breath was coming out of the wound; so I sutured the wound and treated it until it healed, and nothing happened to the servant except a hoarseness of voice, no more.
And she returned after a few days to her best condition; so from this we say that splitting the larynx is not dangerous.
Chapter Forty-four.في علاج الشقوق التى تكون فى الح
In the treatment of incisions which occur in the pharynx, on external tumors called pharyngeal fistulas.
This tumor which is called elephant of the throat is a great tumor of the color of the body and it is much in women and it is of two kinds.
Either it is natural or accidental. As for the natural, there is no remedy for it. But as for the accidental, it is of two kinds: one resembling adipose tumors and the other resembling tumors that occur due to the twisting of an artery and there is danger in its incision. You should not at all use iron on them except for small ones. If you probe and examine it with a probe and find that it resembles adipose tumors and is not attached to any blood vessels, then incise it as you would incision on a tumor. And remove it along with the sac if it is in a sac, otherwise completely remove it and then treat the site as appropriate.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On incision of various types of tumors.
There are many types of tumors, and I have mentioned all their types in the classification. However, it is appropriate that we explain here the difference between a tumor and an abscess, as it is confusing. I say that an abscess comes with heat, fever, and pains until the excess fluid is drained. And the putrescence continues, and then the fever and severity subsides. A tumor does not come with heat, fever, or pain, and it is enclosed in a serous sac, which is its special envelope, and it is of the color of the body. It starts the size of a pea and becomes like an abscess, larger or smaller.
They are of two types: either adipose or containing moisture, and the colors of moisture are many, as I mentioned in the classification. Therefore, when treating a tumor, you should first probe and examine it with the instrument called "madus," as its image will be shown in the chapter after this one.
Estimate the size of the tumor, then remove the probe and look at what comes out in its wake. If a flowing moisture of any color comes out, make an incision as mentioned in other tumors. If no moisture comes out after the probe, know that it is fatty.
Make an incision along its length as I have instructed you, and suspend it with pins. Carefully strip the skin from all sides, and if possible, remove the sac intact with the tumor.
If the sac is ruptured during the operation and you cannot remove it intact, then this often happens. Remove it in pieces, so that nothing at all remains, for if anything does remain, no matter how small, the tumor will return with greater severity.
If you are unable to remove it entirely, then widen the incision when you have finished with some sharp, caustic instruments, and sew up the wound and place over it something that soothes the hot tumor, and treat it with other remedies until it heals. If the tumor is large, cut its edges and treat it with remedies that promote healing.
If you encounter a pulsating vein, or any vein, causing bleeding, quickly treat the area with powdered alum and leave it for two or three days until the wound becomes putrid and the bleeding stops. Then return to removing what remains of the tumor.
Chapter 46
On the forms of instruments.
There are three types of probes, some large, some medium, and some small.
A large probe:
A medium-sized probe:
A small probe:
These are made of tempered steel, with square ends, designed to quickly penetrate tumors. These are the forms of the probes, also called needles, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small. A large probe:
Figure 13: Probe for the center of the wound.
Figure 14: Small probe.
They are used to inspect tumors, wounds, sinuses, and pockets for any bones or other structures within them. They are made into round, polished, smooth probes from brass, bronze, copper, iron, or silver. Of these, the best are made from bronze.
Probes can also be made from black lead. They are used to probe sinuses with twists and turns in their depths, and they come in three types: long, medium, and short.
Figure 15: Lead probe.
Figure 16: Medium lead probe.
Figure 17: Small lead probe.
There are many types of hooks, including single-hook simple hooks (which come in large, medium, and small sizes), blind hooks (also in three sizes), double-hook curved hooks (also in three sizes), and double-hook straight hooks. Figure 18: Large simple hook. Figure 19: Medium simple hook. Figure 20: Small simple hook.
Figure 21: Large blind hook. Figure 22: Medium blind hook.
Figure 23: Small blind hook.
Figure 24: Large double-hooked hook. Figure 25: Medium double-hooked hook. Figure 26: Small double-hooked hook.
Figure 27: Large triple-hooked hook.
Figure 28: Medium triple-hooked hook. Figure 29: Small triple-hooked hook.
Here are the images of the knives used for incision and excision of absessess and tumors. There are three types, as some are large, others medium-sized, and yet others small. The image of a large knife:
The image of a medium-sized knife:
The image of a small knife:
The blades of the knives used for incision are limited, while the other ends are unlimited. They are designed this way to facilitate the removal of an abscess without cutting a nerve or vein. The patient can also find some comfort and relief from the burning sensation during the excision of the tumor.
These are the images of the speculums, which come in three types: large, medium, and small. The image of a large speculum:
These are made of brass, similar to the rod used for eye makeup. One end has a wide, spoon-like shape with two layers, and in its head is a hidden blade like the tongue of a bird, which can be moved in and out as desired, as you can see.
These are the images of the hidden-blade knives used to incise tumors without the patient feeling it. They come in three types: large, medium, and small. The image of a large hidden-blade knife:
These are the images of the hemostats used to stop bleeding. They come in three types: large, medium, and small. The image of a large hemostat:
They are made of brass or porcelain, curved slightly along the length as seen in the image. It is advisable to have these types of hemostats in your possession, both large and small, to quickly stop bleeding when necessary, especially when there is no medicine available.
But do not use it to cut blood in every part of the body, but rather use it in fleshy places like the calf muscle of the leg and thigh, and the muscle of the arm, breast, abdomen, groin, and similar fleshy wet members.
And from it can be made other small tools that resemble pistachio shells in this shape:.
It cuts off the blood if it is shed from the place of phlebotomy, or when a vein or artery is cut, and it can be made into a round shape like this: .
Chapter Forty-Seven.في الآلات التى تسمى المناشير.
In the tools that are called saws.For the treatment of men's breasts.
Some people's breasts may swell up when they reach puberty so that they resemble women's breasts and remain swollen and unsightly. Therefore, if you dislike this, then you should split the breast with a semi-circular incision in this shape.
From line a to line b:.والشقّ الذى يكون على الثدى من فوق الكتف الى تحت الإبط، وقد ترسم خطوط الش And the incision that is on the breast from above the shoulder to below the armpit, and its lines can be drawn.Then strip away all the fat, then fill the wound with the ointment that heals, then bring together the lips of the wound by sewing and treat it until it heals, if the breast hangs down and relaxes for its bone as it offers for women.
It is fitting that you split in its upper sides with two splits that resemble a crescent shape, each one of which is connected to the other at its end, so that the larger line surrounds the smaller on this picture: .وإذا أزيل الشحم الذى حول العظمة وعولجت العظمة بالدهن العتيق، فقد يبرأ الشقّ واللحم معا. And if the fat around the bone is removed and the bone is treated with old tallow, then the split and meat may heal together.From line a to line c, then peel the skin between the splits and remove the fat and use what we mentioned of sewing and cauterization and anything else needed for treatment until it heals.
If you cannot remove all that needs to be removed because of the patient's anxiety or because of bleeding, then you should pack the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until it eats away the remaining fat, then treat it until it heals.
CHAPTER FORTY-EIGHT.
ON THE TREATMENT OF SWOLLEN GLANDS UNDER THE ARM.
These swellings that appear under the arm are of two types: some are solid and enclosed in a sac, while others contain fluids. Those that contain fluids should be opened with an elliptical incision as shown here.
From line B to line C, if all the contents of the swelling have been evacuated with the syringe, then pack it with old cotton and leave it for another day, then remove the cotton.
Treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals. If the swelling is of the type of a pig's cyst, then open it as we mentioned in the opening of a pig's cyst, and if the wound persists and pus keeps coming out, then cauterize it as we mentioned before,.
CHAPTER FORTY-NINE.
ON THE INCISION OF A SWELLING THAT APPEARS DUE TO AN ARTERY OR A VEIN, CALLED ANEURYSMA.ما كان من الأورام ممتداً من قبل العرقين الودّ والشرايين فينبغى أن ي
If a swelling extends from the veins and arteries, it is often due to injury to the artery and the skin above it. Similarly, a vein can also become swollen and inflamed.وذلك يدلّ على أنه قد التحم ما تحت الجلد من الشريان او الوريد مع الجلد، وربما يكون ذلك فى موضع واحد أو مواضع متعددة فإذا عرض ذلك فينبغى أن يشقّ عليه كما سنذكر
This is indicated by the fact that what is under the skin, whether it is an artery or a vein, has adhered to the skin. This can occur in one place or multiple places. If this happens, it should be opened as we will mention later. The signs by which you know whether the swelling and inflammation are due to an artery or a vein are as follows: when the swelling is due to an artery, it is elongated and deep in the body, and when you press on the swelling with your finger, you feel as if it has a buzz.وإن كان من قبل الوريد يكون مستديرا ويكون سطحا قريبا من الجلد، فإذا دفعت عليه بأصبع
And that which is before the vein, the tumor is round in the exterior of the body, and the incision on these tumors is dangerous, especially in the armpit, the groin, the neck, and in many places in the body, and it was very large, so it should be avoided to treat it with iron.
And if it is also in the limbs or in the head, it should be avoided. And if it is a swelling of the artery, then make an incision on it in the skin lengthwise, then open the incision with forceps, then strip the artery and free it from the varicose veins.
Until it is exposed, then insert a needle under it and pass it to the other side and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have instructed you in tying the arteries in the temples, then stab with a scalpel between the ligaments until all the blood in it comes out.And if you find that the vein is large and its pulsation strong, then split it lengthwise with a scalpel, then squeeze it from above and below with forceps to prevent the blood from returning to it, then tie it as I have described to you.
And the tumor dissolves, then use a treatment that produces pus until the ligaments are removed, then treat it with suitable ointments until it heals.And if you find that the vein is large and its pulsation strong, then split it lengthwise with a scalpel, then squeeze it from above and below with forceps to prevent the blood from returning to it, then tie it as I have described to you.
And if the tumor is due to the vein being split, then you should hold in your hand as much of the tumor as possible with the skin, then insert a needle under the site where you are holding it with your hand and pass it through to the other side with a double thread until you bring it out from the other side.Then tie it tightly around the vein so that no blood can pass through it, then treat it with ointments suitable for that until it heals.And if the tumor is due to the vein being split, then you should hold in your hand as much of the tumor as possible with the skin, then insert a needle under the site where you are holding it with your hand and pass it through to the other side with a double Then tie the tumor tightly with the thread, as I have described to you in tying the artery on both sides with the ends of the thread. And if you fear that the threads will slip, then insert another needle with another thread under the whole tumor at the point where the first needle intersected.
Tighten your sutures in four places, then cut into the tumor in the middle so that what is inside comes out. Cut away any redundant skin and leave what was tied as it is. Then apply a dressing which you have dipped in a drink and oil. Then use treatment with compression and ointments until it heals.
Chapter Fifty:
On tumors that arise from a twisted nerve.
As tumors can arise in arteries and veins, so too can they arise in nerves if there is a blow or from excessive exertion or similar, and this is more common at the sites of the wrists and the heel.وأول علامة الورم هو ان يشتد ويغلظ ثمّ يورم.
The first sign of a tumor is that it becomes hard and thick, then swells.In every location where the joints move, if it is a soft, fixed tumor whose color resembles the rest of the body, then in most cases it causes no pain.If pressed firmly, the patient senses a numbness, but the tumor is not concentrated deep within the body.وإن كان فى موضع لا تتحرك فيه المفصل مثل الكوعين والمرفقين والركبتين والقدمين يكون الورم متحركا والجلد الذى فوقه رقيقا ويكون لونه إلى الصفرة أو الخضرة وهو مؤلم عند الضغط عليه.
But if it is in a location where the joint does not move, such as the elbows, knees, and feet, then the tumor is mobile and the skin above it is thin, its color being yellow or green, and it is painful when pressed.Yet it should not be probed with iron, for it may cause paralysis. And if it is in the head or on the forehead,
then split the skin with a scalpel. If the tumor is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it from its root. If it is large, hook it with a needle and peel it off, then stitch the wound together and treat it until it heals.وإن كان الورم قريبا من العصب فافصل بين الجلد والعصب، ثمّ انزع الورم واجعل يدك تحت العصب حتّى لا ينثنى به شيئا ولا تؤذه، فإنّك إذا لم تفعل ذلك وشققت عليه أصابه ألم شديد،.
Chapter Fifty-one.
In the excision of warts that appear on the abdomen.
These warts, which are called fungal because of their resemblance to mushrooms, often appear on the abdomen and elsewhere on the body; they have a thin root and a thick head, and their lips may become inverted. Some of them are small, while others grow very large indeed.
I once saw a man whose abdomen had two warts that looked very much like mushrooms, with thin roots and thick heads, and whose lips were turned inside out; moisture dripped from them constantly. I excised them and found the larger one weighed about eighteen ounces and the smaller one about six ounces.
The procedure for excising them is to examine the patient; if the wart is moist and white, with a thin root, cut it with a broad scalpel while having your cauterizing irons ready in the fire, for often there will be much bleeding when you cut into them.
If the blood is too profuse, cauterize it immediately; if the patient is timid and afraid of the iron, take a strong lead thread and tie it tightly around the wart, then leave it for two days before tightening the lead thread again.
This will have an effect on the wart, causing it to fall off of its own accord without any effort; however, excising a thick-rooted wart is risky and particularly so when located in the abdomen. However, it may be possible to cut off half or part of it.وكلّما أمكنك أن تؤخّر قطع الثآليل التى تكون فى المواضع التى نهيت عن القطع فيها إلى أن يذهب فصل الشتاء ويطول النهار فافعل ذلك، وإن كان عليك أن تقطعه فيما بين الصفا والمقام فلا بأس به.
Then cauterize it so that it does not return, then treat it until the wound heals; but beware of excising a wart that is dark in color, with little sensitivity and an unsightly appearance, for this is a sarcomatous growth and we will discuss sarcoma later.
Chapter 52.
Treatment of Umbilical Hernias.
Umbilical hernias can have many causes: a tear in the peritoneum covering the abdomen, which allows the omentum or intestines to protrude, as happens in other types of hernia; bleeding from a vein or artery; or the accumulation of gas.
If the hernia is due to a tear in the peritoneum and the protrusion of the omentum, the swelling will be similar in color to the surrounding skin and will be soft and pain-free, but its position may vary. If the hernia is due to the protrusion of the intestines, its position will be more variable, and when you press on it with your fingers, it will disappear and then reappear; there may also be a gurgling sound, and it will increase in size after strenuous activity or when going to the bathroom. If the hernia is due to moisture, it will be soft.وإن كان من قبل انبعاث الدم فيكون الورم أزرق اللون وصلب الملمس وموضعه معلوم ويؤلم صاحبه ويظهر بعد التعب أو الحمل الشديد، وإن كان من قبل احتقان الريح يكون الورم أصغر وأقلّ ليونة من سابقه وموضعه معلوم ويؤ
If the hernia is due to bleeding, the swelling will be blue and hard, its position will be noticeable, and it will be painful; it may increase in size after strenuous activity or heavy lifting. If the hernia is due to gas, the swelling will be smaller and less soft than the previous type, and its position will remain constant; pressing on it with your hand will not make it disappear or reappear. If the hernia is due to bleeding, the swelling may turn black in addition to these signs. If it is due to a growth of tissue, the swelling will be firm and immobile.وإن كان نتو السرّة من قبل انكسار الع
If the umbilical hernia is due to a fracture, and if it is caused by gas, then its touch will be soft. The course of action depends on the cause: if it is caused by bleeding from an artery or vein, or by gas, then you should refrain from treating it, as there are risks involved; I have explained this in the section on tumors caused by arteries and veins.
If the umbilical hernia is caused by the intestines or omentum, then you should instruct the patient to stand up straight and stretch out, then use ink to mark a circle around the umbilical area.ثمّ تمسك الموضع الذى يظهر فيه الورم فترفع الجلد من ذلك الموضع الى السرّة وتعقد فوقه رباطا شديدا وتبيته ثلاثة أيام فإن لم يظهر الورم فى تلك المدة فأزله، وإن ظهر فى المدة فأعد عليه ما أزلت به المرّة Then order him to lie down on his back between your hands. Then cut with a wide scalpel around the navel at the spot marked with ink. Then push up into the tumor with a large probe, and bind the site of the incision with a strong thread or silk thread tightly.
The knot should be a slip-knot. Then open up the tumor above the ligature, and insert your index finger inside and look for the intestine. If you find that it has been caught by the ligature, loosen the slip-knot and push the intestine back into the abdomen. If you find a peritoneum, stretch it with a probe.
Cut off the extra tissue, and if you encounter an artery or vein, ligate it well and return to your work. Take two needles and thread them with strong threads, then insert the needles into the incision you have made around the tumor, making sure they are spread apart, and then tie down the tumor in four places on the needles.
If you wish, remove the needles and leave the site until the flesh dies and falls off by itself, or cut it away once it becomes soft and rotten; then treat it as appropriate with ointments until it heals. If the navel protrusion is a growth of flesh,
or if it is due to moisture, you should open up the tumor as we have said and draw out the blood or moisture that you find there, then treat the site with something that will heal it.
Chapter 53.
On treating cancer.
We have already mentioned in the classification the types of cancer and how to treat it with medications, and warned against treating it with iron so that it does not ulcerate. We have also mentioned cancer generated in the womb and the warning against treating it.
The ancients said that when cancer is in a place from which it can be completely removed, such as cancer in the breast or thigh and similar places from which it is possible to remove it entirely, especially if it is small and new. However, when it is old and large, it should not be approached.
Then I was unable to cure anyone of it, nor did I see anyone before me reach that, and the operation in it if he was proficient as we said, is to proceed and facilitate the patient from black bile several times, then you bleed him if there is a clear fullness in the veins.
Then you stretch the patient so that he is able to undergo the operation, then you apply to the cancer the forcepses that are suitable for it, then you scrape it from all sides with the skin, taking care to reach all its roots, and let the blood flow without stopping it quickly.
But press the places and let out all the thick blood by hand or by any instrument you can, if during the operation a large amount of blood is discharged from a cut artery or vein, stop the bleeding by tying it with a ligature until the bleeding stops, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 54
In the treatment of hydrocephalus.
We have already mentioned in the section on types of hydrocephalus and how the collection of water occurs, and the signs of each type and its treatment with medications. The type that is treated with iron is only the serous type; the phlegmatic or the sanguineous type should not be treated with iron at all.
For if you have treated this type of hydrocephalus with medications and your treatment was ineffective, then examine the patient; if he has become very weak or if he had another disease besides hydrocephalus, such as.
Coughing or diarrhea and the like, then you must not treat him with iron, for it is dangerous. But if you see that the patient is strong and has no other disease except hydrocephalus, and is neither young nor old, then you should proceed as follows: stand the patient up in front of you. And an assistant stands behind him, squeezing his abdomen with his hands and pushing the water down towards the groin. Then take a spoon-shaped knife as follows:..
A long, two-edged instrument, like a scalpel, except that it is slightly curved so as not to damage the intestines when used in surgery. Then look to see if the hydrocele is coming from the intestine.
You should incise from the navel downward a distance of three fingers width above the pubic bone. If the hydrocele is caused by liver disease, then make an incision to the left of the navel, three fingers width; if it is caused by spleen disease, then make the incision on the right side, three fingers width.
It is also not advisable to make the incision on the side the patient wants to lie on, so that fluids do not flow into that weak area. Then pierce the skin all the way with the instrument and insert the instrument into that incision and lift your hand.
With the scalpel, slit between the skin and the peritoneum as if you were skinning it; the amount you skin should be about the size of a fingernail or similar. Then pierce the peritoneum until the scalpel reaches an empty space, which is where the water is located; then take it out and insert into the hole the instrument which has this shape.
It is a tube-like object made of thin silver, or copper, or brass, or smooth iron, with a small hole at the bottom and three holes on the sides - two on one side and one on the other - as you see it.
And he may sharpen its tip in the shape of a pen nib, like this:
At the top end there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, it will flow down from that moment on; you should draw out from it in that moment an intermediate amount of water, because if you draw out more than you should at that time, then perhaps the patient will die from the dissolution of his animal spirit.
Or he may experience a faintness approaching death, but you should draw out an amount appropriate to his strength, and what the condition of the patient indicates to you through the strength of his pulse, and the goodness of his color; then take out the instrument and retain the water, because it will be retained from that moment on.
Because of the skin that holds the hole on the peritoneum which I have told you to line in that way, then reapply the instrument another day if you see the patient is tolerating it.
You should also remove a small amount of water, doing this for several days while you are careful not to make a mistake so that only a little water remains. If you are worried about the patient and leave a lot of water then treat him by burial in hot sand.
Excessive sweating in the bath and sun, and be patient with thirst and treat him with drying medicines until he recovers, and cauterize the stomach, liver and spleen after removing the water as I described earlier..
Chapter Fifty-Five
On the treatment of children who are born with their urinary openings not perforated, or the hole is narrow or in the wrong place..
Some boys may be born from their mothers' wombs with their navels not perforated, so you should quickly perforate it as soon as he is born..وإن كان ضيقا فافتحه بالإبرة، وإن كان فى غير موضعه فأخرجه إلى الموضع الذى ينبغى أن يكون فيه وذلك بالآلة التى وصفت
If it is narrow, open it with a needle, and if it is in the wrong place, move it to where it should be using the instrument
Then place a thin lead peg in the hole and tie it, and hold it for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, move it aside then let him urinate, then replace it. If you do not use the lead, then it is possible that the urine which travels through the opening will not allow it to close..وإن كان الثقب واسعا فافتحه بالإبرة واجعل عليه مسحوقا من السكر وجزئين من الكبريت الأحمر، وانقع المسمار الرصاص فى زيت اللبان ذيّل عليه قليل من زيت الورد وادهنه على الموضع وأمسكه ثلاثة أيّام فمتى أراد البول تحرّك،
If the opening is wide, open it with a needle and place upon it powder of sugar and two parts of red sulfur. Soak the lead peg in castor oil, add a little rose oil to it and anoint it on the spot and hold it for three days. When he wants to urinate, he will move it,
Let the patient raise his urethra with his hand upward, so that no semen can enter before it reaches the uterus directly; this is a very serious defect. To treat this, let the sick person lie on his back.
Then, with your left hand, stretch the foreskin tightly and puncture the head of the urethra with a sharp blade or scalpel, as sharp as a pen, as if you were carving something to make it concave in the middle, similar to an arc, so that the hole is in the middle as it should be.
And beware of bleeding during the operation, for this often happens. So treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter 56
In cases of blisters on the foreskin, and blackness, and decay, and adhesion of the foreskin to the glans.
This blister often occurs in the urethra, it is a rough, fleshy protuberance, and may be benign or malignant. In the case of a benign growth, you should attach it with a fine hook.
Cut it away completely, then apply a cotton pad soaked in Egyptian ointment, and afterwards treat it with castor oil until it heals. But if the blister is malignant, rough in color, you should cauterize it after cutting it off and removing its outer layer..
If the blister is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised man, and part of the blister is inside and part outside, you should first treat the inner part, and when it has healed, then treat the outer part..وإن كان البثر فى الكمرة ولم يكن خبيثا بل كان من داخلها فيجب أن تنزع الغلفة كلّها حتّى تصل إلى موضع البثر فتحفّظ عند نزع الغلفة إن كان علق من داخلها بعرق أو عروق فإذا انتزعتها ذهب معه، وعليك بأن تحفر مكان البثر بأطر
If the blister is on the glans and not malignant, but is on the inside, you must remove the foreskin completely to reach the blister. When treating this area, be careful not to tear the foreskin, as it may be attached to the glans by a vein or veins. You should also excavate the area around the blister, as if you treat both areas at once, you cannot be sure that the foreskin will not tear. This can also happen in women, and in the foreskin, there can be blackness and decay, so you must cut away all that has turned black and is starting to decay or has already decayed
Then pour on it honey mixed with pounded and sifted pomegranate rind and myrrh, then treat it with other remedies until it heals. If bleeding occurs, cauterize with a crescent-shaped iron in this way:
Cauterization is beneficial for both conditions, that is, bleeding and an open wound when it becomes rotten. If the tip of the foreskin has been worn away completely and is gone in a certain period of time, one should insert into the urethra a lead tube to make the patient urinate, and as for the adhesion of the foreskin to the glans,.
This adhesion occurs in those whose foreskin is intact and has not been circumcised, but it can also happen due to an injury or swelling; in this case, one should separate the foreskin with a curved scalpel until the ligament is released and the glans is free from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them by examination, one should cut off a little of the foreskin and glans, because the foreskin is thin, and it might easily tear. Then, separate the foreskin from the glans with a thin linen cloth that has been wet in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
Then treat it with an astringent drink until it heals,.
Chapter 57
On cleansing infants and treating the errors that occur in them..
Circumcision is no different from any other disconnection of a connection, except that since it is something we do intentionally and especially since it is performed on infants, it is necessary for us to prescribe the best course of action for it..
The easiest path to safety is this: I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not practiced in their religions; rather, we have acquired it..
By experimentation, for I have found that the majority of artisans and barbers use cleansing with a razor or scissors, and they also employ cauterization with a ligature, thread, and nail-clipping, and I have tried all these methods..
I have not found anything better than cauterization with a pair of scissors and ligature with thread, because cauterization with a scalpel often damages the skin, as the foreskin has two layers, so sometimes the upper layer is cut and the lower layer remains.
You will have to cut again and cause more pain. The use of a cautery is not safe, as the glans may be cut into its hole. As for cauterization with a nail, sometimes the skin slips away and your work is ruined or the skin of the child is naturally short.
Many children are born like that and do not need circumcision, and I have seen this happen myself. As for cauterization with scissors and ligature with thread, experience has shown me its superiority because the blade of the scissors above is similar to the one below.
When you squeeze your hand in a way that the blades are parallel, it cuts evenly at the same time and becomes like a wall for the foreskin from all sides, without any mistakes. The procedure is done as follows: First, convince the child.
Especially if he is old enough to understand that you are only tying the thread in his penis and leaving it for another day, then encourage him and make him happy with everything you can, so that he accepts it mentally. Then stop him between your hands, standing upright.
Do not sit down, and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot so that the child does not see it or any of the tools. Then put your hand into his penis and inflate the foreskin upwards until the head of the penis comes out.
Then clean it of any dirt that has accumulated inside, then tie the marked spot with a double thread and tie another knot just below it. Then hold the knot between your thumb and index finger firmly and cut in between the two knots. Then raise the foreskin quickly and pull out the urethra, then let a little blood flow, it is better and less for the inflammation of the urethra, then dry it with a wet cloth, then sprinkle on it the ashes of the burnt dry hair of the head, it is the best I have tried or the flour of the barley, it is also excellent.
Then raise the foreskin quickly and pull out the urethra, then let a little blood flow, it is better and less for the inflammation of the urethra, then dry it with a wet cloth, then sprinkle on it the ashes of the burnt dry hair of the head, it is the best I have tried or the flour of the barley, it is also excellent. Then carry out the hymenoplasty with a needle above in a cloth, the size of a cooked egg in rose water, mixed with soft, fragrant rose oil and leave it on for another day, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
This is an image of the scissors that are suitable for cleaning: .والمقصّ الذى يطهر به الإحليل هو مقصّ صغير من حدّين
The scissors used for cleansing the urethra are small, sharp-edged scissors with no curved edges and a nail that is polished and sharpened. The length of the blades should be equal to the length of the handles. One common mistake made during cleansing is that the inner foreskin may be turned inside out during cutting, so you should stretch it with your fingernail from your watch before the swelling occurs.
Cut it evenly, and if you can't hold it with your fingernail, pull it out with a hook and cut it. If three days have passed and the area under the head of the urethra remains swollen and inflamed, leave it until the hot swelling subsides, then peel it off gently.
Cut it according to what you think is appropriate, and be careful of the head of the urethra, for if some of the head of the urethra is cut, it will not harm it, then treat it with the remedies that promote wound healing as described in the article on remedies..وإن كان فى الذرور رمل وورم حارّ من شدّة الحرقان أو من ضعف، فاعلم أنّه لا يسكن ذلك الورم الحارّ ولا يزول إلاّ بسلامى يبقى بعده، فإن لم ينكشف بعد ثلاثة أيّام فلا بدّ أن يعود، وإن ز
If there is sand in the hymen and a hot swelling due to severe burning or weakness, know that this hot swelling will not subside and disappear until a scrotum remains afterwards. If it does not heal after three days, it will definitely return. If more of the foreskin is cut off and it shrinks upwards, this is also not very harmful. Treat it as mentioned until it heals..فإن عاوده فاعلم أنّه لا
Chapter LVIII.
In the treatment of urinary retention in the bladder.
Urinary retention in the bladder occurs due to obstruction from a stone, coagulated blood, pus, overgrowth of tissue, and the like. If you treat this condition with the various therapeutic methods mentioned in the classification,
and you find that the retention is due to a stone which has damaged the neck of the bladder, you should have the patient kneel down, then lie on his back with his abdomen extended towards his back, while another man sits on his back and the patient himself tries to hold on as tightly as he can.
This will force the neck of the bladder to push the stone backwards, and the urine will flow. If this method does not work and the condition becomes severe, you should use the instrument called a "catheter", which is as follows:.
It is made of silver, thin and smooth, hollow like a reed for writing with, about nine inches long, with a gentle funnel at its head. To attract the urine, you take a thread, bend it, and tie a piece of wool or cotton to its end securely.
You insert the end of the thread into the bottom of the catheter, and with a pair of pliers, remove any excess wool so that it can enter the tube and act as a plug, just like a button. Then grease the catheter with oil or lard or egg white, and have the patient sit on a chair.
And you should open up his bladder and urethra with moist ointments or oil, tepid water, then gently insert the catheter into the urethra until it reaches its base, then bend the urethra upwards towards the navel and push the catheter inside it.فإن لم ينطلق البول من القاثاطير فلتسحب القاثاطير الى الخلف قليلا ثمّ تدفعها الى الأمام حتّى تنبعث رائحة بول فينطلق البول، فإن سكن البول فلتعد للقاثاطير كما ذكرنا مرارا.
When the urethra has been doubled back upon itself, the sound is then pushed in until it reaches a point close to the anus; the penis is then bent downward while the sound remains inside it, and it is pushed until it reaches the bladder, whereupon the patient feels that it has entered into an empty space.
This is done in this manner because the channel through which urine passes is bent, and then the thread with its sponge is pulled tightly, causing the urine to follow the sponge; then you remove it and let the urine flow out, and reinsert the sound.
You should continue doing this until the bladder is empty and the patient feels relief.وإذا وجدت فى القاثاطير دمّا أو صديدا أو ماء أصفر تبين أنّه من المثانة، فإن كان الدمّ كثيرا أو الصديد، فاعلم
Chapter 59.في علاج النكبة فى المثانة وعل
On the treatment of injuries to the bladder and how to inject fluid into the bladder using a syringe.والأعور هو الذى يكون بين
The 'awwor' is the one that is between. And pictures of tools that are suitable for that are made of silver or ivory, hollowed out with a long tube on the thickness of a membrane, and if you wanted to drip water or medications into it, this is done using a tool called a syringe; its picture is as follows:.
It is made of silver or ivory, hollowed out with a long tube on the thickness of a membrane, except for the tip, which is solid and has three holes, two on one side and one on the other, as you can see.ويكون الطرف الآخر من الأنبوب مصمتّا.
The other end of the tube is solid. And the hollow part in which the piston sits must be just large enough for it, without any excess, so that when you pull on it, it pulls with it some moisture, and when you push on it, it pushes out to a distance, as a squirt gun does with oil in sea battles.وإنّما يرتدّ اليه الماء الذى يقطر من المثانة فان سكنت وقف القطر وان تحرك تحرك معه، وإن استحكم وحركه بقوّة قارص المثانة وشقّها كما يشاء، فان كان فيّضه وشقّه طولا كان ذلك فيّضا للمثانة و
Then, if you want to evacuate the fluids in the bladder, you insert the end of the syringe into the fluid and pull with the piston upwards; the fluid is then sucked into the hollow of the syringe, after which you insert its end into the urethra as we described in the chapter on catheters, and then you expel the fluid with the piston.
For this fluid will reach the bladder, and the patient will feel it; this is also a picture of a delicate syringe which can also be used to irrigate the bladder:
You make it of silver or brass, its upper end like a small funnel and below that is a groove into which the ligature fits; then you take a camel's bladder and put in it the fluid you want to irrigate with, then tie it tightly between the grooves with a double thread.
And you warm this fluid a little over the fire, then insert the end of the syringe into the urethra, then grip your hand tightly on the bladder with the fluid, until the patient feels that the fluid has reached the bladder.
If you cannot get a bladder, take a piece of leather and make it into a circle, and pierce it all around its rim, then thread a strong thread through these holes as they go around; then gather the circle together just like you gather up a napkin after you put in whatever fluids, oils or waters you want.
Then tie it into the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, by squeezing your hand until the fluid reaches the bladder..
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of the calculi.
We have already mentioned in the division the types of calculi, their treatment with remedies, and I have described the difference between the calculus formed in the kidneys and that formed in the bladder, and their signs; and I have also mentioned the calculus which requires manual intervention and incision..
Here is the stone that is generated in the bladder, especially, and which lodges in the urethra; and I will describe it with a clear explanation and brevity.
Here is the stone that is generated in the bladder, which mainly affects boys; and one of its signs is that urine leaves the bladder like water in its thinness.
Here is the stone that appears in the bladder and irritates the penis, and often hangs down and protrudes with it, and many of them have protruding buttocks; and it is easy to heal boys until they reach the age of fourteen, but it is difficult for the elderly. As for young men, it is medium between that.
And those whose stones are greater, their treatment is easier; but smaller ones are the opposite. So when we come to treatment, it should first be injected with an enema that removes all the waste in his intestines; because it may prevent the existence of the stone upon inspection.
Then the patient should be taken by his legs and shaken and shaken down to bring the stone down to the neck of the bladder, or jump from a high place several times; then examine him while sitting upright in your lap with his hands under his thighs so that the bladder tilts all the way down.
And examine him from the outside; and if you feel the stone in the air, take quick action with your needle, for if it does not fall under your touch at all, you should grease the index finger of the left hand (if the patient is a boy) or the middle finger.
If he is a grown man, insert it into his anus and examine for the stone until, when it falls under your finger, you move it little by little to the neck of the bladder, then press it with your finger and push it out towards the place where you want to split it.
And order a servant to squeeze the bladder with his hand, and order another servant to stretch his right hand between the testicles and with his other hand stretch the skin under the testicles towards where the incision will be made; then take the sharp knife whose shape is as follows:..
And one makes an incision between the seat and the vulva, not in the middle but to the side of the left buttock, and the incision is made on the same stone and your finger in the seat, pushing it outward, so that the incision from the outside is wide and from the inside narrow as much as possible for the exit of the stone.
Do not make it larger, for the finger in the seat might press on the stone at the incision and cause it to exit without difficulty. Know that there may be stones with angles and edges, which are more difficult to exit.
Some are smooth and rounded, so they exit easily. But if there are angles and edges, you should increase the incision slightly; if it still doesn't exit, you should devise a way to deal with it, either by grasping it with a tight instrument with a tip like a file.
So that it doesn't escape from him, or you can insert a thin instrument with a hooked tip under the stone; if you can't get it, then widen the incision slightly. If you're overwhelmed by any bleeding, cut it with a styptic.
If there is more than one, then first push the largest to the mouth of the bladder, then make an incision on it, then push the smaller one afterwards; do the same if there are more than two. But if it is very large, it is foolish to make a large incision on it, because it exposes the patient to one of two things.
Either he dies or he always has a dribbling of urine because the wound does not heal at all; but try to push it until it comes out, or devise a way to break it with hooks so that you can take it out in pieces.
When you have finished your work, wash the wound with vinegar and wine, and tie it tightly; then place a damp cloth over it, soaked in rose oil and cold water to soothe the hot swelling; then let the patient lie on his back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
If the wound shows excessive inflammation, and heat, or anything like that, such as blood clotting in the bladder which prevents urination, and this can be detected by the presence of blood in the urine.
Insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, because if it remains, it will cause damage and infection in the bladder. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and treat each type with its matching treatment until it heals.
At all times during treatment, it is recommended to tie the thighs and bring them together to hold in place the medications that are applied to the area. If the stone is small and has moved into the urethra, and it is stuck there causing the urine to be unable to flow out, then treat it as I have described before it moves further into the incision.
I have often found this treatment to be sufficient without having to resort to an incision. I have experimented with this, and here is the shape of the iron tool that you can use: .[image - a drawing of an iron tool with a curved tip]يبلغ طوله ذراعا وعرضه عرض كفّ، وفي طرفه شعيرات من الحديد مدببة تكون على شكل
The length of the tool is one arm, and the width is the width of a palm. At its tip, there are small iron hairs arranged in the shape of a triangle with a pointed, tapered end embedded in a stick. Then take a thread and tie it to the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder. Then gently insert the iron tool into the urethra until it reaches the stone itself.
You slowly turn the tool in the stone, hoping to pierce it until it passes through to the other side, and at that moment urine will flow out. Then you squeeze your hand on what remains of the stone from outside the penis, for it will crumble and come out with the urine, and the patient will recover.
If you are unable to perform this treatment due to an obstacle, then tie a thread under the stone and another thread above it, and then make an incision on the penis itself between the two threads and remove the stone.
Then the ligament is cut and the clotted blood that has collected in the wound is cleaned away. The thread must be tied under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other tie above so that when the thread is cut after the stone has come out, the skin will return to its place and cover the wound.
Therefore, when you tie the upper thread, you should lift the skin upwards so that it will return when you are finished and cover the wound as we have said,.
Chapter LXI.
On the Extraction of the Stone in Women.
Stones are rarely produced in women, but if one of them does develop a stone, it is difficult to treat for several reasons: one reason being that the woman may be a virgin; another is that you cannot find a woman who will allow herself to be examined by the doctor..
If she is chaste or related to you by blood, and the third reason is that you cannot find a woman who is proficient in this craft, especially when it comes to manual work; and the fourth reason is that the location of the incision on the stone in women is distant from the location of the stone, so you need to make a deep incision..وأمّا علاجها فعلى النحو الذى قلناه فى علاج الحصاة للرجال إلاّ أنّك إن وجدت امرأة تعينك فى العلاج فهى المراد والاّ فالرجل ينبغى له أن يعالجها بنفسه
The treatment for women is the same as that described for men, except that if you can find a woman to assist with the treatment, that is preferable; otherwise, a man should treat her himself, which is risky. If necessity demands it, then you should seek out a female doctor who is proficient in this field; such women are rarely found. If you cannot find one, then seek out a male doctor who is gentle and skilled, or a midwife who has some knowledge of this field, or a woman who can give some advice on this matter..والعمل فى الحصاة للنساء أصعب من العمل فى الرجال لأنّها لا تقدر أن تتنحى عن موضع علاجها بل يجب أن يكون
Treating stones in women is more difficult than in men because they cannot move away from the treatment area; therefore, she must remain still and you should examine her first to determine if she is a virgin. If so, you should insert your finger into her rectum and feel for the stone..وإن وجدت الحصاة تحت أصابعها فلتضغط عليها بقدر ما يمكن وربّما وقعت الحصاة الى فوق فى المثانة فإن رأيت أثرا لها تحت جلدها فلتجعل يدك تحت جلدها لتردّه الى مكانه وربّما احتاجت الى أن تمسكها بيدك فلتفعل وتشد
Then you order her to be cut open. If she is not a virgin and has given birth before, then you order the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and search for the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and squeezing it hard.
If she finds it, then she should move it from the opening of the bladder to the bottom as far as possible until she reaches the root of the thigh, then cut her at the front of the vagina at the root of the thigh from whichever side she feels the stone.
Her finger should remain pressed under the stone, and the incision should be small at first, then she inserts the probe into that small incision. If she feels the stone, she should increase the size of the incision to the extent that she knows the stone can pass through it. Know that there are many types of stones.
They come in various sizes, both small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, with branches. Know their types so that you can identify what you want. If you are overwhelmed by the bleeding, sprinkle ground alum on the site and hold it for a while until the bleeding stops, then go back to your work.
Until the stone comes out, and know that you should have with you the tools I mentioned for removing stones in men, so that you can use them to help you in your work. If you are overwhelmed by bleeding and you know that the pulse of the blood is from a severed artery, then place turpentine on the site.
And tightly bandage it and leave it, and don't return to it, and leave the stone where it is, for perhaps the patient will perish, then treat the wound. If the severity of the bleeding subsides after a few days and the site becomes infected, then return to your work until the stone comes out.
Chapter 62.
On incising a hydrocele.
A hydrocele is the accumulation of moisture in the white peritoneum that lies beneath the tunica vaginalis surrounding the testis, and it may be located in a specific membrane that nature has prepared on one side of the testis.
So it seems like another testis, and this hydrocele is located between the tunica vaginalis and the white peritoneum that we mentioned before, and this only occurs rarely. This hydrocele is caused by a weakness in the testicles, and this fluid may accumulate due to a blow to the testicles.
This moisture can have many colors; it may be yellowish, reddish, black and thick like pus, or it may be watery and white, which is the most common type. There are certain signs by which one can identify it.
Wherever this accumulation of water occurs in the white peritoneum that we mentioned, the swelling will be slightly oval and similar to an egg shape, and the testis is not visible because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
If the moisture accumulates in a specific membrane, then the swelling will be round on one side of the testis.
This often leads people to mistake it for another testis. If the moisture is between the tunica vaginalis and the white peritoneum, then it will be detectable by touch. To determine the color of the moisture, use a square probe as shown in the previous illustration. The color of the fluid that comes out after inserting the probe will indicate its nature.
Now, let's move on to the treatment with cauterization. First, order the patient to bleed if possible and his body is full. Then, have him lie on his back on something slightly elevated and place several pieces of cloth underneath him. You should sit on his left side.
You should also instruct a servant to sit on the patient's right side, holding his penis to one side of the tunica vaginalis and close to the pubic bone. Then, take a wide scalpel and make an incision through the tunica vaginalis from the middle, lengthwise, down to near the pubic area.
The incision is made straight and parallel to the line that divides the tunica vaginalis into two halves, until it reaches the white peritoneum which envelops it; you strip it away, being careful not to tear it, and you strip more from the side which is attached to the testis. You carry out the stripping as much as possible.
You then widely extend the peritoneum filled with water, and drain all the water. Then you separate the lips of the incision with probes, and stretch the peritoneum upwards without touching the tunica vaginalis which envelops the testis. You cut the peritoneum as much as possible, either all at once or in pieces.
Especially its thin side; if you do not cut it thoroughly, you cannot be sure that the water will not return. If, while performing your work, the testis emerges from its covering, when you have finished cutting the peritoneum, return it, then sew up the tunica vaginalis.
Then treat it as you would any other wound until it heals. If, however, you discover that the testis is rotten due to another illness, you should tie off the vessels in the funiculus spermaticus to prevent bleeding, then cut the testis away from the funiculus and remove the testis, after which you should treat it as already described.
If the accumulated water is on both sides, then know that it is hydrocele on both sides; so make an incision on the other side just as you did on the first, and if it is possible to perform the operation in one go, do so, then wipe away the blood.
You insert into the incisions wool which you have dipped in oil or rose ot, and from outside you place other wool which has been dipped in syrup and oil, and you smooth it over the testicles and lower abdomen; above this you place folded linen which are called bandages. And above this you tie it with a six-sided ligature in this way:..
Then you take two pieces of linen which are sewn together and stuffed with fluffy wool in this way, and the ends which are used to cinch it are made of cotton or dampened wool, and these are gathered onto the belt of the undergarment; one end goes over the buttock to the back.
And the second one, take it towards the pubis and the two ends on the thighs from below, and the remaining two on the groins, and gather all the tightness in a belt of underpants. These suspenders can also be made by cauterization instead of iron incisions.
Take a fine, skinny cautery and split the skin of the testicle while it's hot as described until the white peritoneum containing the water is revealed. Then take another cautery in this form:
It resembles the Greek eye, then line it with that peritoneum while it's hot until all moisture is released. Then extend the peritoneum with pins and strip off the containing membrane by cautery and cut it as much as possible so that you remove them all and preserve the testicle from fire.
Know that this work is safer and further from bloodletting and better than incision surgery. If you encounter swelling, or bleeding, or something else while making the incision or cauterization, you should treat whatever you encounter with the appropriate treatment as previously mentioned.
If the patient is timid and does not endure this operation due to its severity, then he should use cupping as I am describing it. If you are convinced by the evidences that we have presented beforehand,.
that the hernia is watery, then you should make the patient sit on a high chair, then incise the swelling at its base with a broad blade and place the cupping vessel along the body lengthwise, and let the opening be wide so that all the water flows out. Then put cotton on the spot and tie it.
Let him drain the rest of the water and then treat him until the wound heals. If the water does not flow out during cupping, it is because the white membrane obstructs at the mouth of the wound, preventing the water from flowing out..
At that time, you should insert into the wound a goose feather or the instrument used to extract water from the hydrocele as its image was previously presented, or increase the opening of the wound slightly.
And know that water may return and collect after six months or so, and when it collects, then bandage it in the same manner, and the patient must guard his days.
Chapter LXVI.
On incision for hernia of fleshy parts and its treatment.
Know that incision on this hernia is a risky matter leading to death in most cases, so we prefer to avoid it and opt for safety. I shall describe the procedure and the different types of tumors.
There are many types of tumors that can occur in the parts that make up the female reproductive system, and these can be caused by various factors, either due to an excessive heat that flows towards the reproductive organs or due to a blow. The color of the tumor is usually similar to that of the surrounding body tissue, and it does not contain any fluid.
The tumor is usually firm, and sometimes it is a hardened color with no feeling to it. This can be due to the complexification of the arteries and their swelling, as previously mentioned, or due to the swelling of the veins. When it is caused by the swelling of the arteries, this is known as a diffuse tumor.
If you press it with your fingers, nothing should happen to it at all. As for the type that is caused by the swelling of veins, nothing happens when pressed with fingers. This type can be operated on and on other fleshy parts.
The procedure is to slit open the scrotum, then stretch the testicle upwards and remove it from the white fascia. The spermatic cord should be freed from its vessels and the vessels tied off. After freeing the spermatic cord from all sides of the testicle, if the testicle has become adherent to these growing tissues
it is preferable to remove the testicle and cut it off. If there is adhesion between the tunica vaginalis or between the vessels, all that adhesion should be freed and cut in a circular shape.وإذا أخرجت البيضة من جوف الصفاق الأبيض فأمّا أن تكون قد وجدت ماء بين الصفاقين الأصلى والأبيض فهذا دليل على أنّه ورم مائي، وإن لم تجد بين الصفاقين ماء فهذا دليل على أنّه ورم لحمى.
If the fleshy growth is in the area of adhesion at the back, then you should cut it all out and remove the egg as we said. Once you have finished, dress the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
CHAPTER 64
The treatment of hydrocele accompanied by hernia.
Hernia is a twisted swelling, similar to a cluster of grapes, with relaxation of the testicles, making it difficult for the patient to move, exercise, or walk. The treatment of this condition is similar to what has been mentioned earlier.
However, it is important to follow the traditional approach, and here is what I say: The patient should sit on a high chair, then push the testicular sacs downward, then hold the skin of the scrotum with your fingers along with the vessels that are close to the penis.
Another assistant should hold it tightly and stretch it firmly, then make an oblique incision with a sharp, wide blade along the vessels until they are exposed, then strip them from each side as I mentioned to you in slitting the vessels in the ears, then insert a double-threaded needle into them.
Tie them at the beginning of the hernia and also at the end, then make a vertical incision in the middle along the body and drain out the cloudy, rotten fluids that have accumulated inside.
Then treat the wound as you would any other wound, waiting for a period of time to cut off the vessels that supply one of the testicles; there is no harm in doing so. If the hernia affects all the vessels, then it is permissible to remove one of the testicles along with the vessels so that the sperm does not lack nutrition. Cutting off the vessels causes them to wither and become useless.
Chapter sixty-five.
Treatment of hernia of the intestinal loop.
This hernia occurs from a defect in the peritoneum that extends over the abdomen towards the inguinal regions of the abdominal walls, and the intestine protrudes through this hernia into one of the groin areas.
This hernia can be either from a defect in the peritoneum or from its extension, and these two types occur for many reasons, such as a blow, a jump, a shout, or lifting a heavy object, and its sign, if it is from the extension of the peritoneum, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time.
It does not occur suddenly, and the swelling is level towards the depth before the peritoneum squeezes the intestine. Its sign, if it is from a defect in the peritoneum, is that it causes great pain at first, and the swelling is variable, appearing under the skin near the surface.
This is due to the intestine exiting and going outside the peritoneum, and the peritoneum may also exit with the intestine, in which case this hernia is called intestinal and mesenteric. It may also occur with gas, and feces may flow into the intestine and be trapped there, resulting in the death of the patient.
This is because it causes severe pain and cramping, especially if compressed. The treatment for the various types of this condition should be approached with caution, and the patient should be instructed to gently push the intestine back into their abdomen if possible.
Then have the patient lie on their back between your hands and raise their legs, then stretch the skin below the groin upwards and slit the scrotum completely from top to bottom, then insert pins into the lips of the incision according to the size needed to open the incision with them.وينبغى أن تكون الصنّارات رفيعة كالشفة ومدببة الطرفين لتدخل فى الصفاق فى الشقّ الذى به الفتق، ثمّ تقطع حول المعاء دون أن تخدشه، فإذا فرّجت بين شفتى الشقّ رأيت المعاء وامكنك فتحه وإدخاله، وإن كان الفتق من امتداد الصفاق لم تجده هناك بل تراه فى موض
The incision should be as large as possible so that the testicle can slip out. Then the tunics under the tunica vaginalis are stripped until the tough, white peritoneum is exposed on all sides. At this point, insert your index finger below the testicle.
You separate the peritoneum between the tunica vaginalis and the second peritoneum, and release the adhesions behind the testicle. Then you fold the tunica vaginalis inward with your right hand while at the same time pushing the testicle and its peritoneum upward with your left hand toward the incision.
You tell your assistant to lift the testicle upward and release the adhesions behind it completely, while you inspect with your finger for any part of the intestines coiled within the peritoneum. If you find any, push it back down into the abdomen.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten strands, insert it at the lower end of the peritoneum under the tunica vaginalis next to the incision, and cut off the ends of the folded thread so that there are four strands. Then you twist some of the strands together to form a sturdy thread and tie the peritoneum, which we mentioned is under the tunica vaginalis, very tightly from two sides. Then you also twist and tie the ends of the strands very tightly so that nothing can pass through them. This is to prevent the development of a hot tumor, and it also serves as a second tie outside the first one, about two finger-widths away from it. After these ties, you leave under the tunica vaginalis, the amount of peritoneum that is equal to the width of a finger.
This is to prevent the development of a hot tumor, and it also serves as a second tie outside the first one, about two finger-widths away from it. After these ties, you leave under the tunica vaginalis, the amount of peritoneum that is equal to the width of a finger. Then cut off the rest all around in a circular shape, and remove it along with the testicle. Then make an incision at the bottom of the tunica vaginalis as we described before, so that blood and fluid flow out; afterwards, use wool dipped in oil and place it inside the wound, and apply the bandage that was mentioned.
The peritoneum, which is white, may be cauterized after it has been cut in order to stop bleeding, as this often occurs. The ligature should be left until it falls away naturally. If its fall is delayed, it should be soaked in hot water and a sweat induced until it drops off.
Then the wound is treated with other wound treatments until it heals.
Chapter LXVI.
On the treatment of hernia in children This is a type of hernia that I have never seen anyone dare to treat with iron. The ancient authorities state that it should be treated as described for hernias associated with hydrocele: that is, the sac should be gently tied below after making an incision.
Then an incision is made in the centre and the tumour is treated until the sac falls away. The wound is then treated as described until it heals.
Chapter LXVII.في علاج داء النكهة يعالج هذا الداء بما
On the treatment of inguinal hernia This condition is treated in the same way as hernia in the groin.
Hernia may occur in the groin as we have stated; the site is incised and no part of the intestine descends into the scrotum, or if it does descend, it is only slightly and can always be reduced.
However, if a long time has passed, the incision in the peritoneum is enlarged so that the intestine and omentum can descend into the scrotum. This occurs due to the extension of the peritoneum which is found in the groin as mentioned. This happens because the peritoneum extends, then relaxes and the area becomes swollen and hollow. It is treated by cauterization as previously described.
It can also be treated with iron in this way: the patient lies on his back while you make an incision in the swollen area of hernia, a transverse incision about three fingers in width. You then separate the aponeuroses under the skin.
Once the white peritoneum is exposed, take a probe and place it on the area of the peritoneum, pushing it into the depths of the abdomen. Then stitch the two edges of the peritoneum which lie along either side of the probe.
Then, grasp the end of the trocar and do not pierce the peritoneum at all, nor touch the testicle or anything else as I have informed you in the treatment of hydrocele. Then, treat it with remedies for wounds.
When the threads are removed, cleanse and dress the wound until it heals. The peritoneum will contract and the hernia will not increase in size.
Surgery is preferable in this case as it is safer.
Chapter 68.
On the relaxation of the skin of the testicle.
The skin of the testicle often becomes relaxed in some people without the relaxation of the meats inside it, and its appearance becomes ugly; therefore, whoever desires to treat it should put the patient to sleep on his back.
And cut away all the skin that has relaxed on the thick skin, then bring the two lips together; and if you wish, first stitch up the excess of the relaxed skin with three or four stitches, and be careful with the stitching, then cut between the stitches.
Then treat it as you would other wounds until it heals and the stitches drop out.and if you see the testicle has become like a grape in size, then cut away what is excess skin and stitch up the remaining skin to make it tight around the testicle.
Chapter 69.
On castration.وأمّا الإخصاء فإذا كان المريض
Indeed, castration is prohibited in our religion.and if you see the testicle has become like a grape in size, then cut away what is
And it is for this reason that I should not have mentioned it in my book; however, I have mentioned it for two reasons: one is so that it may be within the knowledge of the physician if he is asked about it, and the other is that we often need to castrate some animals for our benefits.
For example, with lambs, male goats, cats and other animals; I say that castration can be done in two ways: either by pressure or by incision and cutting. The way to do it by pressure is to make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles relax, soften and hang down.ثمّ نأتى بآلة الرضّ وهى شبه الحلقة ونضعها تحت أنثياه ثمّ نرضّ بها حتّى نجد اللحم قد ارتدّ عن موضعه، فإنّه يرتدّ إلى موضعه لا يبقى فيه شيء من المنى.
Then rub it with your hand until it becomes soft and indistinguishable by touch. As for castration by incision and cutting, you should hold the animal and squeeze the skin of its testicles with your left hand, then tie the cords and make an incision on each testicle.
When the testicles protrude, cut them after you have stripped them, and leave no part of the tunica on them except for the thin membrane that covers the vessels. This type of castration is better than the one done by rubbing.
Because rubbing may leave something of the testicles, which could make the animal desire sexual intercourse. Then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hermaphrodites.
A hermaphrodite is of two types: one in which a vagina-like shape appears below the scrotum or on the skin between the testicles, along with pubic hair; sometimes urine may flow from what is located on the scrotum's skin.
As for women, there is only one type: it appears above the vagina on the pubic area, resembling a small penis; both are like testicles, and the treatment for all three types is as follows:.
For the two types of men and one type of women, you should cut off the excess flesh so that its mark disappears, then treat it like any other wound until it heals. As for the second type of men from whom urine flows from what is in the scrotum's skin, there is no treatment for it, nor will it heal.
Chapter 71.
On cutting the clitoris and flesh protruding from women's vaginas.والبظر يكون زائداً فى النساء على نوعين أحدهما أن ين
The clitoris can grow in women in two ways: one is that it may increase in size beyond the natural limit, becoming misshapen and unsightly; in some women, it may even spread like men's genitalia and become capable of sexual intercourse.وأمّا النوع الثانى فيكون معتدلاً فى القدر على الأمر الطبيعىّ غير مفرط ولا ممسوح البتّة، وأمّا اللحم النابت من الفروج فأنواع منها
The clitoral prepuce should be gripped with the hand or a probe and cut, without excessive force, especially at the base to avoid bleeding.
Then treat it with surgical remedies until it heals. As for the肉芽, it is meat that grows in the mouth of the uterus until it fills it.
And sometimes it comes out to the outside like a tail. And therefore some of the ancients called it the disease of the tail. It should be cut like the clitoral prepuce, and treated until it heals..
Chapter 72.
On treating imperforate hymen..
Imperforate hymen is when a woman's vagina has no opening, or the opening is very small. This can be either congenital or acquired due to an underlying cause. It can be caused by excess granulation tissue growth..
This can be due to a thin or thick membrane, located within the uterus, on its sides, at its top or bottom. It prevents intercourse, conception, and childbirth, and sometimes it can prevent menstruation as well. The examination by a midwife will reveal this..فإن رأت القابلة أنّه قد امتنع الطمث والولادة من ذلك فعليها ان تخبر الطبيب ليقطعه فى الموضع المناسب ويكون ذلك بآلة حادّة او بمشرط.
If the midwife believes that the absence of menstruation and childbirth is due to this condition, she should inform a physician to cut it in the appropriate place, using a sharp instrument or a scalpel. If the obstruction is visible and close by, if it is not visible, she should feel for it with her fingers or a probe. If the obstruction is made of thin membrane and is close to the labia, then quickly break it. In this case, place something like a bandage on the labia, then press down with both thumbs..وإن كان من لحم زائد او صفاق كثيف وكان فى عمق الرحم فليقطعه الطبيب بمشرط وربّما احتاج الى آلة تشبه
If the obstruction is made of excess granulation tissue or thick membrane and is located within the uterus, it should be cut by a physician with a scalpel. Sometimes an instrument resembling a
If the peritoneum is thick and dense, then you should slit it with a broad blade resembling an Aspen leaf. If the blockage is from protruding flesh, then attach it with pins and cut it off. Have with you remedies that stop bleeding without causing pain, such as camphor, galangal, and frankincense mixed with egg white.
Then use a lead tube that is wide so that the wound does not heal quickly, hold it for several days and use a flax thread until it heals completely. There may be other growths of flesh in the uterus, which should be cut off in this way.
Unless it is a cancerous tumor; a cancerous tumor that occurs in the uterus should not be touched with iron at all.
Chapter 73.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, warts and red sores that appear in women's genitals.
As for hemorrhoids, it is the swelling of the mouths of veins so that they flow with a lot of constant blood. When hemorrhoids advance, they become warts. I have mentioned in the division their types and marks, and we mention here.
Those that can and cannot be treated; I say that hemorrhoids and warts, if they are deep in the uterus and do not appear to the sense, there is no treatment for them with iron. But those that are at the mouth of the uterus, which the senses can feel, are those that can be treated.
So you should have the woman enter a cold room, then stretch the warts with tweezers or a rough cloth and cut them off at their roots. Then sprinkle upon it, when it is bleeding from one of the cutting points for blood, without scorching.
Like camphor, galangal, and frankincense, and the like; then raise her legs against the wall for an hour, then immerse them in cold water. If the bleeding continues, have her sit in a mixture of sumac, pomegranate peel, and gals or the like; then take barley flour, knead it with honey and vinegar.
And bind it on her back; if the bleeding stops, otherwise apply a tight bandage to the chest and breasts without condition. Then take a piece of wool, dip it in tarathith juice or tongue-of-the- lamb juice or alder branch juice with gallnut wine and apply it to the wound.
When the swelling subsides, treat the wound with ointment until it heals. As for the red blister, it resembles the heads of hashish, rough in appearance, so you should cut what appears of it according to what I mentioned in warts, alike, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 74.
In the treatment of abscesses that occur in the womb.
Many types of tumors may occur in the womb, such as cancer, calcified tumors, ulcers, abscesses, eating disorders, fistulas, hemorrhoids, fissures, warts, and hot tumors; I have mentioned all these diseases and their types and signs in the classification.
So we should mention in this article the hot tumor that occurs in the womb, if it is one of the tumors that accumulate for a period; how its abscess is treated with iron. You should look and see that the pain of the tumor at the beginning is sharp with pulsation, inflammation, and fever.
And if you feel it with your fingers, do not hurry to treat it, but treat it with what aids in ripening; then, when these symptoms subside, the woman should sit on a chair with two seats and lean back.
And bring her legs to the side of the lower abdomen, with her thighs spread apart, and let her arms be under her knees and tied with a bandage that suits.
This is how the midwife sits on the right side and uses the instrument to open the cervix, the image of which will be shown later; when you want to use this instrument, you should estimate with a probe the depth of the woman's uterus so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the uterus.فان أصابتها الآلة عند استعمالها آلام شديدة فلا تعجل بالبطّ بل تستمر فى الكويّ حتّى ينضج الورم ويطلق الدم ويصير الورم ليناً رطب.
If the instrument is more than half the depth, then a tampon should be placed on the edge of the cervix to prevent the entire instrument from entering the uterus, and it is preferable that the loop which runs through the instrument from the upper side becomes the one.
While you hold the instrument, the assistant turns the loop until the cervix is opened, and if the abscess is touched by hand and feels soft and tender, then it should be split at its head with a wide blade, and when the period is completely discharged.
You should put a soft tampon soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringent in the wound, and the tampon should be outside the cervix, and on the uterus and pubic area, pure wool soaked in water that has boiled in it, baker's yeast.وإن كان الجرح فى رأس عنق الرحم ومدخل الحبل أو فى موضع من مواضع القسط، فإنّه ينبغى أن تصير فتيلة فيه، ويصبّ فوقها زيت أخضر فيشرب الزيت ما حوله ويطبّ.
If the wound is at the top of the cervix, or in a place where the tendon is located, then a tampon should be placed in it, and green oil should be poured over it, absorbing the oil around it, and then it is treated with
The uterus and wound may be washed by injecting water and honey, then with water that has boiled in it, anise or wild mint, then return to the ointment, if the abscess is hidden inside the uterus.وإن كان قد عظم ولم يظهر وكان مائيا فلا بأس ان تصلح بماء دافىء.
It is preferable to refrain from treating it with iron, but rather treat it as we mentioned in the division.وإن كان الخراج فى الحوض أو تحت الرّح، فإنّه ينبغى أن تصير فيه فتيلة مغموسة فى زيت مرهم
If the abscess is in the pelvis or under the uterus, a tampon soaked in ointment
Instructing midwives how to treat live fetuses if they exit in an abnormal shape.الفصل السادس والسبعون. فى علاج الذّهاب الى الأعضاء من النّكاح.
The midwife should first of all know the natural shape of childbirth, one of whose signs is that if you see the woman struggling to go down and longing for air and the blood shed becomes easier for her.فان رأيتها متغيّرة اللون والوجه والأنف واللثّة شاحبة والعرق يتصبّب منها وصوتها منتحبّ وروحها تتوجع وحرارتها قد ازدادت وبدنها متفرق ونبضها قد زاد ولحمها وجلدتاها ترتجفان ورجلاها وأرج
When the fetus emerges quickly, know that this birth is normal and its exit is head first, with the placenta accompanying it or hanging from its umbilical cord. When you see these signs, you should massage her abdomen so that the fetus comes out quickly.
When the fetus emerges head first, the placenta comes down with it and is cleansed of its fluids in a good way. Any birth that deviates from this is abnormal and blameworthy, because the fetus may emerge legs first, with its hands emerging before its head and legs.
One of its hands, or one of its feet, or it emerges with its head and hand, or it emerges folded up, or it might turn upside down, and so on, in all these faulty forms. The midwife should therefore be adept and skilled in all these matters, and she should beware of mistakes and errors.
I will explain each form and how to deal with it, so that you can understand and know it. If the fetus emerges head first in the normal way, and the woman finds it difficult and the labor pains are strong, and you see her strength weakens, then seat her on a chair and order the women to restrain her.وأمرها بالضغط على البطن لكيما يخرج الجنين بسرعة، وأمرهم ان يشدّوا على بطنها ويضغطنه حتى تخرج الفضول والماء والدم كلّه فاذا خرجت المشيمة مع الجنين أو قبله فأحسن موقعه، وامسح ما بين سرّتها والمشيمة وادهن ما فوق سرّتها بدهن الورد
And order her to press on the abdomen so that the fetus comes out quickly, and order them to tighten and press on her abdomen until all the fluids, blood, and placenta come out. If the placenta comes out with the fetus or before it, then place it in a good position, wipe between her navel and the placenta, and anoint what is above her navel with rose oil. Then the midwife should insert a small knife between her fingers and cut the placenta, or cut it with her nail, until its moisture flows out. She should then massage the woman's abdomen until the fetus comes out.وإن خرجت المشيمة معلّقة من سرّة الجنين فأدنها الى الرحم وأمر القابلة ان تمسك بها وتميلها الى أحد
If the placenta comes out hanging from the umbilical cord, bring it close to the womb and order the midwife to hold it and tilt it towards one side. If it does not come down, the woman should be injected with a mixture of castoreum and rose oil, and then she should be ordered to strain and snort with a handkerchief while her mouth and nose are held closed. The fetus will come out at once. If the fetus' hands emerge first, they should be gently pushed back in little by little.وإن خرج الجنين منطويا على نفسه فافتح فخذيه ومدّ ساقيه فإنّه يخرج، وإن خرج على قفاه فينبغى أن تميل رأسه الى أحد جانبيه وتجذبه برفق حتى يخرج، وأمّا إذا خرجت رجله فان القابلة تسحبه برفق حتّى يخرج
If they do not enter, then place the woman on a platform and raise her legs up, then shake the platform on the ground while the woman holds on so as not to fall when you shake it. If the hands do not enter and the fetus dies, cut them off and pull out the rest of the fetus.
Or tie his hands with a cloth and pull them gently, for he will come out. The birth of the fetus on its legs: when the fetus comes out on its legs, you should push them up, then turn the fetus little by little until it is straightened out. Then take one of its legs and stretch it out little by little.
If they come out to the thighs, order her to push and sneeze with the kands, for it will come out. But if it does not come out as described, then return the fetus little by little until it is in its natural shape, for it will then come out smoothly. But if it still refuses after all this...
Take the saliva of the pomegranate and the saliva of the anise, and castoreum oil and dissolved gum, and pound them all together in a mortar until they are well mixed. Then apply it to the woman's vagina and lower abdomen, then seat her in warm water so that it reaches her pubic bone.
If you see that her lower part has softened, then make a douche for her with honey and she can tolerate it. If the douche stays in place for an hour, seat her on the chair, then sneeze and block her mouth and nose and squeeze her lower abdomen gently. The fetus will come out at once. The birth of the fetus on its hands and knees:
If it comes out in this position, work on getting his hands inside a little at a time. Then the woman lies on her back and lets her arms hang down while she is lying on a bed, and she pulls her hands toward her chest, then squeeze her abdomen gently. Then remove the pillows from under her feet so that they are raised, and if the fetus does not come out, take both of her legs and move them vigorously, then squeeze the perineum a little at a time until the fetus comes up to the top, then the midwife inserts her hand and smoothes out the fetus a little at a time.
Tell the woman to push until the fetus comes out, with its exit across one of her hands. Try to bring back his hand; if she can't do it, make the woman stand up and walk, and if she can't walk, let her lie down on her side.
Put her back on the bed and shake her legs vigorously, then use the method I described with the enema. If labor comes upon her, put her on a chair, then treat to bring back the hand and smooth out the fetus in the normal position. Make the woman sneeze and tell her to push until it comes out.
The fetus should come out on his hands and knees with his face towards his mother's back; the midwife should then hold the fetus's hand, turning it gently and smoothing it out gently until he is in the normal position. Then carry out what I described about the ointment and enema.
Then tell her to move a little bit, and if she does that, put her on the chair and tell her to tilt to the right side, then tell her to push and sneeze with the douching syringe; this will cause the fetus to come out upright on his side.
If it comes down into the mouth of the womb in this way with the placenta, then cut the placenta with your nail until it is free from moisture; if it clings to the face and neck of the fetus, cut it from the umbilical cord so that he does not choke and die. Then push the fetus back inside until you have positioned him as he should be.
Let the woman be delivered several times, for it is an easy delivery, like that of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born and survive; but this is rare. As for five, it is a phenomenon outside nature and they do not survive at all.
They are surrounded, even if they are many, by a single placenta, and they are separated by a membrane that acts as a barrier between them, attached to the umbilical cord of each one. They may be delivered just like a single fetus, in a normal and easy delivery, or they may be delivered in a blameworthy manner, as we have described.
If some of them experience difficulty during delivery and exhibit the abnormal shapes we have mentioned, treat them as we have described. Let the midwife be gentle and act with gentleness, delays, and ingeniousness for each shape, using whatever means she can to achieve safety."وإن كان فى المشيمة علة من الأدواء فلتستفرغها ولتكن على علم بما يستدعى ذلك من الحال، فإنّه لايتمّ ولادة التوائم إلّا بسلامة المشيمة وأمّا إن كانت المشيمة منحرفة أو مكسورة فهلكتهم محققة وإن كان بهم علة مستعصية فعليها أن تتأمل فيما ذكرناه من الأحوال وتبتدىء
If there is an ailment in the placenta, she should evacuate it and be aware of what that entails. The delivery of twins is not completed except with the safety of the placenta. If the placenta is tilted or broken, their destruction is certain. If there is a stubborn ailment in them, she should ponder what we have mentioned about the conditions and begin
to estimate the all-knowing, almighty God. This is all something that the midwife should know, because perhaps she will encounter something like this one day and deal with it as she should."وإذا وقع اليها فلتتدبر وتتأمل وتفعل ما يصحّ عندها لسلامتهم فإنّها قد تتأذى بأمور تعجز عنها إن لم تقدر على دفعها ورفع ضررها، فليحفظ
Chapter 76."في الولادة من التوائم وما يتخللها من
On the delivery of twins and what accompanies it."والجنين الميت يخرج كالكلب الميت و
If you treat the dead fetus with what I have mentioned in the section on treatment and it does not come out, and you are forced to use your hand, you should then look. If the woman is strong and has no symptoms that one would fear might cause damage to her, she should lie on a bed on her back.
Her head should be tilted down and her legs raised, with an assistant restraining her on both sides or tied to the bed so that her body does not get pulled when the fetus is extended.
Then the entrance of her uterus should be moistened with moist oils, mixed with saliva of rose geranium, fenugreek and flaxseed, then the midwife should moisten her hand with these oils and saliva, then gently insert it into the uterus, then seek a place to insert the pins into the fetus, in the appropriate places.
If the fetus is in a position to come out head first, insert the pins into his eyes or the back of his head or his mouth or palate or under his chin or below the Adam's apple, or close to the ribs, or under the armpits.وإن كان الجنين على جنبه الأيمن او الأيسر فى الرحم والموضع المناسب للصنّارات تحت العاتق او فى المواضع التى ذكرناها، وإن كان مستلقيًا على ظهره والموضع المناسب له تحت الصدر او ما يقرب من ذلك، وإن كان مائلا الى جانبه الآخر والموضع المناسب له فى الجانب
And if the fetus is on his right or left side in the uterus, and the appropriate place for the pins is under the shoulder or in the places we have mentioned. And if he is lying on his back, the appropriate place is under the chest or close to it. And if he is tilted towards his other side, the appropriate place is on that side. However, if the fetus is coming out with his feet first, the appropriate place for the pins is in the pubic area and the middle ribs. The pin should be held in the right hand, and its curve should be positioned between the fingers of the left hand, then the hand should be gently inserted and the pin inserted into one of the places we have mentioned.
Until you reach something empty, then insert another pin opposite it, or a third one if needed, so that the pull is equal and does not lean to one side. Then extend it evenly, but do not just extend it straight, but move it in every direction.وإن لم ينفتح فم الرحم ولم يخرج الجنين فلتغرس القابلة الصنّارات فى مواضعها من الجنين ثمّ ترفع بيديه الى فوق وتحركهما حتى يتوسّط الرحم وتكون اليد اليسرى للقابلة على فم الرحم ويكون مدّها عاليا الى فوق وترجع يداها متتابعتين وتكرّر ذلك حتّى يخرج الجنين.
To facilitate its exit, as is done with a tooth when it is extracted; in between these things, the string should be loosened. If one side of it becomes stuck, the midwife should grease some fingers and insert them from that side to turn what has become stuck. If part of the fetus emerges, the pins are transferred to other locations.
She should then lift it slightly to bring out the fetus completely. If one part emerges before another and cannot be pushed back due to compression, a cloth should be wrapped around it and pulled until it comes out completely, at which point it should be cut off.
Either at the wrist joint or at the elbow; this should also be done on the other hand and feet. If the head of the fetus is large and experiences difficulty in emerging, or if there is a collection of fluid around its head, one should insert a hooked scalpel between the fingers.
This will split the head, and the water will come out, or she can split it with the instrument called "Mashdakh", the image of which is given with other instruments in the chapter after this one.وإذا أخرجت إحدى الرجلين وأقامت الأخرى فىالحوض ولم يمكنها اخراجها فعليها أن تدخل يدها وتجذب الظنبوب الى أعلى حتّى تخرج،
If one leg comes out while the other is still in the pelvis and cannot be pulled out, she should insert her hand and pull up on the shinbone until it emerges. This should also be done if the fetus has a large head by nature; the skull should then be split or crushed with the Mashdakh as we have said before, and the bones extracted with forceps. If the head is compressed at the level of the collarbone, it should be split to release the fluid that is in the chest.وإذا خرج الجنين على أمه فلتنزع ثدييها عنه وتضعه على فراش ناعم وتباشره بالملقط من تحت الذقن برفق حتّى تضع لسان الغشاء التى تكون تحت الحلق ثم
If the fetus emerges face down, the mother should remove her breasts from under it and place it on a soft mattress; she should then gently use the forceps to pull up from under the chin until the membrane below the neck is removed. At this point, the chest will usually close; if not, then cut as much as you can. If the lower abdomen is swollen or there is an effusion, the perineum should be pressed to release fluid.وإن كان الرأس فى الحوض وأمّه ملقاة على ظهرها فلتجذب إحدى ساقيها الى أعلى حتّى يخرج رأسه، فإن لم يمكن ذلك فلتنقل الى الجانب
If the fetus is on its feet, it is easy to pull it and adjust it to the mouth of the uterus. But if it is pressed against the abdomen or chest, you should pull it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen or chest until what is inside flows out.
If all the members have been extracted and the head has retreated, but is stuck, the midwife should insert her left hand, if the mouth of the uterus is open, she inserts her hand into the neck of the uterus, feels for the head, and pulls it with her fingers towards the mouth of the uterus. Then she inserts a hook or two hooks and pulls it with them.
If the mouth of the uterus has closed due to a hot swelling that has occurred, she should not be harsh on it, but at that time, she should use the application of moist, fatty things, and poultices, and sit in waters that soften and moisten.
But if the fetus is on its side, and it can be adjusted, you should use what we have mentioned in the treatment of a live fetus. But if that is not possible, then cut it into pieces and take it out. You should not leave any part of the placenta inside at all. When you are finished with your treatment, use the treatment we have mentioned for hot tumors that occur in the uterus.
If bleeding occurs, she should be immersed in astringent waters and other treatments should be used. I once saw a woman who became pregnant while still carrying a dead fetus inside her. Then she became pregnant again on top of it.
Then the other fetus also died, and after a long time, she developed a tumor in the same place; it swelled until it opened and began to discharge pus. She was brought to me for treatment, and I treated her for a long time, but the wound would not heal, so I applied some strong drawing ointments to it.
A bone came out of the spot, and then a few days later, another bone came out. I was amazed by this, as the abdomen is not a place for bones; so I concluded that they were the bones of the dead fetus. So, I examined the wound and took out many bones from the head of the fetus.
I continued to do this until I removed many bones, and the woman was in the best of health; she lived like that for a while, and from time to time a little pus would flow from the wound. That is why I have come here to tell you about this unusual case.
Because it contains knowledge and help for what the doctor who treats with his hands attempts.
Chapter 77.
In it are pictures of the instruments needed to remove a fetus.
Figure: A spiral to open the mouth of the uterus:.
This book press, which is similar to books, has two spirals at the ends of the pieces of wood, except that this spiral should be finer than the press and either made from ebony or boxwood, and each piece of wood should be as thick as two fingers.ويكون طول الخشبتين كلّهما سواء ويكون طول كل لولب ذراعا والخشبة التى فى وسطها اللولبان من خشب الزيتون أو من آبنوس وأما الحبل الذى يلف على اللولبين فيكون من أمعاء الصوف.
The two pieces of wood should be the same length, and each spiral should be an arm long; the central piece of wood that the spirals are attached to should be made from olive wood or ebony, and the string that is wound around the spirals should be made from wool intestines. The notches on the sides of the wood should be about the size of a finger, and their length should be about half a span, and in the middle of the wood there are two notches of the same type of wood that have been secured to them; their length should be about half a span or a little more, and their width should be
These are the ones that go into the mouth of the uterus to open it when you turn the spirals. Figure: Another lighter and finer instrument for the same purpose:.صورة أخرى لآلة تفتح فم الرحم وتدخل فيه من غير أن يمسكها أحد.
Made from ebony or boxwood in the shape of hooks, except that it has two notches at the end as you see, each about a span long and two fingers wide. If you want to open the uterus, put this instrument into the uterus and turn it as you would a screw.فإنّه يسهل ويفتحه وإذا أردت إخراجه أعطيته من الخلف حتى تخرجه فإذا أخرجت منه قشرة أو عظما أو جنينا فأميل الخشب إلى الجانبين وأدر اللولبين فإنّك تر
Then seat the woman on a couch, with her legs dangling and spread apart, and then insert these two narrow probes into the uterus while you hold the end of the instrument between her thighs; then open your hand with the instrument as you would do with the forceps, to the extent that you want to dilate the uterus. [Image caption] So that the midwife can do what she wants, a picture of another spiral mentioned by earlier authors:
[Image caption] A picture of the cannon that propels the fetus:
[Image caption] A picture of the instrument that crushes the fetus's head:
[Image caption] It is similar to a pair of scissors, with teeth at the end as you see; it can also be made rectangular like forceps, as shown here, with teeth like a saw blade that cut and grind.
[Image caption] A picture of a cannon:
[Image caption] A picture of a hook:
[Image caption] This hook should be slightly thick so as not to break when pulling the fetus out. A picture of a double-hooked hook:
[Image caption] A picture of two wide scalpels for cutting the fetus:
All of these instruments, the more types you have and the more prepared you are as a manufacturer, the faster you will be able to work and the higher your reputation will be among people for your skill. So do not underestimate any instrument, even if it seems unimportant to have, because one day you will need it.
Chapter LVIII.
On expelling the placenta.
If the placenta is retained after childbirth, the midwife should make the woman sneeze by using a sponge and at the same time press your hand over her mouth and nostrils; if this does not work, then use forceps to remove it.An 11th-century Arabic medical textbook on surgery by Albucasis.
Make a hole in the lid and place some herbs that open up the uterus, such as fennel, savory, camomile, wormwood, verbena, centaury, and calendula, in the container and pour water over them; then heat it over a fire and place one end of a silver tube into the hole in the lid and the other end into the uterus.
She should hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the uterus, then sneeze as we have said, and the placenta will come out quickly. If, after this treatment, it does not come out and remains, it is up to the midwife to dip her left hand in the oil of rose or spittle of a cat.
She should then insert her hand into the vagina and feel around for the placenta, if she touches it she should grip it and gently pull it out little by little. If it is attached deep inside the uterus, she should insert her hand as described above until she finds the placenta, then gently pull it out little by little.
So that the uterus does not fall out due to severe pulling, but it should be moved gently to the sides, right and left, then the amount of pulling should be increased. When it responds at that point and is freed from the adhesion, if the mouth of the uterus is closed, we have described the treatment by sneezing and the treatment with the pot and herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have described, then you must be careful not to use force in pulling it back again, but you should tie what has come out of it to the mouth of the uterus to the woman's thigh, then inject her with the quarten ointment, which will rot it after a few days.
It will soften and come out, except that when it rots, an unpleasant smell will spread from the stomach to the head, which will harm the patient. Therefore, suitable incense should be used.
For that reason, some of the early experimenters used incense made from wild thyme and dried fig, the image of the instrument with which a woman is smoked when menstruation and placenta are retained:
It is made of lead, resembling a funnel, or of copper, with the thin end inserted into the vagina and the wide end over the fire, with incense placed on the embers, held until that incense goes away and replaced with others,.
Chapter LXXIX.
In the treatment of the imperforate anus.
Many boys are born with their anus imperforate, the peritoneum being a thin membrane which the midwife should perforate with her finger; if she cannot do this, she must cut it with a sharp bistoury and take care not to touch the muscle.
Then she should put on it a piece of wool soaked in wine and oil, and then treat it with ointments until it heals; if she is afraid that it might close again, she should insert a tube of lead into the orifice for many days, and remove it whenever the child wants to pass motions.
The imperforate anus may also occur from the cicatrization of a wound, or from inflammation; in which case, the cicatrization should be cut and then treated as we have said before with ointments and lead.
Chapter LXXX.
In the treatment of piles occurring in the lower part [of the body].ان النواصير التى تحدث فى الاسفل ثلاثة أضرب: نواص
Piles occurring in the lower part [of the body] are of three kinds: internal, external and complex.Internal piles are those that occur near the anus on the outside, or in the cavity on one side; they may be single or multiple.فإن كان الناصور من الخارج فأول علاجه أن يقطع رأس الناصور بموسى حادّ فينزع متى أمكن، ثم يعالج بما ذكرناه من العلاج والمر
If the pile is external, its first treatment is to cut off its head with a sharp bistoury, so that it may come away if possible; then it should be treated as we have said before with ointments and poultices. If this has become chronic, an opening will form and white watery or thin purulent matter will flow from it; such piles may be perforated into the rectum or intestine, but they are not always so perforated. Those which are perforated may be recognized by what comes out of them when the patient expels wind and excrement.
From such piles worms may come out; they may also be perforated into the bladder and urethra, or into the hip joint and coccyx; and what distinguishes a pile that is perforated into the rectum from one that is not is as follows:
You should insert your index finger into the anus and a thin probe of copper or iron into the fistula; if there is no bend in the fistula, but if there is a bend, insert a thin lead probe or a horsehair.
Until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger, if you do not feel it at all and nothing of feces, gas, or lice comes out as we said, then know that it is not perforated, so hasten to treat it.
If the fistula is perforated into the bladder or into the urinary tract, its sign is that urine comes out of it and it refuses to heal with remedies; whereas if it is perforated into the hip joint or into the sacrum, its sign is that the probe reaches there.
If there is no bend towards the bone and there is pain in that area, and pus comes out of it constantly, and remedies are ineffective and it does not heal with ointments; all these perforated fistulas have no cure."وإن كان تعريجه الى العظم وكان مؤلما وكان القيح يخرج منه ويستمرّ، وكان المؤلم من الموضع عظيما وكان فيه ألم شديد وكان في أصله رطوبة فإنّه لا يبرأ.
And its treatment is a fruitless endeavor for those ignorant doctors who treat it; whereas the non-perforated and non-chronic fistula can be expected to heal with iron as I shall describe, based on my experience: the patient should lie on his back."ثمّ تأخذ شقّا من أظفار إبهام اليدين وتشقّه بحديدة حادّة ثمّ تسلّم الشقّ الى ممرضتين فلتسحبا بقوّة، وهذا يفتح مسالك الأبخرات فينفذ الحديد الى موضع الناصور.
Then you should take a nail from the thumbs of both hands and split it with a sharp iron tool; then give the nail to two nurses who should pull it hard, which opens the passages of the vapor channels so that the iron can penetrate into the fistula. The patient's legs should be elevated upward and his thighs tilted towards his abdomen; then insert the copper or lead probe if there is a bend in the fistula, until you feel it near the anus."فإن لم تحسّ بشىء فى المقعدة وأحسست به فى ناحية الفخذ او نحو عجز الذنب فقد وقعت على موضع الناصور، ثمّ استخرج المسبار واعطه العليل دواء مرطبا ليشرب منه قدر قبضة.
If you feel that the probe has entered your finger by itself, uncovered and without feeling a membrane or meat between your finger and it, then be sure that it is pierced and do not tire yourself with it, for there will be no healing as we said.
They say that in some people it heals rarely, and from the treatment that may be beneficial is to heat a thin iron on the size of the fistula as mentioned earlier, and insert it into the fistula until it reaches near the rectum, then return it twice or three times.
Until you know that all those excess meats that are coagulated, which resemble a feather tube, have been burned, then treat it with a twisting motion using a wet cloth in butter, so that the meats that have been burned come out, then treat it with healing ointments, and if it heals.
If it does not heal without any other treatment, ever, and if you insert the probe and it does not pass through your finger which is in the rectum, and there is a thick membrane of meat or membrane between them, then split the skin from the beginning of the fistula. You pass the probe through the fistula, and you pass it until you reach the end of the probe, then the probe is released and falls, then cleanse those meats that are coagulated, which resemble a feather tube, and do not leave anything from it.ثمّ تعيده مرّتين او ثلاثا حتّى يوسع الناصور، ثمّ تسدّ ما وراءه بمسبار اخر رفيع وتفتل عليه فتلا شديدا وتبصق عليه شيئا من دخان المرهم الملحم الذى تقدّم ذكره فى بداية هذا الفصل، ثمّ تعيده مرّتين او ثلاثا حتّى تصل به ال
Then treat it with healing ointments until it heals, if you are overcome by blood and prevent you from cutting those meats, the best thing you can do and the fastest benefit is to burn them with fire or with a sharp drug because burning with fire combines two good things: burning those excess meats.وحرق موضع الناصور على أن يكون الكىّ خفيفا حتّى لا يحترق الجلد، وقد قالوا إنّه يبرأ من غير هذا الكىّ ولكنّا لم نجربه.
Cut off the clotted blood, dry up the moisture and then treat it with fomentation in oil-soaked swabs or powdered sulphur in oil until suppuration occurs at the site of injury and the charred flesh comes out through the pus. Then treat the wound with healing ointments that promote the growth of solid flesh.
If the fistula is deep-rooted and has progressed to the rectum, away from the surface of the body, insert your finger into the anus and explore with it.
If you feel something with your probe and there is a membrane of peritoneum or flesh between it and the probe, and it is close to being within reach, then the procedure should be done only out of hope and expectation. This could be done in three ways: either by cauterizing as we have said,
or by slitting it so as to reach its depth in order to be able to insert the fomentation and treat it closely; do not overdo the slit so as not to cut through the muscle surrounding the anus, causing involuntary discharge of faeces, then treat it as we have mentioned. This way, it might heal as we have said.
Or you can penetrate that membrane and pierce it after slitting it close to the anus as we have said, either with a probe or another sharp instrument; then thoroughly clean all the coagulated flesh inside the slit as much as possible.فإنّه إن استطاع نفاذ الفتل من الشق واستمكن به فسوف يلتئم الجرح، وإن لم يستطع نفاذ الفتل من الشقّ فاستعمل الكيّ على مخرج الناصور فإنّه يقضى عليه.
Then close the wound with stitches all around, including the slit and the upper opening, so that it heals. The fistula will remain open inside the anus, which is milder for the patient; the fistula may also be punctured in this manner.
If you insert a probe into the fistula, and it is on one side of the anus towards the surface of the body, then take a probe with a hollow tip like a leather-worker's needle as follows:.وقد أعدّ لنا أبو القاسم الزهراوى رحمه اللّه مسبارين أحدهما مثل إبرة النعل فى الطول وهى التى تسلك الفم الأعلى للناصور.
And insert into it a twisted thread of five threads or so, then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its depth; if it is perforating at the edge of the buttock from inside near.
Then pull out the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the anus and pulling out the end of the thread, then gather both ends together and tie them tightly and leave it for a day or two; And whenever the thread cuts through the flesh, you tighten it tightly until that flesh between the thread ends is cut and falls, then treat the wound until it heals and heals.
If the fistula is not perforating, pierce it however you can except that it is very deep, so you should not do that because of the muscle so as not to cut it, then do what we have mentioned until it heals.
The image of the spinal incisor, which is used to split fistulas, should have a very sharp curve and the other side should not be sharp so as not to cut what is not needed, as you see: .
Chapter Eighty One.
On piercing hemorrhoids that flow blood and cutting them and treating fissures.
There are two types of hemorrhoids, either they are inside the anus like red warts or like grapes and there are small and large ones and blood always flows from them.وأمّا التى تكون فى خارجها فتبدو مثل الكرز الأحمر وكثيرا ما يظهر منها شيء من الدم ولكن لا يكون ذلك دائما وقد تكون صغار وكبار والعلاج واحد لهما وإنّما نذكر تركيب كل واحدة منهما:.
And there is only one that is outside the anus and on its edges, except that this one which is outside the anus is mostly less moist, flowing with yellow water or a little blood always, and it is the color of the body.والحاجة الى علاجها أكثر من التى تكون فى داخل المقعدة لأنّها أكثر إزعاجا وأذى لها وتكون أحوالا شتّى منها ما هو مستدير ومنها ما يشبه الصبّابة ويكون ذلك فى الأكثر مع الطائشين والجهال الذين يضربون أنفسهم فى تلك المواضع ضربا
For the treatment of hemorrhoids that are inside the anus, you should order the patient to defecate and strain until the anus protrudes and the hemorrhoids appear to you, then quickly catch them with forceps or hold them with your fingernail, and cut them at their base. If they do not hold in the forceps because of their moisture and relaxation.
Examine them with a rough cloth or with a piece of dry bread, or pull them with your fingers and then cut them; then sprinkle on them after cutting some sharp powder so that it acts as cauterization, or apply them as mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
Then treat them with the other treatments until they heal. If the anus does not protrude, then inject the patient with a syringe containing a little irritation to wash out what is in the anus and encourage it to come out quickly when the patient strains. The treatment of hemorrhoids that protrude from the anus is simple and straightforward.
This is done by catching them with your fingernail or with a forceps and cutting them, then treating them as we mentioned until they heal. For those who dislike cutting with iron, you should pierce the hemorrhoid in this way: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle.
Then pull the hemorrhoid upwards and pass the needle through its base from the other side, and wrap the two ends of the thread underneath the needle which is laid across, and tighten the hemorrhoid tightly, then tie the thread and remove the needle. Do this to all the hemorrhoids except one, which you should not pierce.
Let the blood that is left flow out, then apply a cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate to the anus and order the patient to stay still, then leave him until they fall off. Once they have fallen off, treat them with ointments and other treatments until they heal.
And as for the treatment of fissures, they often result from dry exudate and congestion. If they become chronic and unresponsive to medication, one should strip them with a scalpel or your fingernail until they become moist and the superficial crust that prevents healing is removed.
Then treat it until it heals as it should. If it does not heal, repeat the stripping more aggressively than before until it bleeds freely and the surface is stripped. Then treat it, for it will heal.
Chapter 82.
On the treatment of ingrown and non-ingrown toenails, dry warts and moles.
A toenail is a round knot on the color of the body, resembling the head of a nail, which occurs throughout the body, especially on the soles of the feet and the fingers, and it causes pain when walking.وأبواقها إنّما تكون من التقرحات فى الموضع الذى تشبهه فإن عولجت أوّل ما يعرض علاجاً صحيحاً ذهبت وإلاّ عادت أبواقاً.
And its horns are due to ulcers in the place where it resembles; if it is treated at first, it will go away and if not, it will return as horns.So it should be cut around the nail with a knife or held with a hook and pulled out from its root, then treat it; if you wish, brand it as mentioned earlier in its chapter. And the dry warts are each one of them is a small, rough, knobby, round protuberance above the surface of the body.وكلّ نتوٍ خشنٍ فهو ثؤلول وكلّ نتوٍ أملس فهو خال، وأمّا النملة فإنها تكون كالحبّة البيضاء فوق سطح البدن وتحته منفذٌ إلى الجلد إن ضغطت عليها خرج منه ماء أبيض.
And any protuberance that is rough is a wart, and any smooth protuberance is a mole. As for the mole, it is like a white grain above the surface of the body, and under it there is an outlet to the skin; if you press on it, a white water comes out of it.It often occurs in boys' hands, and its treatment is to stretch the wart, cut it off or pierce it with a silk thread or a hair until it falls off, or brand it as mentioned earlier with fire or a sharp drug.
Warts, both inverted and non-inverted, can be removed with the instrument that I have mentioned in the treatment of moles. A mole is also a small, thick, hard protuberance on the surface of the body that goes very deep. When it is exposed to cold, one feels a sensation similar to that caused by an ant bite.
It can occur anywhere on the body, but most often it appears on the hands. Its treatment is to take a pipe made from a strong goose or eagle feather and place the pipe over the mole so that the circle of the pipe surrounds the mole from all sides. Then you turn your hand with the pipe so as to split what surrounds the mole.
This is done deep in the flesh, and the mole comes out from its root. If you wish, you can do this with a copper or iron pipe in the same way:
The upper part of the pipe, which is inserted into the skin, should be smooth and twisted so that it can be easily grasped and twisted by the fingers. If you wish, you can also cauterize the mole as mentioned in the section on cautery in this book.
Chapter 83.
On the forms of instruments used for enemas to treat hemorrhoids, diarrhea and colic.
The syringe may be made of silver, porcelain, brass or copper, and it can be made small or large depending on the intended use. Those used for treating young children, whose anuses are narrow or painful, should be very delicate. Figure of a large syringe:
The upper end, where the syringe is attached, should be wide as shown, with a rim where the syringe is attached, and its lower end, which is inserted into the anus, should be smooth and slightly curved. On one side, there are two holes, and on the other side, there is one hole.
The capacity of the hole should be about the thickness of a finger or slightly thicker. The syringe, in which the medications are placed, should be made from the bladder of an animal or from lamb's membrane and shaped like a small spatula with a diameter of about six inches.
And you pierce many holes as it turns and is after what between each hole thickness of a finger, then enter in those holes thread tight of spinning bent from ten stitches or so and collect by the bag like سفره. If you put in it medicine tight at the head of the syringe between the two stones tight then you inject by it, and this image circle bag and piercing: .
And the manner of the injection by it that fill the bladder or sac with medicine is hot to the extent of suffering of the patient and beware that is very hot or cold then the patient lies on his back and cools his legs up.
And placed under it a mattress or towel then anointed tip of the syringe with oil or egg white or saliva of fenugreek or similar and then entered into the rectum gently then takes the attendant bag by his hands together and squeezes it with severity until all what is in the syringe in the intestine.
Then the syringe is removed and cools the patient's legs against the wall, if urged medicine to exit let hold as much as possible and if slept by the night was most beneficial in benefit, if injected for diseases of diarrhea and accelerated exit let prepare enema until he healed.
If in the rectum were hemorrhoids or painful tumors let be syringe very gentle smooth of syringes that are injected by children, and this image of a soft syringe tight on his skin: .
The forty-eighth chapter.فى احتقان الزقّ.
In injection sac.In treatment of wounds.
I have mentioned in the division of treatment is like cauterization and I am ذكر hah here is treating them by hand and drugs to perfection, I say that wounds vary according to the thing which it is cautery and according to the site which occurs on the wound.فجراحات الكعبرين متباينة، فإذا كان من شىء حادّ كالسيف او السكين فعلاجها أن يأخذ جرعة عظيمة من زرنيخ الزاج الذى يدعى آردنك او جرعة من زرنيخ النحاس الأصفر او جرعة من زرنيخ الحديد المستصقل، وذلك بعد ما يسكن ألم الجرح
The objects by which wounds are caused are numerous, such as a blow from a stone or the cut of a sword, a knife, or a thrust with a spear, a staff, an arrow, and many other things.
As for the types of wounds according to their location on the body, they are like a wound that occurs on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, liver, and other similar organs.
And I will describe the treatment of some wounds to make them a standard and a law for all other wounds. And I will start with simple head wounds, especially since compound wounds will be mentioned at the beginning of the third chapter of this book.
I say that whenever a simple head wound occurs and there is no fracture, you should examine it. If it is from a blow of a stone or the like and it only cracked the skin and the wound was large and you were afraid of the occurrence of a hot swelling in the patient, then act quickly and phlebotomize the scalp on the spot. Do not delay this and let him lose as much blood as his strength permits, especially if there is no impediment to phlebotomy, especially if the blood flowing from the wound is slight. Let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded area.
And warn the patient against fullness, drinks, and heavy foods. If there is an impediment to phlebotomy, then he should reduce his food intake and not eat meat or drink alcoholic beverages. If a hot swelling occurs on the wound, apply a compress of cotton soaked in rose oil alone or with the astringent beverage.
If you are not afraid of a hot swelling, then apply the blood of the wound itself if it is still fresh and has not been changed by the air. But if it has been changed by the air, apply some ointments on it.وإذا احتجت إلى الفصد وكان المريض لايتحمله فافصده على ما أمكنك من مواضع الفصد ولا تطلب موضعا واحدا فإنه قد يمنع منه مانع فيتعذر عليك الفصد، وقد يتفق أن يكون الذى يأتى إليك من أهل الحاجة والرزية والذين لايعرفون من أنفسهم ماي
Let the pus flow out and then treat it until it heals; if the wound is large, from a sword cut or similar, and its lips have not come together with bandages, bring them together by stitching as I am describing in the stitching of abdominal wounds.
If the skin has exposed the bone and is attached, and its grip is only in a small ligament, then cut it off and treat the wound with remedies that strengthen the flesh instead of the skin, and order the patient to nourish himself with solid foods such as heads and purees, etc.
If there is gangrene in the skin and it has not adhered to the bone, cut out all the gangrenous tissue and then treat it; if there is an artery or vein bleeding from these wounds and the blood does not stop with remedies, then look for the artery.
If you find it, do not amputate it with a scalpel and ligate it; if necessary, when what we have mentioned does not help, cauterize it until the blood stops; if these wounds are small and flat, it is an easy matter, contenting itself with treating it by sprinkling this powder on it while it is still bleeding.
Before it is changed by the air, the composition of the powder is that myrrh should be taken in one part, and alums in two parts, and slaked lime or unslaked lime in three parts; all are ground and strained, and packed into the wound, and bound tightly so that it adheres firmly.
And it coagulates with blood, and then you tie it above with bandages and leave it without removing it as long as there is no swelling; the remedy will not be removed from it until it heals; lime alone can do this if myrrh and alums are not available.
It can also do this with the help of a poultice in many large wounds if it is applied skillfully and tightly, and the wounds are soft with blood as long as air has not changed them; but if they have been changed by the air, especially in summer,
There is no meaning in the position of this pustule, so treat it with what we have mentioned, by carrying on some mature ointments or carry on a porridge of barley flour made with water and honey until the pus is extended, then treat it with all the treatment until it heals.
However, if a fracture occurs in the bone with the wound and it is slight, pull it with plaster, and I have mentioned the treatment of head fractures in what will be continued in neck surgery, so if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in its treatment and the treatment of a simple head wound.
However, if a nerve or an artery is cut in the neck, and if it is a nerve, there is no way out but to avoid treating it with anything that constricts strongly like alum or vitriol, because they harm the nerve and cause spasm.
And nothing cold should be placed on the wound at all, because the nature of the nerve is cold and its connection to the brain, which is the noblest of organs, and what you treat it with from mild remedies such as washed alum several times moistened with oil or rose oil and tutia.
If you wash it with pure water and other mineral stones on this way, and moist ointments, however, if the wound is large, use stitches or tie its lips with bandages then treat it until it heals.وإن كان الشريان مقطوعا فلا بدّ من رتق الجرح فان لم يمكن جمعه خياطا ورباطا استخرجت منه بقدر ما يكفى لخياطته ثمّ خيطته، وليكن ذلك قبل انفجار الوريد او انقطاع النزف فيه.
However, if the artery is cut, it is necessary to sew the wound, and if it cannot be gathered with stitches and bandages, remove some of it as much as is sufficient for stitching it, then stitch it, and let this be before the vein explodes or bleeding stops in it.And if there is a hollow in the wound and a collection of pus at its base, press it in the lowest place, and if an artery is cut and you detect its blood flowing, ligate or tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to do so.وإن كان النزف من عروق الدم فى الجرح عظيما فابتره او اكوه او ربّطه بشريط، وإن كان النزف يسيرا ف
If the wound has cut through some or all of the vocal cords but the windpipe remains intact, then bring together the lips of the skin with sutures on the windpipe and do not touch the vocal cords but smooth it out and return it to its natural shape, then tightly tie it off and leave it for several days.
Then treat it with ointments that contract and dry out the wound until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, then examine it. If there are fragments of bone in it, remove them all or as many as you can. If you cannot remove them all, leave them and let the wound fester and heal, which will make it easier to extract the remaining bone fragments.
If the wound is fresh, then apply the powder we have described. If it has festered and there is a large amount of pus, then treat it as described in the section on chest and shoulder surgery.
If the wound is a stab from a spear or knife and you see that it is sunken, then know that it is a fatal wound. If there is no sunken area and it is just a fresh wound, do not apply the powder immediately or tie it tightly, lest the blood be trapped inside.
This will cause the blood to return to the heart and kill the patient. Instead, apply an attractive ointment, changing it twice a day. If you do not have ointment, place a piece of old cotton in the wound to absorb any fluids that come out, and make sure the patient sleeps on his wound.
Let the fluids that have accumulated inside flow out, and if the wound is more than three days old but the patient does not experience muscle spasms, irregular heartbeat, or shortness of breath, and his overall condition is good, then know that the wound is healthy and treat it with binding and other methods until it heals.
If it does not heal and the fever persists, then know that it has become a fistula and treat it as such. Have the patient lie on his wound so that fluids can flow out, and if it is in the chest or back, treat it with sutures as mentioned earlier.
If it is large, or small, if it has affected the bone and broken off pieces of it, then examine the wound and immediately remove those pieces. If they are detached, leave them for now.
Let the wound fester, for that will make it easier to remove them. As for other wounds that occur in other parts of the body, their treatment follows the same rules as those already mentioned.
Chapter 85.
On abdominal surgery and the protrusion of the intestines and its suturing.
A perforation of the abdomen may be large, small, or intermediate in size. The large one may cause the protrusion of a single intestine or several intestines, and their re-insertion and suturing will be more difficult and challenging.
Even a small perforation can be challenging from another perspective, as it is necessary to return the intestine to its proper place immediately; otherwise, it will swell and thicken, making its insertion difficult. Therefore, an intermediate-sized perforation is considered the best type of abdominal wound because it does not present the same challenges as the other two types.
Know that there are four types of sutures for the abdomen: two general sutures that can be used for the abdomen and other wounds, and two specialized sutures specifically for abdominal wounds.
I will describe them to you one by one, explaining and elaborating: If the wound is small and a portion of the intestine protrudes and its return is difficult, this could be due to two reasons: either because of the small size of the perforation as we have already mentioned, or because the intestine has swelled due to the cold air.
If this is the case, you should warm it by dipping a sponge or a wet cloth in lukewarm water, or water in which herbs such as savoury, sage, and calendula have been boiled, and use it to gently massage the protruding intestine until the swelling subsides.ثمّ تدخله بعد ذلك الى موضعه وتخرجه من الخرق بقدر ما يتسع الخرق.
And this can be done by the drink which causes constriction, and it is better than water alone in dissolving the inflammation; so if you see that the inflammation has been dissolved, moisten the intestines with water in which there has been cooked blackthorn or sloe, for thus it will enter more easily.
If it is difficult to return after this treatment, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used for incising hemorrhoids; and the first treatment, when completed, is better than making an incision. The incision is made only when it is necessary and all other means have failed. This is the image of the instrument:.
One side of it should be curved and limited, while the other side is not limited, and the thin end should not be as thin as a scalpel but slightly flat. It should resemble a small spear, as you can see. If the wound is enlarged and the intestines have entered, they should be returned to their natural shape.
Its specific location, if you can manage it, is better. However, if the incision is wide and it is at the bottom of the abdomen, the patient should lie on his back with his legs higher than his head; if it is at the top of the abdomen, he should lie with his head and chest higher than his lower body.
Also, if the incision is on one side of the abdomen, always make the side with the surgery higher than the other side; this should also be done in serious surgeries and intermediate surgeries.
However, in minor surgeries, place it according to what is convenient for you. Then bring a gentle servant between your hands who will hold the incision with his hands and gather his lips; then he reveals it little by little for the person in charge of stitching.
This is the description of general single stitching; take a needle or several needles according to the width of the incision, then leave at the edge of the incision a thickness equal to that of the thumb, and pierce one needle in each side of the skin without threading it. I pass the needle from within, through the peritoneal margins under the skin, and draw it out at that side; I then bring together the two margins of the skin and the two margins of the peritoneum, so that there are four lips, after which I tie a folded thread around the needle several times on both sides, until the lips of the wound are firmly closed.
Then, I leave a space of about the thickness of a finger, and pierce with another needle which I interweave with the thread in the same way as I did with the first needle; thus, I continue to do this with as many needles as are required for completing the suturing of the entire wound, letting the needles be intermediate in thickness between being too thick or too thin.
For very thin needles quickly cut through the flesh, and very thick ones are difficult to pierce into the skin; therefore, they should be intermediate in thickness, not too thin or too thick. The needle should not pierce the edge of the skin too close to it.
So that the flesh is not quickly cut through and the wound opens before it heals, but also so that the stitches are not too loose, preventing the wound from healing. Then, cut off the ends of the needles so as not to hurt the patient when he sleeps, and make guards of linen fabric on each side to hold the ends of the needles in place.
Leave them until you know that the wound has healed; this type of stitching with needles is thus more appropriate for minor wounds, as it may be sufficient to use only one or two needles or some similar number.وأمّا الجروح العظام التى تحتاج الى كثير من الإبر فينبغى أن يخيط بها مع حاشية الجرح بعضه الى بعض ويكون ذلك بغير إبر بل بمخاط فقط وذلك ان يدخل الخيط فى الإبرة ويمرّ به من فوق الجرح من داخل ومن تحت من خارج ثمّ يخرج الخيط من تحت الجلد و
However, for large wounds that require many needles, the edges of the wound should be stitched together, one edge to another, without using needles; this is done by passing a thread through the needle, passing it over the wound from within and under from the outside, then the thread is passed under the skin and back out again.
Let the thread be doubled and passed through the top of the wound, so that the stitches may be like those of the pouch with which goods are bound up, and let there be between every stitch a space as great as the thickness of the little finger; this stitch is known to everyone.
With this stitch, a wound was treated in the belly of a man who had been stabbed with a knife; the hole of the wound was larger than an inch and a half, and two inches of the middle intestines protruded out, and the hole was in the middle of the abdomen.
He was treated after his intestines had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours; the wound healed in about fifteen days, and he was treated until it was cured, and he lived many years afterwards, conducting all his affairs, and the physicians judged that he would not recover at all.
And it is a marvel that I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where nothing of medicines was to be found; so I put on the wound old lint twice a day, and attended to washing it with honey-water until it healed.
As for one of the two kinds of special stitches, I will mention it according to Galen's words: You should begin sewing from the skin, and insert the needle from outside to inside; when you have passed the needle through the skin and into the muscle going straight along the length of the abdomen.
Leaving the edge of the peritoneum on the side into which you have inserted the needle, and passing the needle in the other edge of the peritoneum from inside to outside in the other edge of the abdominal wall; if you have passed it, pass it again in this same edge itself, from the abdominal wall from outside to inside.
And leave the edge of the peritoneum on this side, and pass the needle in its other edge from inside to outside, and pass with your passing it in the peritoneum to the edge of the abdominal wall that is in his neighborhood, until you have passed through all of them,.
Then begin also from this side and draw it with the edge which is of the peritoneum on the other side, and bring out the needle from the skin which is near it; then return it into that skin, and draw the edge of the peritoneum which is on the other side with this edge of the fascia.
And bring it out of the skin on his side, and do likewise once more; and do this repeatedly until you have sewn up the entire wound in this manner. The whole process of this sewing is like the sewing of fur by furriers.
By sewing the peritoneum once from one side with the edge of the skin, and leaving it once from the other side until you have finished; and as for the second type of special sewing which Galen also mentions, this is what he says verbatim:
That you sew it in the manner that some healers do, by joining each part to its similar natural counterpart, joining the edge of the peritoneum to the other edge and the edge of the fascia to the other edge; this will be as I describe to you.
You should insert the needle into the edge of the fascia nearest to you from the outside and pass it through to the inside therein alone, and leave both edges of the peritoneum; then bring the needle back, and pass it from the outside to the inside in both edges of the peritoneum, then bring it back again.
And pass it from the inside to the outside in the other edge of the fascia on the opposite side; this type of sewing is better than common sewing, which is the sewing already mentioned. This is what Galen says verbatim: Some have said that the abdomen can be sewn with two needles. That you insert a single thread into both of them, and begin by inserting the needle from your side and passing it to the other side, and inserting the other needle from the opposite side and passing it to your side, just as shoemakers sew.
Know that a hole in the middle of the abdomen is more difficult to sew up than other parts of the abdomen, but the treatment of the wound is the same as for other wounds; that is, if you find the wound still soft with blood before it is dried out by the air, and you return the intestines and stitch it up firmly, then apply a poultice.
If the wound has been dried out by the air, then apply some ointments that are available to you until it forms pus and the stitches drop out, and the peritoneum and membranes heal; then treat it as you would any other wound until it heals.
If you do not have any medicines available, then apply old cotton soaked in vinegar and change it twice a day as I have told you, until it heals; you will usually not need any other treatment for simple wounds. If you fear that the wound may involve the vital organs in pain,
you should soak soft wool in warm oil or rose oil and place it around the area between the ribs and armpit; if he feels pain or discomfort in his intestines, this often occurs, so treat him with a mild astringent drink.
Especially if the putrefaction has reached the intestines and become a through-and-through wound; know that whatever is thick in the intestines is easier to heal, and whatever is thin is more difficult.فإن كان الجرح فى الموضع الذى يلى الصفاق فقد وقع فى الأمعاء الغليظة وهذا أسهل فى البرء من غيره، وان كان فى الموضع الذى يقابل العمق فهو فى الأمعاء الرقيقة، وان كان فى الموضع الذى بينهما فهو فى المعي الوسيط.
If the wound is on the side next to the peritoneum, then it is in the large intestine, which is easier to heal; if it is on the opposite side, then it is in the small intestine; and if it is in between, then it is in the middle intestine.As for the intestine known as the duodenum, it does not heal from any wound at all, due to its many veins and their thickness, and its thinness and closeness to the nature of the nerve. But if what protrudes from the wound is serosa, then return it just like you would return the intestines, the same.
If it has been for a period and has turned green or black, you should tie it with a thread above the place where it has turned black so that bleeding does not occur, because in the fascia there are blood vessels and arteries; then cut what is below that ligature.
You should make the two ends of the thread hang below the incision outside of it, so that it is easy for you to pull and remove it when the fascia falls and the wound suppurates. I mentioned the wound that occurs in the intestine. However, if a perforation occurs in the intestine and it is small
It may heal in some people because I have seen a man who was stabbed in the abdomen, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach. The wound became chronic and turned into a fistula from which feces and flatus were discharged. I treated it although I did not expect it to heal. I continued to treat him gently until the wound healed and the tissue joined together. When I saw that the wound had healed, I was afraid that something bad might happen to the patient inside his abdomen, but nothing bad happened to him at all, and he remained in good health. He is healthy, eating, drinking, having sexual intercourse, taking baths and exercising in his service. Some experienced people say that whenever a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, it should be stitched in this way.
This is done by taking large ants with big heads, then gathering the lips of the wound, and placing an ant with its mouth open on the lips of the wound. When the ant grips and tightens its mouth, it cuts off the head, which adheres without coming loose. Then another ant is placed next to the first one.
You should continue to do that with several ants according to the size of the wound, then you should return it and stitch the wound. Those heads will remain adherent in the intestine until it granulates and heals, and no harm will come to the patient at all. It is also possible to stitch the intestine with fine thread.وإن كان الجراح كبيرا، فإنّى أرى أن يخاط بالحرير فإنّه خفيف على الموضع، وينبغى أن يوضع الحرير فى وسط الثرب لا عند القرحة بل عند الثرب السليم ويخيط ما حول القرحة من الجرح.
The method of threading the intestines of an animal that adheres to it after being passed through a needle is as follows: take the end of this thread from the intestine, then tie it with a thin, twisted flax thread, and then pass this thread through the needle. And with it, the intestines are stitched and then returned to the abdomen. This type of stitching with thread and intestines is done out of hope and desire.
However, if the hole is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy or cure for it at all..
Chapter 68.
On the treatment of colic and fistula.
Know that any wound or tumor, if it becomes chronic and persistent and turns into a ulcer that does not heal and from which pus always flows without stopping, is called in general terms a fistula, and we call it colic. The fistula.
It is in reality a dense, solid, white mass without pain, with a cavity like the cavity of a bird's feather..
For this reason, some people call it a feather, and sometimes it is moist, always flowing pus, and sometimes the moisture stops, and sometimes it flows more or less, and sometimes it is thick and sometimes thin..
I have already mentioned in the division, when mentioning wounds, that any ulcer that does not heal and does not grow flesh, is due to one of nine reasons: one of them is due to a lack of blood in the body, or its poor quality, or because there is hard meat inside it and on its lips, which prevents the growth of good meat.. Or because the ulcer is full of wounds and dirt, or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the matter that flows from it is of poor quality, or because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or due to corruption that has occurred in the town, or due to a specific cause in the town.
Or because the ulcer is full of wounds and dirt, or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the matter that flows from it is of poor quality, or because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or due to corruption that has occurred in the town, or due to a specific cause in the town. As seen in the city of Zaragoza, where diseases mature slowly and tumors heal slowly by nature, either because there is one bone or several bones; I have explained all these causes and their signs and treatments with medicines in the division.
I should now inform you of the treatment of fistulas and colds that occur through manual work. Know that fistulas may occur in all parts of the body, some of which end in large vessels or nerves, or in a tendon.
Or to the peritoneum, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to a rib of the ribs, or to a vertebra of the vertebrae, or to a joint of the complex joints such as the hand and foot, etc., and some of them lead close to a major organ.
Those of these fistulas that are on this description are among the most difficult diseases to cure and accept treatment, and working with them is tedious and ignorant. If there is a fistula that has not reached the places I have mentioned, and you hope and expect to be able to treat it,
And you want to find out, then take a probe made of copper or iron. If the fistula passes straight through, examine it with this probe. If there is a bend in the fistula, examine it with a probe made of thin lead because lead softens its body.
It will twist when you insert it and turn towards the bend. If the fistula has many mouths that you cannot detect with the probe, inject one of its mouths with fluid. The moisture you inject will flow towards the other mouths.ثمّ استعمل فى علاجه ما قدّمناه من الأدوية والعلاجات التى ذكرناها له قبل هذا الموضع، فإن برئ وإلّا فأعاده، وإن كان الناصور ضيّقا بحيث لا يدخل فيه المسبار ولا يؤثر فيه الدواء.
Then use the treatments and medicines we mentioned before this place for treatment, if it heals, otherwise repeat it. If the fistula is narrow so that neither the probe enters it nor the medicine affects it, then pursue the investigation in any way you can to find out if there is a bone or nerve, or whether the bottom of the fistula is far or near, or whether it is a single fistula with many mouths and know all this within the limits of your ability by investigating your patient's pain when you press your hand on the area.
And so on with the signs and causes of tumors; when you have determined all this as being true, then proceed to treatment with confidence. It is that you should look, if it is.
If the fistula is superficial, or in a healthy spot, remote from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places which I have mentioned to you, then cut open the fistula as I described earlier and remove any suppuration, rotten flesh, or excess growths within it.
And if there is any growth, wart, etc., in its mouth, treat it until it heals. If the fistula is deep and straight, you should cut it deeply as far as possible, then cleanse it of all rotten flesh.
Then use the twisted threads soaked in sharp medicines and push them into the bottom of the fistula which you can reach with the iron, do this several times until that sharp medicine eats away all that remains at the bottom of the fistula.
Then force it with ointments that promote the growth of healthy flesh, until it heals. If it does not heal in this way, cut it open as I have described earlier, unless something prevents you from doing so.
If the bone is exposed and you see some rotten flesh or blackness, remove it until its rottenness is gone, then treat it with what will promote its healing, until it heals. If it does not heal and the pus continues as before,
know that you have not removed all the rottenness, then expose it again and remove as much of it as you can, then force it again; if it does not heal, know that the rottenness is in a deep cavity, then expose it again.
and remove as much of it as you can; if the rotten bone is a small one and you can pull it, then do so with the fine pincers that are suitable for this.وإن كان عظاما كبيرا فاعلقه بحبل رفيع وحرّكه حتّى يخرج، فإن لم يمكنك ذلك فشقّ على جانبيه وفتته واكشفه، ثمّ عالجه كما تقدّم.
If many bones are involved, then carefully remove all their fragments and leave none of them untouched. If you encounter any ligaments in your way which do not pose a risk when cut, then cut those ligaments and the surrounding flesh to free the bones.
If you are unable to remove the bones at once, cover the wound with something that will putrefy it, and leave it for several days until the flesh and ligaments surrounding the bones have rotted away. Keep the wound open so that it does not heal over.
Instead, place a poultice of powdered sulfur mixed with oil, or Egyptian ointment, or one of the green ointments. When these ligaments rot and the bones are loosened, it will be easy to remove them.
If it is a single large bone, such as the tibia or femur, and only the surface is affected, then remove it aggressively to get rid of the blackness and decay, then close the wound. If, however, a large portion is affected and the decay has reached the marrow of the bone, then it must be cut open.
Cut it all the way to where the decay ends, then treat it until it heals. I will tell you about a case of gangrene in a young man's leg as an example and guide for your treatment. This man was young.
He was about thirty years old when he developed pain in his leg, caused by an internal disturbance that spread to his leg and caused a large swelling. Since it was not treated properly and on time, the swelling grew larger.
A lot of pus and body fluids flowed out, and he was misdiagnosed and mistreated for almost two years by several physicians who were not experts in surgery.
Until he came to me and I examined his leg, the fluids were flowing profusely from those openings, and the man had become thin and yellowish in complexion. So, I inserted a probe into one of the openings, and it reached all the way to the bone. Then, I probed all the other openings.
I found them opening into each other from all sides of the leg. So, I cut through one of those openings until I exposed part of the bone, and I found it rotten, eaten away, blackened, and putrefied, with holes going right through to the brain. So, I spread out what was revealed to me.
I was able to access the rotten bone, and I thought that there was nothing in the bone but that rottenness which I cut out and spread open, and that I had removed it completely. Then, I treated the wound with healing medications for a longer period, but it did not heal. So, I exposed the bone again, above the previous exposure.
I found that the rottenness was connected to the bone, so I spread open what was revealed to me of that rottenness as well. Then, I tried to heal it, but it did not heal or come together. So, I exposed it again, and I kept cutting the bone, piece by piece, trying to heal it, but it did not heal until I had cut about a span from the bone.
I removed it with its brain, and then I treated it with medications, and it healed quickly and recovered. It was necessary to repeat this procedure because of the patient's weakness and inability to endure, and out of fear that he might die, for whenever there was excessive vomiting, he would experience a bad faintness. But he fully recovered.
In the place where the bone had been, hard flesh grew and his condition improved in his body, and his strength returned, and he was able to go about his business without any further harm coming to him. If a bone in the body has broken and become displaced,
It is advisable to open it in this way: take a ligature and tie it to the end of the displaced bone, and have someone pull it upward while you place another ligature made of thicker wool than the first one.
Then, tie it to the flesh under the bone and pull the end of the ligature so that the flesh is attracted downward as you spread open the flesh at the place where you want to open it, so that the saw does not harm the flesh. Place a piece of wood or a board under the bone to support it firmly from below.
Because if you do that, the saw will not stop cutting the rotten bone, and it should be above the site of the rot a little so that there is no rot in the cavity of the bone, so that it does not appear on its surface to the sense, so that you have to cut it again.
If the bone is rotten and not protruding, but connected to each other, and the rot is in the middle or in some of it, then remove the meat from all its sides, then put the wood from below, then cut it from the first side where the rot is.
When you have finished cutting it, cut it from the other side, and let the cut be a little distance from the rot, as we said. If the rot is in a joint, cut the rotten joint itself and cut the bone where it connects on the other side.
If the rot is in the connection of two joints, there is no remedy but amputation. If the rot is in the hand or foot, the treatment is very difficult. However, you should peel away the rot, however it appears to you, and strip it off and clean it in any way you can.
By any trick that works for you when you are not obstructed by a vein or nerve, and know that the cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, their height, thickness, thinness, size, hardness, porosity, etc. Therefore, you should prepare a tool for each type of work that matches that work.
Know that the work itself may guide you to the type of tool you need if you have long experience and knowledge in the arts of this craft, because those who are skilled in the craft and have seen many types of diseases. may deduce for himself what instruments to use for each disease, and I have illustrated for you at the end of this chapter a variety of tools.
Make them examples to be followed and measured by others, God willing. Image of a saw:
Image of another saw:
Image of a small saw:
Image of a large saw:
This bone saw has a head in the shape of a nail, and its teeth are shaped like those of the escalpelle. It is used to scrape the heads of joints that have become rotten, or large and wide bones. Image of another small bone saw:
Image of a broad bone saw:
The upper bow and blade of this bone saw are made of iron, and its handle is made of a sturdy conical wood. Image of a bone saw with a hollowed-out interior:
Image of another delicate bone saw:
Image of another bone saw with a hooked tip:
Image of a small bone saw that resembles a probe:
Image of another small section:
This bone saw has a tip like an awl and can be used in many different areas of bone surgery. Image of a bone saw suitable for drilling into bones:
Its tip is triangular and sharp, made of Indian iron. All the bone saws, chisels, and drills mentioned should be made of this material. Image of a bone saw:
Chapter LXXVIII.
On amputation and bone sawing.
When limbs become gangrenous, either from an external cause or an internal one, and when treatment with remedies fails to produce any improvement and you see the gangrene progressing in the limb without anything able to stop it,
You should then amputate the limb at the point where the gangrene has spread, in order to save the patient from death or from a great ill greater than the loss of the limb. The sign that this is the case is that the limb turns black, so much so that you would think it had been burnt by fire.
Or if the corruption comes after blackness until that mold spreads to the next member and takes in the whole body, then hasten to cut it off; likewise, if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of some insects such as the sea scorpion, snake, centipede, or similar.
If the corruption or sting is in the tip of the finger, then cut off the finger and do not delay the corruption to spread to the hand; likewise, if it has taken hold in the hand, cut it off at the base of the wrist and do not delay the corruption from spreading until it takes hold in both bones of the forearm.
Likewise, if it has taken hold in the arm, cut off the arm at the elbow joint itself; if the corruption has passed and you see it spreading towards the shoulder, do not cut off the shoulder at all, for that would result in the death of the patient. Instead, employ other treatments to the best of your ability.
Likewise, you should do with the leg if corruption takes hold in the toe, cut off the toe at one of the phalanges; if it takes hold in the instep, cut off the entire leg; if it ascends to the knee, cut off the leg at the knee joint.
If the corruption has reached above the knee, there is no remedy but to leave it and surrender the patient to death. As for the method of cutting off a limb or spreading it, you should tie a band at the bottom of the place you want to cut off and another band above the place.
One attendant should pull the lower band downward, and another the upper band upward, and you yourself should strip the flesh between the bands with a broad knife until all the flesh is exposed, then cut or spread it; you should also place pieces of linen on all sides.وينبغى أن يكون المبضع صحيحا غير مكسور وأن تكون الخيوط التى توقف بها العروق سليمة وغير غليظة ولا رقيقة، بل متوسطة معتدلة.
The knife should be sound and not broken, and the threads with which you ligate the vessels should be sound and not thick or thin, but medium-sized and moderate. So that the saw does not affect the correct place and cause excessive pain and hot swelling for the patient; if bleeding occurs during your work, quickly stop the place or apply some hemostatic agent, then return to your treatment until you are finished.وإن كان الموضع الذى تريد قطع او نشره قريبا من العظام فاكشفه عن الهزال واقطعه بمخيط عريض، وإن كان بعيدا عنه فأمسك به بيديك أو بشيء آخر وحرّكه وادفعه الى جهة دون أخرى حتّى
Then bind the wounded member with a bandage suitable for it, and treat it until it heals. I will give you an example of a man who had this exact symptom in his leg, because a blackness appeared in his leg with a burning sensation like fire.
And this corruption first occurred in his toe, so the man cut it off at the joint when he saw the corruption spreading through the member and felt intense pain and burning.
When a long time had passed, he developed the same corruption in his index finger, so he came to me and I applied remedies for him after cleaning his body, but the corruption did not stop and began spreading to the other fingers.
The corruption spread to his hand, so he begged me to cut off his hand, but I refused because I hoped the corruption would stop and also because I was afraid that cutting off his hand would kill him, since he was already weak. When he despaired of me, he left and went back home.
I heard that he cut off his entire hand and healed, and I only narrated this story to be a help in similar cases of this disease and as an example to follow.
Chapter 88
On treating concealed wounds and how to inject remedies into them.
If a tumor occurs in one of the fleshy members and its duration is prolonged until it becomes suppurated and all the pus is discharged, leaving the site empty as if it were a container.
The skin on it is like a cloth that has become thin and the corruption has not affected the bone, nerve or ligament; this is why it deserves to be called a hidden wound rather than an abscess, unless its duration is prolonged so that the corruption affects one of these members.ويشبه المخبأ كلّه الناصور إلّا أنّ المخابئ لا تكون إلّا فى اللحم الرقيق دون العظام والجلد السميك، وأمّا الناصور فقد يكون فى كلّ عضو من الأعضاء لحما كان أو عظما أو جلدا.
Then it is called a sinus or a polyp, and its treatment is to cut away all that skin as it turns inward, especially if it has thinned out and become like a rag, and you are sure that it will not adhere to the site because of its decay.
If you hope that the skin will adhere and the decay has not yet reached that point, and there is a thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with a syringe. Examine the sinus; if it is large and the pus extending from it has a foul odor, then inject the Egyptian medication into it.
This is a mixture of vinegar, oil, honey, and alum in equal parts, combined in a container and cooked over fire until the medication thickens to the consistency of honey. Then take what you need from it, dilute it with water and honey, and inject it into the sinus, then tie off its opening and leave the medication inside for two hours.
Then extract it by pressing, doing this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the foul odor disappears. If you do not have the other medication, you can use ashes instead: take ashes from oak or grapevine wood, pour water on them, and inject the resulting mixture into the sinus.
Then strain and inject it, until you are sure the sinus has been rinsed clean. If the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medication or ash water, then inject a mixture of water and honey with some ground alum in it.
Or you can inject a mixture of honey and wine, because honey cleanses and rinses, while wine helps adhere the sinus and promote healing, especially if the wine has a drying and astringent effect. Once you have done this several times and are sure that the decay is gone, then inject a medication that promotes flesh growth in the sinus.
For example, you can use castor oil-based ointment, mixed with rose oil and astringent wine, or inject some other medications or ointments whose properties we have described in the article on ointments. If the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot accommodate the needle, then take a piece of cotton wool soaked in the medication and pack it into the sinus.
Expand it slightly with iron or place in it a cotton swab saturated with Egyptian ointment or syraconium ointment, until it widens. Likewise, if the mouth is also wide, bring your lips together with stitches and leave enough space for the syringe to enter without excess.
Likewise, if the mouth from which the pus is flowing is raised above, make an incision in its lowest point so that the pus can flow downward. Because when pus collects in a hollow place, it prevents the flesh from growing there.
If you cannot make an incision in the lowest part as you want, then tilt the organ so that the pus flows easily according to what is available to you and so that no pus remains inside at all.
As for the adhesive ointments that are applied to the abscess from the outside, and how they should be applied, take one of the adhesive ointments similar to what you want, and spread it on a linen cloth. Let the cloth be large enough to cover the entire abscess. Then cut an opening with scissors opposite the mouth of the abscess, making it slightly wider than the mouth of the abscess. Then spread one of the soft ointments on another cloth to the size of the opening and place it over the first cloth, keeping it away from the mouth of the abscess so that the pus can flow out easily. Do not remove the large cloth until after
for several days. But the one on the mouth of the abscess is the one you remove at all times so that the accumulated pus can flow out, and to see how much pus flows out, whether it is thick or thin, ripe or unripe,.
and also examine the location of the abscess itself to see if its owner feels pain there or not, and whether there is swelling or not. If your treatment continues like this and you see that the material coming out of the mouth of the abscess is small,.
Know that the sutured wound has healed or is about to heal; then open it on the following day, or on the third day. And when you open the wound, replace the old suture with a new one and renew the ointment. If after a long period of time, thin pus comes out of the sutured wound, do not despair of its healing.
Its healing is soon, for some people's flesh grows slowly in their wounds, and others are the opposite. If after many days, unripe pus comes out of the sutured wound, know that the suture has not healed. If the healing of the suture is delayed
and its condition persists, increase the drying remedies, and let them be remedies that are moist in consistency and dry in power, such as the palm oil ointment, if it has been increased with an excess of al-qalqatar. One of the most effective treatments is to use the palm oil ointment
and dissolve it in rose oil, and spray it with old moderate drink in its consistency, then knead it with that and use it. And you can do the same action if the palm oil ointment is not available to you, honey if you cook it until it becomes thick and use it, or you take from myrrh, and al-kander, and crush all of them and sprinkle them on honey while it is on the fire. Then you paint it on a cloth and tighten it on the suture, or you paint it with honey that you have cooked until it becomes thick, and sprinkle the drugs on it, and put it on the wound and tighten it.
And it can also be used in this way: the long rhubarb, the root of iris, and caraway seeds, either individually or all together, are crushed, sifted, and sprinkled on the honey that you have described and used. If the condition persists for a long time and is not healed by this treatment, know that there is corruption in its depths.
It may have affected the bones or other hard nerves or ligaments, so treat it as you would a fistula, as mentioned earlier.
Chapter 89.
Treatments for hidradenitis suppurativa, ingrown toenail, removal of an extra digit, and splitting webbed fingers.
Hidradenitis suppurativa is a condition where excessive flesh growth occurs under the fingernail or toenail, and it can also occur in other fingers. If left untreated for an extended period, it causes a hot swelling.
Or the nail has rotted to the point of reaching the nail bed, and sometimes it rots completely, and sometimes the rot extends to the bone, causing a foul odor, and the tip of the finger becomes swollen and its color turns purplish, and if you treat it as mentioned in the previous section, but your treatment is not effective.
You should cut away all the excess growth with iron, and then cauterize the wound afterward, as cauterization is very effective in this case. However, if the bone is healthy and the nail is also intact,
and the angle of the nail is pressing the flesh inward and causing discomfort, you should place a thin wedge under the angle of the nail that is irritating the flesh and gently lift it up, then cut away the flesh carefully.وإن كان الظفر قد انكسر وانهزم الى داخل وجعل ينخس اللحم ويؤذيه فينبغى أن تسكن حرّته بدهن الأفتيمون المالح ثم ترفع زاوية الظفر الى فوق وتقطع ذلك اللحم الذى ينخسه.
If the nail has broken and bent inward, causing discomfort to the flesh, you should apply a salved of antimony to alleviate the irritation, then lift the angle of the nail and cut away the affected flesh gently. You should then apply caustic medications to the remaining flesh until it is completely gone, after which you can treat the area with ointments to promote healing. However, if the rot has affected the bone, you should cut away and remove that bone, as a rotten bone will never heal.وإن كان الظفر قد انقلع من أصله وجعل ينزف دما فينبغى أن تكبت النزف وتشدّ الظفر الى فوق بخرقة أو بشريط حتى يتأقلم، وينبغى أن تعالج الموضع بالأدوية القابضة والمجففة.
If the nail has been dislodged from its base and is bleeding, you should stem the bleeding and tie the nail tightly with a cloth or bandage to restrict movement, then treat the area with astringent and drying medications. If you notice腐蝕 and decay spreading in the finger, cut it at the first joint, as mentioned earlier, and then treat it until it heals. If the nail sustains a blow or injury causing severe pain, you should first bleed the patient.ثمّ تعالج الظفر بما ذكرناه من الأدوية المقبضة والمخثرة، فإنّه يخفف الألم ويوقف النزف، وينبغى أن تضع على الموضع أدوية قابضة حتى تقبض المو
Then cut the nail with a sharp knife, making an oblique incision from above to below. Be careful not to cut into the flesh underneath the nail, as this will cause severe pain and may lead to excess tissue growth in that area. Treat the site with a pain-relieving remedy.
The extra finger that grows on some people's hands may be entirely fleshy, or it may contain bones and a nail, and sometimes it grows from the base of one of the finger joints.
If it grows from one of the finger joints, then cutting it is easy; simply use a wide knife to cut it at its base. However, if it grows from a joint and contains bones, then you must use a saw to cut through the bones.
Treating a finger that grows from the base of a joint is more difficult; one should avoid cutting it off. However, if the extra finger grows from one of the joints and contains bones, then one should first cut the flesh in a circular motion until reaching the bone, and then use an appropriate saw to cut through the bone.
Then treat it until it heals. As for the webbing that sometimes occurs between fingers, this is quite common and usually happens to people who are born with it, or as a result of an injury such as a cut or burn. One should cut through this webbing.
until the fingers return to their natural state, and then place a cotton pad soaked in rose oil between them so that they do not heal quickly and adhere to each other, or you may place a thin lead plate between them until the site heals as it should.
Similarly, if webbing occurs between some fingers on the palm, then cut that webbing according to what appears appropriate and restored the shape of the member.
Chapter 90.
On cutting varicose veins.
Varicose veins are twisted, thick vessels filled with dark humor that occur in most parts of the body and are most common in the legs, especially in the legs of fitters, farmers, and porters. First, the body should be shaken off from black bile several times, strongly.
Then, the patient should be bled with a basilic vein; as for its treatment with iron, there are two ways: one is to cut it and drain out the black blood; the other is to open the vein and drain out all of it. As for cutting it, the leg is first bathed in warm water.
until the thick, murky blood dissolves, then the patient's leg is tightened with a bandage above his thigh to below his knee, and then the vein is cut in one place or two or three places with a wide cut.
Then, squeeze out the black blood from the bottom of the leg to the top and from the top to the bottom until you get out of the blood as much as you think is enough or what the patient's strength can bear; then tie it up and order him to avoid foods that generate black bile, and repeat emetic and bleeding.
When the veins are full and that hurts the patient; as for squeezing it, it is done in this way: shave the leg of the patient if there is a lot of hair on it, then put him in the bath and wash his leg with hot water until it turns red or he exercises vigorously.
If he does not have access to a bath to heat the member, then cut the skin opposite the vein in length, either at its end at the knee or at its bottom at the ankle; then open the skin with tweezers and peel off the vein from all sides until it is felt by touch.
When you see it, it is red; when you pull it out of the skin, it also looks like a string; then insert a stick under it until it rises and comes out of the skin; then hang it on a blind, smooth hook; then cut another slit near that slit, about three fingers wide.
Then strip the skin from the nerve until it is exposed, then lift it with the hook as you did before and hang it on another hook as you did at first, then make another incision or many incisions if you need to.
Then pull it and cut it at the bottom of the incision near the ankle, then pull it and strip it until it comes out of the second incision, then pull it up to the incision above it and do this until you pull it all the way out of the third incision, which is above all the incisions.
If it does not come out easily, then insert a strong, doubled thread with a needle and tie it, then pull it while you push the hook under it and twist your hand in every direction until it comes out. Be careful that the thread does not break, because if it does, it will be very difficult to strip it out.
The patient will be harmed by this, so when you have stripped it all, put on the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil or olive oil and treat him until he heals. If the tendon is crooked with curves and twists to different sides,
and it is not straight as we have said, you should make an incision at each curve and twist, then hang it on hooks until you strip it all. Be careful when making the incisions not to cut the nerve or injure it, because it will be difficult to strip if you do.
Figure of the knives used to strip the tendon:.[There is an image here, which is not included in this text version.]فان لم ت
Figure of the blind hook:[There is an image here, which is not included in this text version.]
It should not have a curve like other hooks, nor should the tip be sharp so as not to injure the nerve; it should be fairly thick at the bend and smooth, because if it is thin it will cut the nerve, as we have said.
Chapter 91.
In cutting the civilized people's veins.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot countries such as Hijaz and Arab lands, and in arid, barren, and hot countries, and sometimes it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs, and its generation is due to putrefaction that occurs under the skin.
As it happens in the insides of living bodies, and worms and lice, and the worm that is generated between the skin and the flesh. The sign of the beginning of this vein's occurrence is that a severe inflammation occurs in the leg, then the site blisters, then the vein begins to come out from the site of that blister.وإنما سُمّى عرقاً لأنّه يتولّد فى موضع من البدن ثمّ يسيل ويبتدئ يخرج، فإن أبى الخروج قطّع كما تقدّم.
And it is called a vein because it is generated in a part of the body and then flows and begins to come out, if it does not want to come out, it should be cut as mentioned before. It is as if it were the root of a plant or an animal; when its tip appears, it should be wrapped around a small piece of lead with a weight of between one and two dirhams, tied, and the lead left hanging from the leg.وإن لم يخرج فى وقته كان به من العفونة ما تقدّم، فإن زال عنه التلّهب وعاد لح
And if it does not come out on time, there will be putrefaction as mentioned before. If the inflammation subsides and returns to normal, then whenever something comes out of it, wrap it in lead and tie it. If it becomes very long, cut off some of it and wrap the rest, but do not cut it from its root before it all comes out, because if you cut it, it will contract and go inside the flesh, causing swelling, putrefaction, and a bad ulcer in the site.فإن خرج كله ثمّ لم يزول ورم العرق وعاد لحمه الى حاله وجب أن يتداوى من العرق فى نفسه كما قدمناه، فإن زال ورم العرق وبقيت علامته وجب التداوى منه لئلاّ يتكرّر
When it all comes out and the swelling of the vein subsides and the flesh returns to normal, it is necessary to treat the vein itself as we have mentioned. If the swelling of the vein goes away but its mark remains, it is necessary to treat it so that it does not recur. Therefore, it should be handled and pulled a little bit at a time until it all comes out and nothing of it remains in the body. In some people, this vein may be as long as five or ten cubits.فإن خرج فى وقت معلوم وكان الورم شديدا وكان العرق رقيقأ لم يولّد
I have heard that a man had an anal fistula twenty inches long, and if you are treating a patient with such a condition, insert a probe into the opening and push it deeply alongside the body until all its contents are discharged; then apply poultices for several days to encourage suppuration.
Then treat it with treatments for tumors, and this vein may have many branches, especially if it appears in the leg or foot joint, causing multiple openings, and a branch comes out of each opening; treat it as we mentioned in the classification and as previously stated.
Chapter 92.
On incising for worms under the nail, also called cattle disease.
This disease is called in some countries among us cattle disease because it often affects cattle, and it is a small single worm that develops between the skin and the flesh and moves throughout the body up and down.
It can be detected by touch as it moves from one part to another until it pierces the skin wherever it pierces, and it forms due to the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, snakes, and locusts occur in the abdomen,.
and its harm is expected when it moves into the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye and sometimes opening it and coming out, causing blindness. This often happens. If you want to treat it and remove it, it can only be done when it is moving and felt by touch.
So you should tie tightly what is above and below it with a bandage, then incision over it and take it out. If it sinks into the flesh and you don't find it, apply fire to the site until you burn it, and its most expected harm to the eye as we said.
If you see it in the head near the eye, tie tightly under it on the forehead, then incision over it and take it out. The patient should cleanse his body with purgatives for putrid humors and abstain from foods that cause putrefaction,.
Chapter Ninety-Three.
On making an incision for the disease known as hernia.
This disease which is called in our country a hernia is a pain that occurs in some members and then moves from one member to another, and I have seen it as I will describe it to you.
I was called to a sick woman in some of the villages, and I examined her arm and she showed me a slight swelling in the vein of the arm. When I waited for an hour, I saw this swelling crawl with the wrist as a worm crawls, rising to her shoulder as quickly as possible, like mercury.
If it moved from one place to another, the pain disappeared from that place and settled in the shoulder, then I sat for a while, and it flowed through the rest of the body until it became in the other arm, then she scratched for me That it goes around her whole body as I saw.فقلت لها: هذا النافر المعروف، وليس فى جسمك غيره، وهو ينقل من موضع الى موضع.
So I said to her: This is the hernia known, and there is nothing else in your body but that, and it transfers from one place to another.I was amazed at its rapid transfer from one member to another, and I had not seen this disease with my own eyes before on this description except that I saw a group of people feeling the pain transferring from one member to another, and I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in this woman.
And I did not consider that except that the woman was from the people of the desert, dry body, exposed veins, so here appeared to the sense that moving wind, and it is necessary that it does not appear on this measurement in the people of affluence and moist bodies hidden veins.
If you want to treat it and its owner feels the pain, if it appears to you in person as we mentioned, then tighten it above and below with a wheel and cut on it until that accumulated wind comes out and dress the place.فإنّه يبرأ ولا يتوجّه الى موضع آخر وينبغى أن يضمد على المكان الذى شقّ عليه بخرقة معصورة حتّى يسكن ألمها ويمنع انتقاله من مكان الى مكان ويشدّ الخرقة المعصورة تحت الشقّ وعلى جان
If you do not see it with your own eyes, treat it by shaking the body and using remedies that dispel wind and break it up, such as the seeds of the wild onion and the like.
Chapter 94.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows may differ according to their types and according to the places where they fall in the body. As for their difference according to their types, there are large and small ones, hollow and solid glass ones, and those with three or four corners.
And some of them have blades, and some have shards. As for those that are according to the members in which they fall, they are of two types: either the members are principal hollow organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and the like. So, when an arrow falls into one of these members and you see the signs of death that I am describing to you later, you should avoid removing that arrow from it, as death catches up with its owner in most cases. And if these bad signs do not appear and the arrow is not deeply buried in the member, then remove it and treat the wound. One of the signs of a brain injury is when an arrow penetrates the bone and wounds the peritoneum surrounding the brain; this causes severe headache, dizziness, and vertigo.
And if these bad signs do not appear and the arrow is not deeply buried in the member, then remove it and treat the wound. One of the signs of a brain injury is when an arrow penetrates the bone and wounds the peritoneum surrounding the brain; this causes severe headache, dizziness, and vertigo. Reddish eyes, a red tongue, convulsions, and mental confusion are all signs of a brain injury. Sometimes blood may come out of the nostrils or ears, speech may be lost, and the voice may become hoarse. A white, thick fluid similar to porridge may flow from the wound site, and the flesh may become watery.
If these signs appear, refrain from treating the patient and removing the arrow if it has not come out. As for the signs of an arrow that has struck the heart and is close to the left breast, it feels as if it were lodged against something solid rather than in a hollow space.
And perhaps the arrow will have a pulsating motion and black blood will flow from the wound, followed by coldness of the limbs and a cold sweat, know then that death is inevitable. The sign of an arrow piercing the lung is the exudation of frothy blood from the wound.
And the vessels which follow the neck will swell and the patient's color will change, and he will breathe heavily and seek to inhale cold air; if the arrow has pierced the diaphragm in the chest, it will be near the small ribs, and breathing will be labored with great pain.
And he will sigh and all the joints of the shoulders will move; if the arrow has pierced the liver, this will be followed by severe pain and blood will flow from the wound resembling the color of the liver; if it pierces the stomach, perhaps something un-digested will flow out of the wound.
His condition is obvious; if the arrow has pierced the abdomen and lodged there, or if a part of the bowel or bladder has been ruptured, there is no hope for his survival or for removing the arrow. If the arrow has pierced the bladder and urine flows out,
and a part of it protrudes outside, and the patient experiences severe pain, know that he is surely doomed to die. As for other members such as the face, eyes, neck, shoulders, upper arms, spine, collar bones, thighs, legs and similar parts, they may recover depending on the severity of the wound.
When the arrow does not pierce an artery or nerve, and is not poisoned, I will inform you of some cases that I have witnessed regarding arrow wounds, so that you may use this knowledge in your treatment. Once an arrow pierced a man's eye socket at the root of his nose,
I extracted an arrow from a man' eye socket below the nostril; he recovered without any harm to his eye. I also removed another arrow that had pierced a Jew' lower eyelid, just beneath the lower lid; the arrow was completely hidden except for its small end that was attached to the wooden shaft.
And it was a large arrow from the composite bows, a smooth iron square, which did not have ears, so the Jew recovered and nothing bad happened to his eye, and I took out another arrow from the neck of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic.
And it was an arrow with two ears, so I cut it between the Adam's apple and it had pierced his neck, so I handled it gently until I got it out and the Christian recovered and was fine. And I took out another arrow from a man who had been hit in the abdomen and we estimated that he would die from it.
When he stayed for thirty days or so without any change in his condition, I cut open the arrow and manipulated it and got it out and he recovered without any complications. And I saw a man who had been hit by an arrow in his back and the wound had healed over him.
Then, after seven years, the arrow came out at the base of his thigh. And I saw a woman who had been hit by an arrow in her abdomen and the wound had healed over her. The arrow remained and she did not experience any change in any of her natural functions, nor did she feel any discomfort in anything she did naturally..
And I saw another man who had been hit by an arrow in his face and the wound had healed over him, and he did not experience much pain from it. There are many such cases. And I took out an arrow for one of the Sultan's soldiers who had been hit in the middle of his nose, which had tilted slightly to the right..
The whole arrow was gone, so I was called to treat him three days after the arrow had hit him. I found that the wound of the arrow was very narrow, so I probed it with a thin probe and didn't feel anything. He felt a stabbing pain under his right ear from the right side..
I hoped that this stabbing pain was from the tip of the arrow, so I applied a poultice with an astringent to the area in the hope that the area would become inflamed and show signs of the arrow so that I could cut it open. But nothing happened in the area to indicate that the arrow had reached it..
I relied on the bandage for many days, and no accident occurred; then, during that time, the wound healed over, and the sick man despaired of its removal for a period until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose, and he informed me of this. So I applied to the wound the caustic medicine for many days.
until it opened and I probed it, and I felt the thin tip of the arrow that is glued to the wood; then I increased the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared to us, and it stayed with me for some time, about four months.
Then, when the wound widened and I was able to enter the tweezers into it, I pulled it and moved it, but it did not respond to coming out; so I continued to deal with it gently and devise ways for it until one day I caught hold of it with strong tweezers, as its image will appear at the end of this chapter.
And the physicians judged that the cartilage of his nose would not heal, but I healed it and the wound closed up, and the sick man recovered completely and was not hurt at all; and I am telling you about how some arrows are removed so that you may make this a standard and a guide for what I have not mentioned.
For the parts and details of this craft cannot be grasped by description, nor can a book encompass them; rather, the skilled practitioner measures the few by the many and that which is present by that which is absent, and he infers a new action and a new tool for strange contingencies.
If you inquire about this craft, I say that arrows are removed from the members in which they have lodged in two ways: either by pulling from the place where they entered or from the opposite side; those which are removed from where they entered.
Either the arrow is protruding in a muscular place, and it is pulled out and removed; if it does not respond to being pulled out at the time of its entry, you should leave it for several days until the flesh around it putrefies, thus making it easier to pull out. Similarly, if the arrow is lodged in bone.
If it does not come out when you pull on it, leave it for a few days and repeat the procedure of pulling and moving it every day until it comes out. If it still does not come out after a few days, you should drill around the arrow in the bone itself from all sides with a gentle drill until there is enough space for the arrow to move, then pull it out.
If the arrow is lodged in the skull and has penetrated deeply into one of the brain's cavities, and some of the symptoms I have mentioned to you have appeared, then refrain from pulling out the arrow and leave it for a few days to see how things turn out.
Proceed with pulling out the arrow, and if it is lodged firmly in place and does not respond to pulling, use a drill as described before to loosen it, then treat the wound until it heals. But if the arrow is concealed in a part of the body... And if it has become unconscious, examine it with a probe; if you feel it, pull it out with appropriate tools. If you cannot reach it due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or tendon in the way...
Enlarge the wound until it is wide enough for you to reach the arrow and pull it out. If there are two tips, try to release the flesh that is caught between them from all sides using any technique you can, and if you cannot release the flesh without breaking the ears and twisting them, do so.
When attempting to remove the arrow from any part of the body, use your hand with tweezers on all sides until you release it, and be very gentle so as not to break the arrow and make it more difficult to pull out. If you cannot do this in one session...
Let it be for a few days until the flesh around him rots, then return to it, for it will be easier at that time. If you are confronted with bleeding, use the treatment we have mentioned in its chapter, and be careful not to cut a vein or nerve or tendon, and use your wit.
By all means possible, remove the arrow gently and slowly, as described to you. You should also try to bring the patient back to the position he was in when he was struck by the arrow; that is more successful.
If you cannot do that, use whatever method is possible. As for the arrow coming out from the opposite side, sometimes part of it protrudes outward, and sometimes you can feel its tip on top of the skin, and it appears bent.
Make an incision on it to fit the clamps, then pull it out, for it will be easier to come out. If it is stuck in a bone, twist your hand in a circle until the arrow affects the bone and widens for itself, then pull it out.
If not, leave it for a few days and then try again until it comes out. If the arrowhead is still inside, push on it with your finger; if you want to use the pushing method, insert the hollow tool so that its hollow part goes into the tail of the arrow, then push it out with it.
If the arrow is hollow, push it with a tool that goes into that cavity; thus, the arrow will be easier to remove. If the arrow is poisoned, you should hollow out the flesh that has been poisoned as much as possible, then treat it appropriately.
If the arrow fell on the chest, abdomen, bladder, or side and is close to what can be felt with a probe, and you can make an incision on it, do so, but be careful not to cut a vein or nerve; then pull it out.
Then stitch the wound if it needs stitching, then treat it until it heals. Figure of the forceps used to extract arrows:
Its tips are made like a bird's beak, and when it grips an arrow or anything else, it does not let go. Forceps can be made in large, small, and medium sizes, depending on the size of the arrow, its thickness, and the size and narrowness of the wound.
Figure of the hollow cannon:تكون زجاجة المدفع كالأنبوب مستطيل الشكل،
Figure of a solid cannonball:Be like a pipe, with an elliptical shape. Figure of a
This is a solid tip like a rod to facilitate its entry into the hollow arrow and pushing it out.
Chapter 95.
On phlebotomy.
The veins that are usually phlebotomized in the body are thirty veins, including sixteen veins in the head: the two pulsating veins behind the ears, known as the carotid arteries, and the two veins in the temples, visible and the two veins in the eye sockets, known as the ophthalmic veins.The two pulsating veins behind the ears, known as the carotid
The upright vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the tip of the nose, the jugular veins on either side of the neck, and the two veins in the upper lip of the mouth, and the two veins in the lower lip; these veins are known as the pharyngeal veins. And the two veins under the tongue.
And as for the veins that are phlebotomized in the arm and hand, there are five veins: one of them is the cephalic vein, located on the lateral side, which the common people call the head vein; the cubital vein, located in the elbow, is composed of a branch from the basilic vein and a branch from the cephalic vein, which the common people call the body vein.
The basilic vein is located on the medial side and is also called the axillary vein; the common people call it the abdomen vein. The antecubital vein is located on the forearm, just above the wrist, and is attached to the radius bone; this vein appears prominently above the thumb. The asيلم.
The artery between the little finger and the ring finger has two branches, while in the leg and foot there are three arteries: one below the popliteal fossa on the lateral side, another at the back of the ankle on the medial side, and the sciatic nerve which is located at the back of the heel on the lateral side.
In the other leg there are three arteries similar to these. As for the two arteries behind the ears, their compression is beneficial for chronic colds, migraines, ringworm and poor chronic head wounds, and I will describe how they are compressed.
To do this, shave the patient's head and rub the back of his neck with a rough cloth vigorously. Then, the patient should tighten his neck with a scarf until the two arteries behind the ears become visible in the low areas at the back of the head; you can then feel their pulse with your finger. Mark these spots with ink.
Then, take a scalpel known as a "nashl" and insert it under the artery in the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone. Then, lift your hand up with the artery and skin until you sever the artery completely; the length of the cut should be about two finger-widths.
Or you can release some blood and then tie them off with bandages and leave them until they heal. The method of compressing and cauterizing them was described at the beginning of this book. As for the two arteries in the temples, their compression is beneficial for chronic migraines, severe headaches, and constant eye discharge.
The method for compressing them is as follows: The patient should tighten his neck with a scarf until the arteries become visible and their pulse can be felt with your finger. Mark these spots with ink, then lift the skin above the artery with your index finger.
The trocar is introduced from below and lifts the artery upwards, where it is then ligated in the same manner as the other two arteries. The bleeding is controlled according to need, and then the patient's throat is loosened and your finger is placed on the artery for a moment.
Then you place a cotton pad and bandage on top, tightening it firmly, and leaving it until it heals. The benefits of cutting the artery in the forehead after cutting the scalp vein have already been mentioned at the beginning of the book. Phlebotomy in the forehead is beneficial for chronic facial conditions such as ringworm, sores, and erysipelas.
The patient's neck is wrapped in a bandage to make the artery visible, and then you take the instrument called the axe, which has this appearance: .
You place the pointed end of the axe head on the artery and strike it with a comb or something similar, allowing the blood to flow as needed. Then you loosen the patient's bandage and tighten it until it heals.
It can also be opened with a wide blade, but the blade should not be sharp as with other blades; it should have a slightly wider end. It should be ligated on the side because the bone is nearby, so the blade may break if it is too thin.
The two arteries in the eyelids are beneficial for eye conditions such as scabies, erysipelas, and eye problems. As for how to cut them, the patient should wrap their neck in a bandage, and you should cut them while standing above their head, with a slight tilt towards the length, using a small, slightly wide blade.
Since there is no flesh in the area, if the blade is thin, it may break. Then you control the bleeding as needed, place a cotton pad on it, and tie it for one night before loosening it. Phlebotomy of the nasal artery is beneficial for acute fever.
And the severe headache, and from diseases of the face such as the red rash that appears on the nose, especially if it is chronic. The method of incising it is for the patient to stretch his neck, then hold his nose in your left hand, and take a long, thin scalpel with your right.
And you should insert it into the middle of the columella, between the nostrils, straight on, because the vein does not appear to the sense there; the blood will come out immediately. You should press with the scalpel a little and let out as much blood as you need, then tie it off for a night, for it will coagulate quickly.
And as for the carotid arteries, their use is for shortness of breath, and the beginning of leprosy and other diseases that appear on the surface of the skin, such as black vitiligo, scrofula, bad sores and ulcers. The method of incising them is for the patient to tighten under them in his neck with a ligature, and the practitioner stands over the patient's head
And the patient is sitting on a chair, then you should Incise the vein to a width, not too deeply, then let out a moderate amount of blood or as much as you see fit, then do the same with the other vein, then release the ligature.وينبغى أن يفصد فى اليوم مرّتين، وأن لا يفرط فى الفصد أو يتركه بل يعدل بينهما فى ذلك لئلا ينقطع عن الكثرة أو يسيل دما ولا ينقطع.
And it is appropriate to phlebotomize twice a day, and not to overdo the phlebotomy or leave it out completely, but to strike a balance between them so that it does not stop from too much phlebotomy or flow blood and not stop. And the use of phlebotomizing the temporal arteries after phlebotomizing the head is that it benefits from mouth ulcers, gum disease, bad sores, cracked lips and poor sores.
which are in the nose and around it, and the method of phlebotomizing them is for the patient to sit in front of you and tighten his neck with a bandage, then turn his lips and look at the veins which you see one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, and distinguish them by their darkness.
And that also, there are thin black vessels around them, so cut them off entirely. If it is difficult for you and you do not know what they are, then go for cutting the largest and most prominent one, and do the same with the two vessels in the lower lip.
As for the two vessels under the tongue, their benefit is to be cauterized after cauterizing the carotid artery for the diseases of the glottis and the diseases of the mouth. And the way to do it is that you make the patient sit in front of you facing the sun, lift his tongue and look under the tongue on one side there is a vessel and on the other side another, their color is black.
You cauterize them and be careful not to cut them too much, because there are arteries under them, so that perhaps a bleeding occurs from those arteries. As for the three vessels that are cauterized in the elbow, they are the ones that it is customary to cauterize in people in general. And cauterizing them is in two ways.
Either with a broad basil or olive-wood blade, or by cutting with a scalpel which is the lance. [And this is how the picture of the broad basil blade looks].
It should be as wide as you see so that it is suitable for opening hollow vessels that are filled, prominent, visible and thick, and which contain thick, cloudy blood. And this is the picture of the olive-wood blade:
This blade is narrower and its tip is finer, suitable for cauterizing thin vessels that contain thin, bilious blood. And this is the picture of the lance:
This lance, which is suitable for cutting, and there are types of it that are wide and narrow according to the width or narrowness of the vessels. And by this you can understand others, and it is well known among manufacturers.
As for the basilic which is one of these three vessels, the benefit of cauterizing it is that it draws blood from the diseases that are under the neck and neck, which are close to the chest and abdomen. When cauterizing it, the phlebotomist should be careful, because there is an artery under it. If he makes a mistake and goes too deep with the blade, he will cut that artery.
Let blood flow, therefore do not cut it with a razor, but let the incision be made by scraping with a knife. If the varicose vein does not appear clearly, you should avoid it and move on to another one or seek out one of its branches.
Or, if you want to cut it in the area of the arm vein, which is obvious, and make an incision with a knife as we have said, before tightening the arm, you should feel the spot to find the pulse, then mark it with ink.
Then tie the arm and make an incision on the vein obliquely with a knife as we have said, and be careful that the cut falls away from the artery. And when you see, while tightening the ligature, swelling in the spot where you marked with ink, then that swelling is the artery, so avoid it.
If you see the blood pulsing out like a child's urine and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from the artery. Then quickly put your finger on it for a long time, then take away your finger. If the bleeding stops, it often does, then tighten the arm.
And leave it, and warn the patient not to neglect it, and let it be on his neck, and do not move it for a few days until he recovers. If the bleeding does not stop and you are overwhelmed and there is no medicine available in time, then cut off the artery if it appears to you. As its edges contract and the bleeding stops.
Or take a pistachio shell, split it and take half of it, and tie it tightly around the vein with a bandage until the next day. If the bleeding stops, otherwise, treat it as mentioned earlier by placing blood vessels that stop bleeding. And stopping its bleeding is not difficult in most cases.
Because of the small size of the wound and the tightness of the bandage on the arm, you should know this. As for the venous system, the benefit of cutting it is that it attracts blood from the top of the head and the bottom of the body because it is composed of a branch of the basilik and a branch of the cephalic as we have said..
The phlebotomist should be careful not to injure the nerve that lies beneath the vein, for if he pierces too deep with the scalpel and hurts the nerve, a numbness will result which is difficult to cure and may never heal. This nerve is often sensitive to the touch.
If the vein is hidden in some people and is thin and not apparent, you should make an incision with a ligature and avoid the nerve as much as possible. If the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise. As for the vein on the back of the head, the benefit of cutting it is that it draws blood from the head.
This vein is also beneficial for eye diseases, and it is especially recommended to be cut with a scalpel made of olive wood or a broad scalpel made of rhubarb wood, as it is the safest of all veins since there are no arteries or nerves beneath it.
However, when cutting the vein, you should avoid the head of the muscle and target the soft tissue, and it is not harmful if it is not hit on the first attempt to cut it again several times. However, it may swell in some people if it is not hit on the first attempt.
However, this swelling is not harmful, and as for the technique of phlebotomy and its precautions, and what should be done to improve it, first of all, you should know that phlebotomy can either be used to maintain health only.
Or it can be used to treat diseases, and which is used to maintain health, prevent the occurrence of diseases, phlebotomy should be performed on one of the three veins at the elbow: the cephalic vein, the basilic vein, or the median cubital vein, and phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring when signs of fullness appear.
Phlebotomy should be performed on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours of the day have passed, and as for phlebotomy used to treat diseases, there is no limited time for it, but whenever there is a need or necessity for it, day or night.وينبغى أن يكون المريض صائما، وأمّا الذى يستعمل فى حفظ الصحّة فى وقت الغداء بعد أن يمضى نصف النهار ويستعمل فى الأمراض متى دعت الحاجة اليه ليلا ونهارا.
And in every hour and at all times, and boys should not be bled until they are fourteen years old, nor should the elderly who have passed sixty years be bled. If anyone intends to bleed for any reason, then he should not be bled if he is between these two ages.
It is advisable to cleanse the bowels with an enema before phlebotomy if there is a lot of constipation, so that no foul matter is drawn into the veins when the blood is let from the body, which could harm the vital organs. Phlebotomy should not be performed on pregnant women, drunkards, or those who are still intoxicated until they have recovered.
Phlebotomy should also be avoided immediately after vomiting, defecation, excessive sexual intercourse, exertion, lack of sleep, fasting, and anything else that weakens the body or the soul. Before phlebotomy, you should also consider thinning the blood if it is thick.وإذا أزمع على الفصد فى الوجه الذى ذكرناه، فليكن ذلك بعد طلوع الشمس وقبل أن تشتدّ حرارتها، أو فى أوّل النّهار مع طلوع الشم
If phlebotomy is intended in the manner described above, it should be done after the sun has risen but before its heat intensifies, or at dawn while the sun is rising, using food, drink, medicine, if possible. Then, go to the bathhouse if nothing prevents it, or exercise to thin the blood and make sure phlebotomy is done in the morning as mentioned, and to clear the mind of all negative thoughts that day.وإذا وجد فى العضو الذى يفصد عروق متعرّقة ومتورّمة، أو عروق ممدودة، ينبغى أن يمسك عن الفصد حتّى تذهب تلك الوردة والتعريق ويستوى العرق، وأمّا إن كان الورم فى
If there are dilated and swollen veins, or stretched veins, in the body part to be bled, phlebotomy should be avoided until the swelling and redness disappear, and the pulse returns to normal. If the swelling is due to emotional causes such as worry, anger, fear, or other physical causes such as excessive exertion, fatigue, sexual intercourse, etc., then he should be attended by those things which people usually use for their enjoyment, such as perfumes, flowers, entertainment, etc., each person according to their own ability.
Then the blood-letter sits on a pillow which is higher than that on which the patient sits. He then extends his arm, and the blood-letter rubs it with his hand twice or thrice, then tightens the bandage with the tongs, and twists it twice or thrice, making sure that the tightness is moderate.
For when the tightness is not moderate, either because it is excessive or because it is too loose, it prevents the blood from flowing. After tightening the bandage, therefore, both of the patient's hands should be rubbed together.
Until the veins become distended and detectable by touch, then the blood-letter should smear the knife with a little old oil especially, and then place his left hand's index finger on the same vein below the site he intends to incision slightly so that the vein does not slip away from under the incision. For some veins are like a leather thong which, when incised, slip away from under the incision; others are full of wind, and when the knife is placed upon them they sink under the knife and deceive the blood-letter, who then fails to open the vein or opens it but narrowly.
Therefore, the blood-letter should be careful and deliberate in all these matters, and then bring down the knife. If the vein opens at its first incision, well and good; but if not, he should repeat the incision under that site or above it with greater force, provided the site is not swollen.
If, however, the patient becomes swollen or distressed, he should leave him for a day or two and not tighten the bandage, for it may cause a hot swelling; and then he may resume phlebotomy if he wishes. If the incision is small and the blood flows feebly, then.
you are afraid that the quantity of blood you desire to withdraw will not come out, then replace the knife in the same puncture and press gently on end, and increase the opening a little; do this with force before the site becomes swollen, for with many people the site swells when incised only slightly.
If you see that it is swollen, do not go over it at all, for it will not help you; place something of the oil's emulsion on it, for it facilitates the flow of blood and is better in this place than the oil itself and other fats.
Use the oil's emulsion in all your phlebotomies of veins when the flow of blood is difficult; the universal antidote and athamanita if one of them is placed on the spot, for the blood becomes thin and dissolves if it is thick.
If a large swelling occurs at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens especially to those who have not been phlebotomized before or if the opening of the vein is small, act quickly; place a sponge soaked in warm water and salt on the swelling and hold it for an hour, it will dissolve.
You should do that after the blood has left the vein itself or from another vein; if some of the blackness or greenness remains in the spot for a few days, it does not matter, if you like, carry on it something of myrrh and aloes dissolved.
Or something of the extract of fennel and the like; it often happens that a swelling and a protuberance occur when phlebotomizing basilic, so place your hand on it, and if you find it hurts when you press on it, then that is a protuberance of evil, so beware of putting anything we have mentioned on it.
For it might perhaps bleed from an artery, but bandage it with something astringent so that the spot hardens, then treat it with other treatments until it heals; you should take out blood from each person according to his strength and the predominant color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it out until it turns red; likewise, if you see it thick, let it go until it gets thin; also, if it is sharp, let it go until its sharpness goes away; one who is full and strong and needs to release blood all at once.
Let the venesection be wide and the scalpel broad for a feeble person, but the opposite for a strong one. The cut should be made in several passes, and the incision should be narrow. The best way to perform venesection is by making an oblique slash with a curved blade, not by stitching.
This method of phlebotomy is safe from bleeding and nerve damage, and it is better and safer than phlebotomy across or along the vein. If a person is prone to fainting during phlebotomy, they should be given something to eat beforehand, such as bread soaked in pomegranate water or mead.
If the person is hot-tempered and the blood comes out in three or four passes, if their temperament is cold, they should be given bread soaked in myrobalan wine, or honey wine infused with spices, or pleasant floral wine before phlebotomy.
If fainting occurs during phlebotomy due to the loss of a large amount of blood, they should be given meat water and pleasant floral wine, as well as perfumed ointments. They should also be treated with the remedies mentioned in the section on fainting.
Those who want to rest their arms and circulation again should, if their phlebotomy was for the purpose of vomiting, and their strength is weak, release a little blood at a time according to their strength over several days.
And those who want to rest their arms and circulation again, and whose body is strong, should do so seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy. And those who want to attract blood from their body to the opposite side it has leaned towards should do so on the second or third day.وأمّا من أراد احتجاز الدم فينبغى أن يبدأ بالراحة قبل الفصد ويستعمل التطيّب بالزعفران ويخلخص موضع الفصد ليكون الدم طليحا، ويفعل ذلك فى الأيّام التى ينتظر فيها.
And those who have a lot of blood in their bodies, which has become hot and intense, causing fever, should release blood in one go and remove a large amount, widening the incision until fainting occurs, after first ensuring that all the conditions for phlebotomy are met.وأمّا من كان فى بدنه الدم قليلا فينبغى أن يبدأ بالفصد القليل ويستعمل التطيّب بالزعفران ويشرب شرابا معتدلا، وإن احتاج الى أزيد منه فليشرب شيئا يسيرا. And you should place your hand over the pulse when blood is flowing so that death does not occur at the site of the phlebotomy, for this often happens if the phlebotomist is ignorant and careless, and it should not happen if you want to release the arm and let the blood flow again.
And when the orifice of the vein is closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow, you should not press on it too hard or twist it forcefully, for that is very harmful. Rather, either leave it until you perform phlebotomy again, or use the blade of the scalpel to move the congealed blood in the orifice of the vein.
Or you should place on it some salt that has been dissolved in water, or apply something of the antidote called farouq or shakhzanyah, and gently press on it so that the blood flows. If the vein is swollen, then leave it.
Do not touch it until the swelling subsides, and if there is a need to release the blood again, then either phlebotomy above that spot or phlebotomy in the other arm or in the other vein.
As for phlebotomy of the brachial artery, it is performed instead of the ulnar or basilic veins if they are not present or are difficult to find, as it is a composite of those two. The procedure is that the patient should place his hand in hot water until the forearm turns red and the vein becomes prominent, then tie a bandage above it.
Then phlebotomy of the vein is performed on a slight angle, not straight across or lengthwise, and the incision should be wide, and you should perform phlebotomy just above the wrist joint. If it is difficult for the blood to flow, then place your hand back in the hot water and let the blood flow in the water.
Until you reach your desired amount of blood loss. In the summer days, you can usually dispense with placing your hand back in hot water. The flow of blood in hot water is most commonly used in winter time. Phlebotomy of this vein is considered safer than any other vein. Because there is no striking vein or nerve underneath it, and as for the phlebotomy of the little finger of the right hand, it is beneficial in the ailments of the liver. The way to perform its phlebotomy is that you should tie a wristband around the wrist with your hand after immersing it in hot water until the vein swells up.
Because there is no striking vein or nerve underneath it, and as for the phlebotomy of the little finger of the right hand, it is beneficial in the ailments of the liver. The way to perform its phlebotomy is that you should tie a wristband around the wrist with your hand after immersing it in hot water until the vein swells up. You should feel it with your sense, then you phlebotomize it slightly off-center, and if you completely cut it off, it will not harm him at all. Be careful not to overdo it with the knife, as there is a nerve underneath the fingers, and the area is exposed and devoid of flesh. Then you put the hand back in hot water.
And you let the blood flow in it, because if you do not return it to hot water, the blood will congeal at the mouth of the vein and stop flowing. So when you have extracted as much blood as needed, put oil and salt on the vein so that it does not heal quickly.
And you should also do this with each thin branch. And as for the benefit of phlebotomizing from the left hand, it is beneficial for ailments in the lower part of the body, such as disorders of the womb. You should phlebotomize it in the same way as you did the second one.
And the retention of menstruation, kidney diseases, chronic sores in the thighs and legs, and similar ailments. The way to phlebotomize it is that he should put his leg in hot water and massage it until the veins emerge, then tie a bandage above the ankle joint, and the vein is located at the heel on the outside towards the thumb.
And there are many branches that come out of it in the front of the leg, so phlebotomize it in the widest branch or at the heel at the junction, which is better and safer. But if you phlebotomize it on the front of the leg, be careful about the nerves underneath.
And make the phlebotomy slightly off-center as if you are going to cut it off, and the knife should be sharp. If the blood does not come out, put the leg back in hot water and let the blood flow until it is empty. If the phlebotomist misses the vein with the first stab,
Let the phlebotomist raise himself a little above, for this is a safe site and there is no fear of harm if you are careful to avoid the nerve as we have said; likewise do the same with the peroneal artery in the other leg. As for the sciatic nerve, its location, as we have said, is at the heel on the lateral side.
The benefit of bleeding this point for hip pain is when it is caused by hot blood. The method of bleeding it is to have the patient enter the bath, run and raise his leg from the hip up to above the heel with four fingers wrapped in a thin long bandage, for it will not appear otherwise.
If it appears, bleed it in any position that keeps you still, either by twisting, which is better, or by cutting it off completely or slitting it; for its location is safe and in most people it is very delicate, so if you do not find it,.
and if it does not appear at all by touch, then bleed some of its branches, which are those that appear on the back of the foot towards the little and ring fingers; be careful to avoid the nerves and let the amount of blood you want flow.
Then loosen the bandage, place a cotton pad on the site of bleeding and tighten the site; it will heal quickly.
Chapter 96
On cupping and how to use it.
Cupping instruments may be made of horns, wood, copper or glass. Cupping is of two types: one type involves cutting and drawing blood; the other type is without cutting.وأفضلها ما كان من الزجاج على أن يكون ناعما صقيلا لئلا يؤذى الموضع، ومن النحاس ما كان مجوفّا، وأمّا الخشب والقرون فإنّه لا بأس به إذا كان صقيلا ناعما
And this cupping without cutting is of two types.وأحدهما أن يُشَرَّط الموضع ثم يُجْعَل فوق
And the knives for the jugulars, which are the two sides of the neck, and the knife for the chin, which is under the lower jaw below the mouth, and the knives for the shoulders, and the knives for the coccyx at the base of the tail, and the knives for the forearms, which are in the middle of the arms, and the knives for the legs, and the knives for the ankles.
And cupping therapy indeed draws blood from the fine veins distributed in the flesh. For this reason, it does not have the strength to drop as phlebotomy, nor should cupping therapy be used with fire or without it in any of the diseases that are due to fullness until the body is completely emptied.
If there is a need for cupping therapy due to illness or as a routine, we use it at any time during the month, at its beginning, in the middle, or at its end, and at any time.وأفضل أوقات الحجامة على القوة والبدن القويّ السّليم هو أوّل الشهر وأوّل كلّ سبعة أيّام من الشهر، وأقلّها فى وسط الشهر وآخره، وأمّا ف
And that is because some people, when their blood becomes abundant and in need of being withdrawn by cupping, they feel a heaviness and headache, and some experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck, and some experience itching in their face and sides, darkness and dimness in their eyes, and some scratch the site of their cupping marks.فمن هذا كلّه نعلم موضع الحاجة الى الحجامة ونعلم أنّ وقت الحجامة ليس فى وسط الشهر وآخره كأوّله.
And some people laugh a lot, and some taste the flavor of blood in their mouths and their gums swell and they spit out blood, and some sleep a lot, and some see in their dreams blood, redness, wounds, and what is similar. So whenever we see something like this,
especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we command cupping after two or three hours have passed from noon. And as for the benefit of cupping on the nape, it benefits from heaviness in the head and water flowing to the eyes.
However, this should be done after the evacuation of the body's humors. This cupping may serve as a substitute for phlebotomy in the head, but it must not be used by those with cold brains or who have catarrh, for it will harm them greatly.
Therefore, it should not be used by the elderly or those with cold diseases in their heads, and those who are habitual users of it may develop forgetfulness as a result.
Therefore, the cupping doctor should slightly lower his hand with the cup for fear of forgetfulness. As for cupping on the shoulder, it is a substitute for phlebotomy in the ankle and basilic vein.
Therefore, it benefits those with asthma, shortness of breath, congestion in the respiratory system, and coughing. The cupping on the shoulder should be slightly raised, for if it is placed too low, it will cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
As for cupping on the temples, it benefits from pains that occur in the head, conjunctivitis, migraine, sore throat and pain in the roots of the teeth. It is also a substitute for phlebotomy in the basilic vein. You should instruct the cupping doctor not to go too deep with the incision so as not to cut an artery and cause bleeding.
As for cupping under the chin, it benefits from sores in the mouth, gum disease and similar diseases in the mouth, and can take the place of phlebotomy in the jaw vein in the lips. As for cupping on the shoulders, it benefits from palpitations caused by fullness and heat.
As for cupping on the insides of the elbows, it benefits in the same way as phlebotomy in the three veins: the basilic, the anterior antecubital and the cephalic vein, because it attracts blood from all those thin veins in the flesh, and these thin veins attract blood from other thicker veins until the blood reaches the three thick veins.
You should tell the barber not to go too deep with his incision, because the area is deprived of meat and beneath it are nerves and blood vessels. As for the one-cut cupping that is performed on the coccyx, it is beneficial for hemorrhoids of the rectum and sores of the lower part.
You should tell the barber to make the cupping device large and made of copper, because the area needs strong suction and sometimes the glass cupping device breaks and makes many cuts. As for cupping on the legs, it reduces edema significantly.وينبغى أن يأخذ الحجّام أدوات الحجامة بالراحة ويأخذ الحجامة بمكانها ولا ينبغى أن يشدّها شدّا قويا فيحدث خضل أو كدمة، وينبغى أن يضرب على الموضع ضربا رقيقا حتّى يمتلىء موضع الحجامة دما.
You should tell the barber to take the cupping devices comfortably and perform cupping in its place, and not to pull it too hard so as to cause bruising or contusions. He should gently tap on the area until the cupping site fills with blood because it attracts blood from all over the body and is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder, regulates menstruation, and is helpful for boils and blisters. It also takes the place of bleeding the veins in the calves and ankles, except that it exhausts the body a lot and fainting occurs in most people. Cupping on the ankles has benefits similar to cupping on the legs.وينبغى أن يبدأ بالحجامة على اليسار، وقد ذكرنا فى كتاب الأمراض أنّ الحجامة منفردة تنفع من عوارض الكلى والأرحام والمثانة، أمّا الحجامة مع التزريق فتنفع من أوجاع الصدر والبدن كلّه وآفات الرأس وتجلو
You should start cupping on the left, and we have mentioned in the book of diseases that cupping alone is beneficial for symptoms of the kidneys, uterus, and bladder. As for cupping with injection, it benefits body pains and chest pains and head afflictions, and it makes the skin glossier.The way to place the cups is to first place the empty cup and gently suction, without prolonging the placement of the cups but placing them quickly and removing them quickly so that the humors flow into the site evenly. You should continue to do this and alternate until the area turns red and opens up.وينبغى أن يبدأ بالحجامة على اليسار، وقد ذكرنا فى كتاب الأمراض أنّ الحجامة منفردة تنفع من عوارض الكلى والأرحام والمثانة، أمّا الحجامة مع التزريق فتنفع من أوجاع
And when the redness of blood appears, then you should cut and suck gently little by little, then look at the condition of the body. If a person has thin flesh with open pores, one should only cut it so as not to cause a ulcer in the area.
And you should instruct the surgeon to widen the incision and deepen it slightly, and gently suck while moving lightly. If the blood is thick, then he should cut twice. In the first time, he should open a path for the thin blood and its water, and in the second, he should completely remove the thick blood.
If the blood is very cloudy, he should cut a third time to reach the goal. Generally speaking, if we want to remove a little blood, we are satisfied with one cut. If we want to remove a lot of blood, we make more cuts. If we estimate that the blood is thick, we make two cuts
So, we should make an incision deep enough and at a moderate rate, the depth of the incision is only as deep as the skin. We should use oils when placing the cupping glasses, and waters, and what the patient should be cautious of. If a person has thick, tough, dry skin with narrow pores
We should grease the areas of cupping with oils that open, soften and dissolve. During the summer season, we can use oils such as oil of alder, violet, sweet almond or pumpkin seed.وإن كان فى زمان الشتاء فدهن الأرز أو دهن السذاب أو زيتون أو شيرج أو خربق أو عرعار.
In the winter, we can use oils such as rice bran oil, thyme oil, olive oil, castor oil or aniseed oil. If the waste is thick and cold, then the oil should be marjoram oil, aniseed oil, fennel oil or caraway oil.وإن كانت الفضلة حارّة فدهن الرازىّ أو دهن النعناع أو دهن الورد أو دهن اللوز المرّ أو نحو ذلك.
If the person being bled has dilated pores and flabby flesh, then they should abstain from using grease, and those people should wash their cupping glasses after cupping with rose water or cold water or grape vine water or squash water or purslane water and the like, and as for someone whose blood is very moist.
Those with thick fluids should wash their cupping glasses with old wine or marjoram water or fennel broth or chamomile and the like, and one should be wary of cupping in a bathhouse or right after a bath.
It is preferable to use it after leaving the bathhouse by an hour or two, and one should not sleep after cupping. How a person being bled and a person with blisters should be managed before and after cupping.
First, you must consider that if the person being bled or the person with blisters is a sanguineous type, with a dominant sharp and inflammatory blood type, then they should take cooling foods such as pomegranates, dandelions, lettuce, and scordium with vinegar, and their meals should be fried fowl and lamb, and sour foods.
If a person has a cold temperament, they should drink honeyed wine or mabytha (a type of honey and rose water drink) or scordium seed wine, and they should eat moderate amounts of moderate-aged fragrant wine, and they should be instructed to eat less and make their meals fried fowl, quail, and turtledoves, and young pigeons. The drink on the day of cupping and phlebotomy should be more than the food.
It is also advisable to give some people a mixture of Theriac, Musk Medicine, or Silitha before cupping and phlebotomy, or after it, to strengthen the vital organs and thin the blood. This should not be given to those who are feverish.
The cauteries that are unconditional are those placed on the liver, spleen, breasts, abdomen, navel, site of the kidneys and right hip because these organs do not tolerate a condition on them; rather, they are used to attract blood from one organ to another.
As when we place the cupping glass on the breasts in cases of epistaxis or to release a cold wind that has settled in an organ, as in the case of placing the cupping glass on the abdomen and navel, for it permeates the organ, warms it and alleviates pain by dispersing that wind.
They may also be placed on the kidneys if there is a blockage or stones, for by their吸引力they may open the blockage or dislodge the stones from their place. Similarly, they are used when placed on the liver and spleen in cases of wind that causes disturbance in them. These cupping glasses may also be used empty by suction only.
They may be used with fire or they may be filled with tepid water in cases of sciatica, for one fills the cupping glass, which should be large, with hot water alone or with water in which some suitable herbs have been cooked.
Then it is placed filled on the affected area, held in place, removed and reapplied as needed. This is the image of the cupping glass that is used with fire: (a diagram of a cupping glass with a handle and a spout is included here).The Cupping Glass with Fire:The cupping glass should be made of copper or brass. It should have a handle on one side
Its mouth should be the width of two spread fingers as illustrated, and its depth should be half a palm. There should be a small hole in one side, near the middle, large enough for a needle to pass through, made from white copper or brass with a thick rim.The Cupping Glass with Fire:The cupping glass should be made of copper or brass. It should have a handle on one side so that it can be held easily while applying it to the body. The mouth of the cupping glass should be wide enough to accommodate two spread fingers, and its depth should be half a palm in length. There should be a small hole near the middle of the side, large enough for an needle to pass through. This hole is used to let out air when
A smooth, polished surface so that it does not harm the organ when placed on it, and in the middle of which there is a transverse hollow of copper or iron where the candle is placed with fire. This speculum may also be made larger or smaller than we have described, according to the diseases.
The size of the speculum should be tailored to the patient; for instance, those designed for children or people with slender bodies will differ in size from those made for men with stocky physiques. As for how to place this speculum, heated by fire, on the organ: take a linen wick saturated in oil or a small tallow candle and place it in the hollow at the center of the speculum.
The fire should rise upwards, towards the bottom of the speculum, so that the patient's body does not get burned. Then, place it on the organ and hold the hole we mentioned with your finger. When you need to remove the speculum, simply lift your finger.
The steam will exit through that hole, and the speculum can be removed safely. If needed, the wick can be re-lit and the process repeated. The speculum used for treating hydrocele does not have a rigid rod or hole.
It is used by filling it with water and simply placing it on the organ. This is its illustration:. [Illustration: A round, hollow speculum with a narrow neck and a wide opening at the top is shown.]المحجمة التى يستعمل بها الماء
This speculum is best when it is large enough to hold a significant amount of water..  [Illustration: A side view of the same speculum as before, now showing its hollow interior and a spout at
Chapter 97.
On the application of leeches.
Leeches are most often used on parts of the body where other specula cannot be applied, due either to their small size, such as the lip, gum, etc., or because the organ is devoid of flesh, like the finger, nose, and so forth..  [Illustration: The same speculum as before, now shown in use on a patient's finger, with a leech attached to the tip of the finger.]المحجمة التى يستعمل بها العلق
And as for how to use them, you should obtain leeches from clean, fresh water free of pollution. Then leave them in fresh water for a day and night until they are hungry and their guts are empty. Then the patient's body is bled first by venesection or cupping, then the affected member is wiped.
Until it turns red, then place the leech on it. If it becomes full and falls off, that is good. But if the wound continues to bleed after the leech has fallen off, that is a sign of an ulcer. In this case, you should wet a linen cloth in cold water, and apply it to the wound, and massage it and squeeze it.
And you should apply pressure on it until the bleeding stops. If the blood flow is profuse, sprinkle powdered borax, alums, or similar astringents on it until the bleeding stops, or place peeled garlic cloves on the wound.
And let it stay until the garlic clings to the wound, for then the bleeding will stop. If a leech is needed again and there are no more leeches available, the wound should be wiped with fresh blood.
Or, you can pierce the wound with a needle to draw out some blood, and then place the leech on it; for when it senses the blood, it will stick. If you want to remove it, sprinkle it with myrrh, salt, or ash, and it will fall off immediately.
Chapter 3
On bone-setting.
This chapter is also about a trick that is needed in the art of medicine: setting broken bones and dislocated joints.والجبر مصدر جبر، والجبر هو ردّ الشىء المكسور الى حالته الاولى، وأصله من قولهم: جبر فلان كسر فلان أى ردّه
Know, my children, that this chapter may be unknown to some physicians, the common people, and those who have never read ancient books on the subject.
And for this reason, this art of science has become extinct in our country, and I have never found anyone proficient in it at all. I have only learned what I have from the reading of the books of the ancients, my eagerness to understand them until I extracted the knowledge of that from them, and then I clung to experience and practice throughout my life.
And I have outlined for you in this chapter all that my knowledge encompasses. And my experience has gone through it after I have brought it closer to you, liberated it from the branches of prolonging, abbreviated it as much as possible, made it clear, and pictured for you many images of the tools that are used in it.
Since it is of increased clarity as I have done in the two previous chapters, and there is no strength except through the Almighty, the Great.
Chapter 1.
In it, we will mention in a concise and comprehensive manner the matter of fractures and dislocations. Before we begin to mention the fractured and dislocated limbs one by one, it is fitting that we first mention in the forefront of this chapter some general principles and sections on the subject. This will first require you and anyone else eager to learn this noble profession to understand them and grasp their true nature.وأولها وأهمّها وأحراها بالتقديم وألزمها على من أراد طلب هذا الفنّ أن يعلم أن الكسر والجروح والنزف والقرح والمغارب كلّها آلات الموت، وأنّه لايصحّ ولايتم
I say that whenever there is a fracture, dislocation, bruise, fall or sprain in anyone, you should first quickly apply a fomentation or laxative, or both.وإنّه من أعظم ما يضاف فى هذاالباب أنّ الكسر لايبرأ حتّى يتعقّد فيه عود من عظامه، وذلك العود هو الذي يقال له العقد، وأمّا قبل تعقّده فلا يسمى Indeed, one of the most important things to keep in mind is that a fracture does not heal until it forms a callus, which is a type of bone tissue. This only happens when there is no impediment due to weakness or if the person affected is very young or very old, or if the weather is extremely hot or cold.وينبغى أن يعلم من أراد تعلّم هذاالصناعة الشريفة ان الكسر اذا حدث بعدد او بأصابع اليد اليمنى او الرجل اليمنى كان
He should then restrict his diet to cool pulses, bird and kid meat, and abstain from drink, fatty meats, overeating, and any food that fills the veins with blood. This is until you are sure the swelling has gone down and there is no fear of suppuration in the affected area.
When the patient returns to their usual habits, if the broken bone is starting to knit, then they should eat foods that are nourishing, thick, and substantial, with a粘性 quality, such as porridge, rice, meat heads, shanks, and oxen bellies. This includes eggs, soft fish, thick drinks, and the like. By following this regimen, the bone will knit more quickly and effectively. Know that with older, robust men, it is not possible for broken bones to heal completely and return to their original state.
Their bones are dry and hard, and while they can knit, it won't be as strong as the bones of young children. Nature will produce a thick substance similar to glue that forms over the broken bone, which will help hold the pieces together.
This will restore its strength and stability, allowing the patient to resume their normal activities without any障害.
For this reason, the patient's diet should consist of foods that are nourishing and thick, as we have said. Know that there are different types of fractures depending on the affected body part; a fracture in the leg bone is different from a fracture in the head, and a fracture in the chest is different from a fracture in the back.
The same is true for the different body parts, and we will discuss each type of fracture in detail in its own section. The type of fracture can also vary within the same bone.
Some fractures are compression fractures, where the bone cracks but does not produce any bone fragments, while others are longitudinal fractures along the length of the bone, which can result in bone fragments and protruding or non-protruding pieces. Some fractures also involve an open wound and a tear in the skin, while others are just small cracks.
And each type has a specific trick to fix it, as will be mentioned in detail in its place. And what identifies a bone fracture is its crookedness, protrusion, sensation by the sense, and creaking when you press it with your hand.
So, when there is no visible crookedness or creaking, nor does the patient feel any disturbance upon palpation of the bone, and he feels little pain, then it is not a fracture. It can be a minor fracture, a bruise, or a slight crack; you should not move it by extension or compression at all.
But you should apply on it some remedies which will be mentioned later according to the site, then bind it gently. Know that when a bone cracks and shatters into two pieces without any splinters, then the two parts have separated from each other.
You should immediately straighten and adjust it before a hot swelling occurs. If a hot swelling does occur, leave it for a few days until the hot swelling subsides, then adjust it in any way you can with gentleness and skill.فإنّ الورم الحارّ اذا سكن وذهب عنه الحرّ الشديد والورم فربّما أمكنك أن تستخرج منه ما كان فيه من الشظايا، وليكن معك فى استخراجها مخرز أو مسحوق عظم، فإنّه لا يفعل شيئا حتّى يغلب عليه الورم البارد فيصير كالماء.
Know that its adjustment and leveling is easier than the bone in which splinters have occurred, then it is bound as will be mentioned. But if there are splinters, you must extend the fractured limb on both sides, whether it is an arm or a leg.فإنّ مدّه من ناحية واحدة هو الذى يمنعك من تسويته ويخلصك من الشظايا، وإذا أمكنك أن تمدّه على الخشية أو على شيء صلب مرتفع فوق الأرض، فإنّ ذلك أجود لأنّ العضو المكسور لا يفارق مكانه حتّى يلتئم كسره ولا يزال
Indeed, extending it from one side only is what prevents you from leveling it and removing the splinters. And if you can extend it on a block of wood or something hard raised above the ground, that is better, because the fractured limb does not leave its place until its fracture heals and remains as such
And be very careful that you do not cause pain or discomfort to the patient, and strive to join the two ends of the broken bone together in the best possible way. At that time, you should touch and feel them with your hand; if you see anything amiss, correct it and adjust it as much as you can.
And beware of excessive stretching and strong pressure, as many ignoramuses do, and they often tell of their actions causing a hot swelling or numbness in the limb, as I have seen them do many times.
Then, after adjustment and perfection and tightening, you must compel that limb to be at rest and quiet, and warn the patient not to move it during his waking hours or sleep, or when he changes position or is agitated, or when he defecates, and in all his movements as much as possible. He should also make sure that the angle of the limb is one which ensures freedom from pain.
This is because if he feels pain or discomfort while the limb is in a certain position, he should move it to another position which does not cause him any pain, and he should also make sure that this new position is straight and level.واحذر علاج العليل بنقل العضو الى غير موضعه الأول فربما كان ذلك مضراً به وسببا لفساد عظميه وعدم اجتماسهما.
Beware of treating the patient by moving the limb away from its original position, for this might be detrimental to him and cause non-union of the bones. This is so that the limb does not become crooked when it heals. As for the method of splinting a broken limb, it is as I am about to describe to you: You should know that broken limbs vary in size, from small ones like the arm, finger, or radius, and so on.
Thus, the bandages used for small limbs should be soft and thin, but for large limbs like the thigh, back, or chest, the bandages should be wide and stiff because a wide bandage is needed to support a large limb and hold it firmly from all sides with an even grip.والحاجز الذى يفصل بين العظمين فمن اللازم أن يكون سميكا صلبا لئلاّ يتغلغل الى موضع الجبر من تحت اللفائف فيصير عائقا بينهما ويصير ذلك سببا لعدم اجتماسهما.
Then, after you have finished smoothing it out, you begin to apply the paint suitable for that purpose. in a gentle massage on the site of the fracture, then you start to wrap the bandage around the fracture site itself three or four times as needed by the member and tightens your hand a little bandage, then go with him to the upper side of the fracture site.
is less severe than your grip on the broken site, then you move away from the fracture a little and relax the grip a little bit until you get something right from the correct site, then you take another bandage and also wrap it around the broken site. .
Wraps, then go to the lower side of the fracture, and let your action in tightening the wrap and relaxation as we mentioned in the first upper wrap, then put between the wraps of the gentle massage or fabric what is equal to the crookedness of the fracture.
If there is crookedness, do not put anything in it, then wrap another bandage on it, then make the splints on these wraps very tight with your watch if there is no swelling or hot inflammation in the member.
If there is swelling or hot inflammation, then carry on it what settles that swelling and eliminates the swelling and leave it for a few days, then tighten it at that time with splints, and let the splints be of half-cut reeds carved in a wise manner, or let them be splints made of rattan wood.
made from pine or palm leaves or holly or rush, etc., of which the aforementioned are made; and let each splint be the same width and shape as the other splints.ويسمح بين الجبائر ما يسمح به موضع الكسر من غير أن يكون ذلك الموضع ضيقا على العضو فيمنعه عن الحركة ولا فضلا فيه فينقطع عن الحركة، ويجعل طول كلّ جبيرة على قدر المسافة من المنكب او الكعب الى طرف اصبع
The space between the splints should be as wide as the fracture site, without being too tight on the member and preventing movement, nor too loose, so that it cuts off movement. The length of each splint should be according to what suits the broken member in size, whether large or small. .The shape of the g The image of the g
Then the bandages are tightened with another bandage, according to your first tightening, and then tied from above with strong threads, according to what we have mentioned about tightening, namely that your tightening should be greater at the site of the fracture. The further away you get from the fracture, the less the tightness should be.
The threads should be of intermediate thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and they should especially be made from wet flax. For the threads, if they are too thick, as is often seen in the work of the unskilled, who use twisted flaxen strips, this is a great mistake.
Thick threads are unsuitable because they do not allow for the desired level of tightness, and thin threads are also unsuitable because they do not provide sufficient support. There should be no less than a finger's width between the bandages.وينبغى أن تكون الجبائر والخفافيف رقيقة لئلّا يكون حجمها عظيما ويجعل الخفافيف مستطيلة وليست مربّعة ولا مدورة.
If the patient feels pain at the edges of the bandages after they have been tightened in the correct places, then place some soft felt or fluffed wool underneath so that they are not painful. However, if there is a fracture with a wound and a breach in the skin, we will mention this separately.
Be aware that not every fractured limb should be tightened with bandages on the first day. If a large limb is involved, the bandages should not be applied until five, seven, or more days have passed, depending on how confident you are that there will be no hot swelling.وإن كان الكسر فى عضو صغير فأمّا أن يشدّ فى اليوم الثانى أو الثالث ويجعل فى الجبائر خفافيف رقيقة من أديم رقيق لتكون أسهل فى موضع الكسر حتّى لا يحدث الورم الحارّ.
If the fracture is in a small limb, it should be tightened on the second or third day, and the bandages should include thin, soft leather to facilitate healing at the site of the fracture, preventing hot swelling. This is a description of the bandages used by our ancestors for fractures, dislocations, and sprains. It is a general, concise, and effective method suitable for most people, especially children and women, as it does not involve excessive heat or cold.وإن كان الكسر فى عضو كبير مع جرح وحدث خرق فى الجلد ينبغى أن لا يشدّ هذا العضو بالجبائر إلّا بعد سبعة أيّام أو أكثر على حسب أمنك من الورم الحارّ، فإن لم تؤمن من الور
Take flour dust from the mill, which is the fine flour that clings to the walls of the mill when the grinder turns; knead it as it is without straining it with egg white, and make the dough neither thick nor thin, then bake it.
Here is another recipe for a plaster that sets fractures, dislocations and sprains. Take ten dirhams each of hemp, linseed, caraway, aniseed and fennel; five dirhams each of galangal and myrrh; twenty dirhams each of Armenian or Roman clay. Grind and mix all the ingredients with thyme water or egg white if the patient's constitution is hot; this plaster is good for healing broken bones quickly and suits most people due to its moderate nature.
Here is another recipe for a plaster that is also good for fractures and sprains. Take ten dirhams each of galangal, hemp and white poplar; five dirhams each of myrrh and caraway; six dirhams aniseed and twenty dirhams Armenian clay. Grind all the ingredients finely, strain them and knead with water or egg white; use it.
Here is a recipe for a plaster for joints and bones that have become dislocated; it also alleviates pain arising from these conditions, as well as headache and broken bones. Take felt which has been soaked in vinegar and cooked oil and place on the affected area. This plaster does not set the bone in place.
But it is excellent for reducing inflammation and alleviating pain, especially from hot swelling. Here is another recipe for a plaster that sets broken bones: take unripe fig leaves and wild poppy leaves; grind them both and apply as a poultice when moist. Here is another concise recipe for a plaster to be used when a bone has been set in place.
If you want to reduce the swelling further, take equal parts of chamomile flowers, marigold petals and lavender flowers; grind them all together and knead with the ointment if the affected part is hot, or with coriander water or plain water if it is cool.
Description of another bandage, stronger and more effective than the first, to be used when a hard swelling occurs due to the union of bone, taken from the root of the alder and flax seed, and hemp, and king's crown and marjoram, and lavender flowers and chamomile, each in one part.
They are all ground and kneaded with hot water or fresh water or paint, depending on the temperature of the member and the cessation of its heat. However, Hippocrates does not mention in his book that it should be applied to the broken member when setting it.
Except for cerوتي made from wax and oil, nothing else, and he described that it should be intermediate between thickness and thinness. However, Galen believed that when setting the broken member, substances that have a drying effect should be applied with something hot, such as myrrh, pitch, frankincense, and similar to what we mentioned.
Description of a bandage that is beneficial for weakness and pain: take mugwort, roasted copper, human hair or bird feathers, alder, and salt in equal parts. Grind and sift them, knead and apply as a poultice. As for how long the bandage should be left on, it depends on the condition of the patient.
Then it is removed, and you should examine the patient; if no pain, itching or movement of the broken bone occurs in its place, do not remove it for several days. But if there is severe itching, painful restlessness or swelling in the area,
then act quickly and remove it at once, do not delay at all. Then take a soft cloth or sponge, moisten it in lukewarm water and wash the area until the itching and pain subside, then leave the member to rest for an hour.ثمّ أعده فى ضماده، فإن استرجع فى الحال واشتدّت حرارته وأحسست بحركته وحكاكه فعالج على ما ذكرناه قبل هذا، وإن سكن واستقرّ وذهب الوجع والحكاك والتحرك، فاعلم أنّه قد اتصل واجتمع.
Then you apply to it the compressed wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and tie it on overnight so that you may be safe from the hot swelling, and that the swelling of the member subsides and its pain is relieved; then return it to gentle compression and a small bandage, but do not compress it as before.
And be gentle with it until it heals; if you see that the swelling, redness, pain and distension, and all the symptoms have completely disappeared, and that it only needs bandaging and compression, then return to doing as you did at first; if nothing happens in the member from what we mentioned.
Do not remove the bandage except after three, four, five or seven days; it may be left for twenty days, all depending on the condition of the member as we have said, until the fracture is healed and the flesh nearly closed around it.
Also, then increase the compression more than your first compression altogether, and also increase the thickness of the patient's food as mentioned earlier; if you see that the site of the fracture has dried up and become thinner than it should, then know that the food is being prevented from reaching it.فإن كان هذا ولا بدّ من شدّه فأعده الى شدّك الأوّل وضماده وانظر ما حدث فى الموضع، فإن عاوده الورم والحمرة وجميع الأعراض التى ذكرناها فأعلم أنّ الغذاء لا يصل اليه، وان لم يحدث شىء ممّا ذكرناه فأعده الى شدّه الأوّل وضماده.
But if you must compress it, then return it to your first compression and bandage, and see what has happened in the place; if the swelling, redness and all the symptoms we mentioned return, then know that the food is not reaching it; but if nothing happens as mentioned, then return it to its first compression and bandage.And let him drink warm water every time you remove the bandage, and let this be done every three days and loosen the compression slightly, for by this action the food reaches the member and it heals quickly; and as for what the ignorant bone-setters do of breaking the member again,.
if it does not heal straight at first but heals crooked, then that is their mistake and a great deception; if it had been right, the former generations would have mentioned it in their books and practiced it, but I have not seen any trace of it among them at all.وان خفّضت من شدّه شيئا فشيئا ورفعت من ضماده شيئا فشيئا على ما قلناه واستعملت معه المسهلات الخفيفة وعالجته بالغذاء اللطيف، فإنّه يسكن الورم ويستقيم العضو ويقوى شيئا فشيئا ح And it is best not to operate on it.
Chapter 2.
On fractures of the skull.
There are many types of fractures in the skull, and their shapes and causes vary. Some fractures are caused by a blow from a sword, which can split the bone all the way to the peritoneum beneath it. Just as an axe splits wood.
This type of fracture is called a "cleavage fracture", and the wound can be large or small.
Some fractures are caused by a blow from a stone or falling on a stone, etc. This type of fracture can be either penetrating, close to the membrane beneath the bone, or it can be in the face of the bone itself.
The wound from these fractures can also be large or small. Some fractures are subtle, occurring in the thin hairline.
This type of fracture is called a "concussive fracture", and it occurs when the skull is struck by an object, causing depression of the bone, similar to what happens to a copper vessel when it is hit.
These types of fractures are most commonly seen in skulls with thin bones, such as those of young children. We will discuss the treatment for all these types of fractures in their respective sections, and we can identify all these types of fractures through examination.
And its treatment, you should first examine the patient's symptoms.
If you see symptoms that clearly indicate fear, such as vomiting bile, rigor mortis, loss of consciousness, hoarseness, fainting, high fever, bulging and reddening of the eyes, and other similar symptoms, then you should not treat or approach the patient, as death is certain in most cases with these symptoms.
If you see no alarming symptoms and hope for his safety, then proceed with his treatment. This is because if the wounded man comes to you immediately after being wounded, and this happens in the winter days,
You should then try to remove the bone before the fourteenth day, in any case, and if it is in the summer days, you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before what is under the bone spoils the membrane, so that those symptoms that we have described appear.
If the fracture of the bone has reached the membrane covering the brain, and it is accompanied by a crush injury, you should cut off the crushed part as I am describing to you. This is done by shaving the head of the wounded patient.
And you expose the bone in any way that is convenient for you and according to the shape of the wound and what is easier for the patient. If, upon exposing the bone, you see bleeding or a hot swelling, then deal with it accordingly.
This is done by packing the area with cloth soaked in a mixture of vinegar and oil, and cleaning the wound until the swelling subsides and bleeding stops. Then you proceed to hollow out and remove the bone, and this can be done in one of two ways:
The first way is to cut the bone with a sharp, narrow blade. This is how it is done:.
Then you use another cutter after this one, which is slightly wider. This is how it looks:.[The figure shows a drawing of a bone saw with two blades of different widths.]وأنت تقطع وتسحب بيديك القوية
Then you also use another cutter, which is wider than the second one. You should have a variety of cutters with different widths, some wider and some narrower, all of them extremely sharp at their tips, made of Indian iron or good steel.
And use gentle blows on the cutter so as not to jolt the head and hurt him. If the bone is strong and hard, you should drill around it before using the cutters with drills that are not countersunk. They call them non-countersunk drills.
Because it does not extend beyond the limit of the skull bone, since the drill has a rounded tip beneath its sharp point, resembling a small ring or circle, which prevents it from penetrating and going beyond the thickness of the bone.
You should have many of these drills, each suitable for the thickness of that bone, so that you have a drill for each skull, the length and shortness of its sharp point corresponding to the thickness of that skull. This is an image of three types. of drills: large, medium and small:
As for the technique of drilling around the broken bone, you should place the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated, then move the drill to another location, and make the distance between each hole equal to the thickness of the file or similar.
Then cut between each pair of holes with the nippers, doing this as gently as possible, as we have said, until you dislodge the bone, either by hand or with another tool made for that purpose.
Like a hammer and fine pins, you should be very careful that the drill or cutter does not touch any of the membrane, if the bone has been hollowed out and separated from the membrane to which it was attached, and removed, then it should be stripped off.
And smooth out the roughness of what remains in the bone with another tool similar to the cutter, except that it should be thinner and more delicate than the other cutters; if any small bones or splinters remain, you should remove them carefully with your tools.
Then you should treat the wound afterward with twisting and ointments, which will be mentioned later; as for the other side of the operation, it is very easy and far from risk, which Galen mentioned and praised greatly, and this is his words. You should first uncover the portion of the bone from the place where the fracture is most severe and prominent, until you have uncovered that portion, then place under it the tip of this lentil-shaped cutter, and this is its image:
The lens-shaped portion of it is smooth and does not cut anything, and the sharp portion in its sides going towards length as you see, so that the lens-shaped portion rests on the peritoneum and the face of the sharp section is in the bone. Then strike the section from one side.
With a small hammer until it cuts all the bone gently as it turns and you are safe from the membrane, not doing anything frightening at all, and even if the operator is the most ignorant and most fearful person, yes, even if he is drowsy.
If something of the membrane remains on the bone in some places on the bone, scrape it off with the tip of the lens-shaped section itself and free it from it gently; it will be freed from it without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone did not penetrate the membrane, and what was cut from the bone was its face, and there remained in it roughness and fine splinters, then you should strip off that roughness and pull out those splinters with delicate curettes that have been made into different sizes so that you can use them in each place that is most appropriate and suitable according to what the work leads you to.
And the shape of the broken bone itself, and it should be that you strip off first with the widest of those curettes, then use one narrower after it, and keep doing that in order until you come to using the narrowest and thinnest of them all.
And as for the other small hairline fractures and fine fractures, it is appropriate that you use treatment on each one according to what leads to its repair, and this is something that is not hidden from anyone with even the least experience in this craft, and who has stopped to consider what we have written and clarified about large fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed when you pull out the bone, then you should take a linen cloth the size of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it over the mouth of the wound, then take another folded or triple-folded cloth. And you dip it in a syrup and rose oil and place it on the first bandage, and do this as gently as you can so that you don't weigh down the peritoneum. Then you use a wide bandage over the top, but only tighten it enough to hold the wound closed.
And leave it with this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of the hot swelling, then loosen it and afterwards use the remedies which have a drying effect like the roots of lilies, saffron powder, myrrh resin, and similar substances. It is best to make these into a powder.
And sprinkle the wound with this powder while it is dry, and in general, use a remedy that will clear the wound without irritating it. In treating the wound, take great care to keep it clean, free from oil or dirt, and never allow pus to collect in it.
This is because pus, when it collects on the brain membrane, corrupts and rots it, which can cause great harm to the patient. This can happen with any wound to the skull, especially if it is not properly treated.
If you see a blackened area on the surface, and if the patient exhibits the symptoms we have mentioned, then you may be sure that he will die. If the blackening is due to a remedy applied to the wound, and if that remedy is strong enough to cause such discolouration, then it is not certain that the patient will die.
You should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, mix them well, then spread it on a bandage and apply it to the peritoneum. Then treat it with whatever remedies are appropriate until it heals.
Chapter 3
On the treatment of a broken nose.
Know that only the upper part of the nose can break, or one of them, because they are bones. The lower part is made of cartilage and cannot break, but it can become dislocated, crooked, or distorted.
If one of its sides is broken, you should insert your little finger into the nostril and reduce the fracture from inside with your index and thumb from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. Do this gently and be careful not to cause pain to the patient by doing so.
If the fracture is at the top of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, it should be reduced with a rod that has a little thickness on its tip. If the fracture is on both sides, do the same. And it is necessary to reduce it in the first day of the fracture.
If possible, or after the seventh or tenth day when the swelling has subsided, then insert a cotton thread into the nostril if the fracture is on one side, or two threads if it is on both sides.
The thickness of the threads should be such that it fills the nostril. Some ancient setters mentioned that the threads should be moistened with butter and changed every day, but I don't think so. Instead, the threads should be moistened with egg white mixed with flour.
Then, the threads are left until the bone is set and the cartilage hardens. Goose feathers wrapped in soft cloth can also be inserted into the nostril as a more effective method of holding the fracture in place, so that the patient can breathe without difficulty.
This is not a necessary step, but if you wish to do so, you can use either the feather method or the threads. If the nose experiences swelling during the process, apply a poultice of ceratus or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or something from the diachylon plaster.
If there is no hot swelling, then you should apply a poultice of fine semolina and ground benzoin resin mixed with egg white on the outside of the nose. Do not tie the nose at all. If the nasal bones are fractured slightly,
If it is crushed or shattered, then you should cut it and remove it with the appropriate instrument, then stitch up the incision and treat it with suitable ointments to promote healing. If there is a wound inside the nose, then it should be treated by packing and the use of lead tubes. until it heals.
Chapter 4.
Treating a broken jaw.
If the lower jaw is broken and there is no wound, then it is easy to identify.
You should insert the index finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient if the break is on the right side, and likewise, you should insert the index finger of the right hand and gently lift the bump of the fracture from the inside to the outside if the break is on the left side.
With your other hand outside the bone, adjust it to smooth it out. If the jawbone is broken in two places, you should use traction from both sides to align it. If there is a tooth that has grown at an angle, then you should use the instrument to straighten it.وينبغى أن يكون هذا المدّ فى موضع الكسر، فإن كان الأسفل قد كُسِرَ من داخل وبدون جرح فينبغى أن تمدّه الى داخل حتّى تتمكّن تسويته، وينبغى أن يختبر ذلك برفق ويستعمل المدّ بقدر ما يحتمل العل
If the bottom jaw is broken from the inside without a wound, you should extend it inward to align it. This should be tested gently, and traction should be applied as much as the patient can tolerate. Then, you should use gold or silver thread to secure the split, then apply the cireutic on the broken jaw, then place a folded cloth, and finally put a large splint or a piece of sole leather equal in length to the jawbone.فإن كان الكسر فى الشقّ الأيسر واستعملت المدّة من الناحية اليمنى فينبغى أن تردها الى مكانها برفق، وينبغى أن يختبر ذلك برفق حتّى يتمكّن ويستعمل المدّ بقدر ما يحتمل If the break is on the left side and you use traction from the right side, then you should gently return it to its place. This should be tested gently until it is secure, and traction should be applied as much as the patient can tolerate. Then, you should tie it securely above according to your judgment and in a way that suits compression so that it does not come undone. You should tell the patient to rest and eat soft foods, and if you think that something has changed in his appearance, then act promptly on the third day.
If the break is on the left side and you use traction from the right side, then you should gently return it to its place. This should be tested gently until it is secure, and traction should be applied as much as the patient can tolerate. Then, you should tie it securely above according to your judgment and in a way that suits compression so that it does not come undone. You should tell the patient to rest and eat soft foods, and if you think that something has changed in his appearance, then act promptly on the third day. Then you should dress the wound with flour and egg white, or with smetana wheat after removing the guaiacum, and place a soft bandage on the dressing. As long as it adheres to him and does not change for the bone, leave it.
Do not loosen it until the fracture heals and the bone strengthens. This fracture often strengthens in three weeks. If a hot swelling occurs during this time, use what we mentioned repeatedly to alleviate it until the swelling goes down.
However, if there is a fracture with a wound, you should check if there is a splinter or splinters that have separated from the bone. Be gentle in removing these splinters with whatever tool works best for you. If the wound opening is narrow, widen it with a scalpel to the extent you need.وإن كان الجرح مع الكسر جرحا متسعا فانتزع الشظايا وأبرئ الجرح كما ذكرناه وعلّق عليه ضمادا رقيقا وشدّه برفق، فإن احتاج إلى شدّ أكثر شدّته بأداة رفيعة، وإن احتاج إلى شدّ أكثر شدّته بآلة أوسع، وإن احتاج إلى شدّ
If the wound is wide along with the fracture, remove the splinters and heal the wound as we mentioned before, then apply a thin dressing and tie it gently. If it needs more tightness, tighten it with a thinner tool, and if it needs even more tightness, use a wider tool. Then, once you have removed all the splinters and cleaned the wound, if it is wide, stitch its edges, or if it is narrow, apply one of the ointments suitable for this purpose.وإن And let the wound heal.
Chapter 5.
On setting the collarbone when it is fractured.
The collarbone most often breaks from the front end of the shoulder joint, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways: either it breaks and splits into two without creating any splinters, which is the easiest to set; or it shatters into many pieces, which is more difficult to set; or it dislocates, which is even more challenging.وإمّا أن تنكسر وتنقصف
And either splinters occur in the fracture, which is more difficult to set; or it is a fracture with a wound. If the fracture is without a wound, have one assistant hold the arm that adjoins the broken collarbone, and the other extend the neck towards the other side.فإن كان الكسر من وراء وكان مع الجرح فالعمل فيه كالذى ذكرناه، وإن لم يكن معه جرح فأمران يقويان عليك فى جبره أحدهما طوله والآخر أن يكون الكسر من وراء مع أن العنق عظم رقيق جدا.
Then smooth the fracture with your fingers until it is shaped as it should be, without any bumps or irregularities. If you need to extend it further, you should place a ball of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit.
The bone should be the size you need, and you should extend and lift the collarbone, and press the ball with your hand until the fracture is smoothed as it should be. If you cannot pull the end of the collarbone outwards because it has moved too deeply inwards, the patient should lie on his back.
A pillow of moderate size should be placed under his shoulder, and the assistant should press down on the shoulder until the deep collarbone rises up. At that point, fix the fracture and smooth it with your fingers.
If you feel that a shard of the collarbone has broken and is moving, it should be gently split and the shard extracted with care. If the shard is stuck in the bone, use one of the cutting tools prepared for this purpose. After placing the instrument that protects the peritoneum under the collarbone - it is an instrument made of wood or iron, and it looks like this: .
It resembles a spoon without any bumps, and its width should be according to the size of the bone, large or small. As for its length, it should also depend on your needs in the procedure, and it should have two ends as you see, one end is wider and the other narrower.
If the wound opening that you made when removing the bone shard is wide, and you are not concerned about hot inflammation, then close the wound edges by suturing. If the opening is small, or if you fear hot inflammation, pack the wound with gauze and bandages to the extent of the wound opening.
If hot inflammation occurs, wet the wound opening with rosewater and vinegar, or wine, and apply pressure on it. As for bone fracture without a wound or incision, you should apply a cast to the bone made of flour dust mixed with egg white. And place the soft bandage on it, then put the ball under his armpit if necessary, then take a turband that is very long and about a span in width, then fold a pad over the bandage and the bandage, then take a splint of a thin board. Make the width and length of this about three fingers, then insert it into a cloth, then insert that cloth with the splint into the part of the turband which falls on the fracture, then tighten the turband over the fracture as you wrap it around. And wrap it around his neck, and under the armpit of the sound arm, and under the armpit of the affected arm, and return it several times on each side, as you see that the tension holds the fracture firmly in place, which is not hidden from you.وإن احتاج الى شدّ أكثر ردّها تحت إبطه وشدّها مرتين أو ثلاثا حسب الحاجة فإنّ الجبيرة إنما تشدّ للكسر لا للذراع وإن احتاج إلى شدّ الجبيرة من فوق الكرة فلت
And if he needs more tension, return it under his armpit and tighten it two or three times as needed, for the splint is only tightened for the fracture. And the whole point is that the For this reason, you should check the patient every day, for whenever the bandage loosens and you see that the splint has shifted, repair that and tighten the bandage. Then make the patient sleep on his back at night, and place a small pillow under his armpit.وإن احتاج الى أن ينام على جنبه جعلت المخدّة تحت إبطه وعلّمت عليه موضع الكرة وشدّت الجبيرة وأصبت عليه الماء البارد لئلاّ يتورّم موضع الكسر.
And if he needs to sleep on his side, put the pillow under his armpit, mark the position of the ball, tighten the splint, and pour cold water over him so that the fracture does not swell. And let his shoulder rise from his side so that the fracture of the collarbone rises with the shoulder or tie his arm to his neck; do not loosen the bandage unless something happens at that point, such as itching or swelling, for up to twelve days.
Then renew the dressing if you see a reason for it. And return to tightening and leave it until the fracture of the collarbone is healed and bonded, and this is stronger and more firm in twenty-eight days.فإذا تعقّدت واشتدّت عرفت انها قد استحكمت وانقطعت الحاجة الى الجبيرة، فإن احسست فى موضع الكسر بانتفاخ وعظم كأنه قطعة لحم ميتة فأعطاه دواء المراهم And it may be in some people in less than that.
Chapter 6.
On the treatment of a shoulder fracture. The shoulder rarely fractures in its broadest part; rather, its edges are what typically fracture. This is determined by touch, and the treatment depends on the shape of the fracture.
Smooth it out and return it to its natural shape by any means possible, then apply flour mixed with egg white and fine linen rags over the site, and place a wide splint made of wood on top.
Make the splint thin, to fit over the entire shoulder or slightly wider, and if there is any swelling under the splint in any part of the shoulder, smooth out that swelling with fine linen rags until the splint sits flat. Then wrap a long turban around it to secure it in place.وإن كان الموضع الّذى فيه الكسر نحيفا بحيث لا يمكنك أن تجعل الجبيرة على استواء، فتحيّل حتّى تستخرج منها التعقير الّذي يمنع الجبيرة من الاستواء، فإن لم تفعل لم يكن إلّا تعبٌ بلا فائدة.
Make the splint fit snugly and be sure it does not move; check the bandage every day, as it will loosen over time. Whenever this happens, adjust the bandage and splint if necessary. The patient should lie on their non-affected side, and the shoulder will heal within twenty days.
After this time, the bandage can be removed with no worry; this is an bone that does not risk fracturing or dislocating. If a shard of bone juts out and pricks the skin underneath, cut it away. Do as was mentioned in case of a fractured collarbone regarding the hot swelling, should anything like that occur..
Chapter 7.فىجبر كسر العض
On the treatment of a chest fracture.وإن كان الكسر فى الضلوع فافحص المو
If the fracture is in the ribs, examine the chest; it may fracture in the middle, which is rare, or at its edges, which is more common. The symptoms include a downward tilt, severe pain, difficulty breathing, and coughing.وإن كان الكسر فى أطرافه فلا يعرض له وجع شديد ولا عسر فى النفس بل يكون على حسب ما انكسر منه طرف من أطراف الضلوع، فإذا نزلت الجبيرة عن موضع الكسر فقد أزاحت الأعضاء التى تحتها من القلب والرئة وما يليهما فضاقت الأنفس واضطربت النبض، فإن لم تعالج ذلك وقعت فى مزيد.
And perhaps it will shed blood and the concavity in the broken bone will be apparent to the touch, and its treatment is for the sick person to lie on his back and a pillow to be placed between his shoulders, then pressure is applied to his shoulders and the ribs are pulled together by hand from both sides, and care is taken to smooth it out as much as possible.
And when it has been reduced, apply a dressing and a splint over it, and place a thin board of willow or ash, or something similar in thinness, on top of the splint after you have wrapped it in cloth. And be careful in tying it so that it does not come loose, and pass the bandage around the bone several times in a circular fashion to the back, and tighten it firmly. Then check the bandage at all times, and whenever it feels loose, tighten it.
And if it becomes necessary to loosen it due to any pain, swelling, or discomfort in the area, do so promptly, remove the dressing, and address the issue with its appropriate treatment, then reapply the dressing if you see fit. Face it and keep it tight until it heals.
Chapter 8.
In the treatment of broken ribs, know that ribs most often sustain breaks at their thick ends near the back, and their tips in front are more susceptible to contusions due to their cartilaginous nature. The detection of this is not difficult when inspected with your fingers.
Its treatment is to smooth out the break with your fingers as best you can until the shape is restored, then dress and splint the broken rib if necessary. If the ribs are broken and sloping inwards, the patient will experience severe pain.
There is a sharp pain similar to that experienced by those with a punctured lung, as the rib pierces the pleura and causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and the ejection of a large amount of blood. This condition is difficult to treat, and the early physicians devised many remedies for it.
Some have said that the food of the sick person should be what produces wind and bloating, so that the abdomen swells and expands, pushing the fracture outward. We dislike this because it could reinforce the occurrence of a hot tumor, if it has not already occurred; and if it has occurred, then it increases and reinforces it.
Some have said that a cupping glass should be placed over the site and then sucked with force, which is similar to cauterization, except that there is concern that the cupping glass might attract foreign particles to the site due to its weakness. Some have said that the site should be covered with wool that has been soaked in hot oil.
You place a pad between the ribs until it is filled, so that the ligament is level when you wrap it around. Then treat the patient with the treatment of the shrapnel wound, in terms of food and medicine; if the patient becomes overwhelmed by something too difficult to bear. The bone pricks the diaphragm in a painful way, and we fear for the patient; therefore, we should split open the site and expose the broken rib, then place under it the instrument that protects the peritoneum, as its description has been given before, and cut the bone gently and take it out.
Then we bring the lips of the wound together with sutures if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it heals; if a hot tumor occurs in the meantime, then act quickly, moisten pads in rose oil, place them on the site, and treat the patient with what calms the tumor from within as well.
And let him lie on his side which makes sleeping easier until it heals.
Chapter 9.
On splinting the vertebrae of the back and neck.
As for the bones of the neck, if they are fractured and it is rare for that to happen, and it mostly happens due to a blow; and likewise for the vertebrae of the back as well: when such an incident occurs to someone, and you want to know whether it will heal or not. Look, and if you see that his hands have become limp, numb, and dead, and he is unable to move them or stretch or clench them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it and does not experience any pain in them, then know that in most cases he will not recover, and he will perish.
And if he can move them and feels the pricking and poking, then know that the bone marrow is safe, and the patient will recover with treatment. If the same happens to the vertebrae, and you want to know whether it will recover or not,
look at his legs, and if you see that they have become limp and the same has happened to them as to the hands, then when he lies on his back, wind and stool come out involuntarily, and when he lies on his stomach, urine comes out involuntarily. And if, when he lies on his back and wants to urinate, he cannot do so, then know that he is doomed, so do not bother treating him. But if nothing like that happens to him, the condition is less serious. The treatment for what has happened is to try to soothe the hot tumor.وإن كان الورم باردا فاضربه بالمرزنجوش والزعترى وافرك موضع الورم بأصل الساقين من الكعبين، واجعل له مرهما من الاكافورى مع الترياقات المسهلة للدم فى موضع الورم، ثمّ احتجم من
And if the tumor is cold, hit it with marjoram and rosemary, and rub the affected area at the base of the legs from the ankles. Make a ointment from camphor mixed with blood-moving remedies to be applied to the tumor. Then, have the patient bleed in that spot by placing rose oil on the vertebrae alone or with roasted egg yolks. Do this three times a day until the hot tumor subsides. Then, apply one of the strengthening and astringent dressings to the affected area, bind it tightly with a bandage, and tell him to rest.وإذا استدعى الأمر إلى الكىّ فاشدد عليه الرباط حتّى يبقى أثره ويبرأ بإذن اللّه تعالى، وعليك بالزعفران مع الخلّ والماء.
If cauterization is necessary, tighten the bandage until its mark remains and it heals by God's permission. Saffron with vinegar and water should be used. The patient should sleep only on the side where he does not feel any pain until he recovers. If there is a splinter of bone or something that has separated from the bone due to the impact, you should split the skin and remove that bone.واحذر أن تشقّ على موضع الورم الا بعد أن يتبيّن لك أنّه لا يمكن إزالة الشظيّة او الحشو إلّا به، وإن أمكنك أن تخرج ذلك بغير كىّ فافعل فإنّ Then the lips of the wound are to be brought together with stitches if it is large, and then treated with healing ointments until it heals. If the last bone of the tail, which is the coccyx, is broken, you should insert your left thumb into the anus.
And the broken bone is to be set with the other hand according to what is possible and convenient, and then the bandage and splint are to be applied if necessary, and then it is to be tightened.
If you feel a broken splinter in it, cut it and remove it, and treat the wound as already described until it heals.
Chapter ten.
On setting a hip fracture.
Rarely do the bones of the pelvis break, but when they do, it is usually by becoming fragmented at their ends and splitting lengthwise, tilting inward. The patient suffers pain in the affected area, as well as numbness and weakness in the leg on the side with the fracture.
To set the fracture, run your hand over it to feel how the break is shaped. If the break is only in its ends, then adjust that end according to what you can manage so that it resembles its natural shape.
If the break is lengthwise or has tilted inward, then lay the patient on his stomach so that you can set that fracture. Once you have done so, apply a bandage over it and then place a splint made of wood or leather over it and tighten it.
Do not worry about the fracture shifting or the splint being removed, and adjust the indentation in the flanks by whatever fills it so that it is even. Then you should tell the patient to sleep on his back or on his healthy side if a hot swelling appears.
Stop treating him and leave the fracture alone until the hot swelling subsides, then go back to setting the fracture and tighten it as it should be. If splinters or fragments appear in the ends of the bone, they should not be removed.
And it is not touched but smoothed from the outside as we have said and its tension is left until it heals.
CHAPTER XI.
On the treatment of a fracture of the humerus.
The humerus is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder. If it is fractured, it should be treated in one of two ways. One way is to take a curved, smooth, medium-thick stick in this shape:
And you tie two strings to its ends, then suspend it from an elevated place, and the patient sits on a chair, then his broken arm is laid on the stick so that his armpit becomes attached in the middle of the bend of the stick. Then something heavy is suspended from above it..
Or a servant pulls it down, then the doctor reduces the fracture with his hands together until the fracture is reduced as it should be. The other way is for the patient to lie on his back and his hand is suspended from his neck by a string.
Then you order two servants, one of them to hold above the fracture with his hands and the other to hold below it and each of them pulls towards his side. If you want the pull to be stronger, tie a string under the fracture and another above it, and each servant pulls towards his side..وإنّ المريض إذا استلقى على جنبه الأيمن أو الأيسر ومدّ ذراعه المكسورة الى جهته فهذا هو أسهل له وللمال.
If the patient lies on his right or left side and extends his broken arm to his side, this is easier for him and for the money. If the fracture is close to the shoulder joint, the middle of the bandage should be under the armpit and the other towards the elbow and in the same way if the fracture is close to the elbow, the bandage should be on that spot and on the elbow itself..وكلّ كسر فينبغى أن يبقى العليل معه أياما حتى يتّسع الكسر ويبرأ، وإنّ الكسر في المواضع المنحنية مثل منكب الذراع أو الورك فإنّ
And every fracture, the patient should remain with it for a few days until the fracture widens and heals. And if the fracture is in curved places such as the shoulder joint or the hip, then. the fracture is reduced gently without violence until the fracture is reduced as it should be and when it has united well, then it is bound, if no hot swelling occurs, if a hot swelling occurs, leave it until the seventh day and put on it a woolen bandage moistened with vinegar and rose oil..وكلّ كسر يكون في المواضع المنحنية ينبغى أن يقلّم ويلصق بعضه على بعض حتى لا يتباعد عند الحركة.
Until the tumor has subsided, then compress it; and its compression is that you place a dressing on the fracture, then place a bandage of new cloth on the dressing, then bring the arm together on the bicep itself, and place his hand open on his shoulder.
And you carry the bandage and compression on the bicep and arm so that the arm takes the place of splints if nothing prevents you from doing so, and nothing has changed from the broken bone. But if you are afraid that something might change, then use splints.
This is done by placing a splint on the fracture itself, which is wider and stronger than other splints, and between each splint there should be a finger's width, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture plus three fingers on each side.وينبغى للجبائر أن تكون خفيفة ومستديرة وليست مربّعة ولا مستطيلة وأن لا تثقلها ولا تجعلها سميكة لتمنع الورم من أن يذهب، وينبغى أن تجعل الجبائر على
Then tighten the splints in the way mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.وإذا أراد الخروج فليركب مركوباً وليرتضع الرضاعة التى ذكرتها لك، فإن لم يمكنه ذلك فالراكب ي
And when he wants to go out, he should ride in a vehicle or use the method I mentioned before; and if that is not possible, then the rider should
The closer the fracture is to being healed, the less compression is needed; so if you see that applying the splints and compression as mentioned in the time of setting the bone is effective, then do it.فإذا سكن الورم وأقامت الجبائر العضو فى مكانه فأزل الجبائر وشدّ الكسر بالشداد الذى ذكرته لك، ثمّ ضع الضماد على الكسر
And when the swelling has subsided and the splints have held the bone in place, remove the splints and compress the fracture with the bandage I mentioned; and if you fear hot swelling, leave the compression and splints off until the seventh day as I mentioned, then examine the ligament every three days so that no itching or swelling occurs in the area, nor does food fail to reach the member due to excess compression. You should correct all of this as I mentioned.
If you are sure that none of this will happen, do not loosen the bandage for many days. Let the patient lie on his back with his hand on his abdomen and place under the armpit a moderate amount of wool in a small pouch.
And check at any time, day or night, so that the shape of the broken bone is not disturbed or the bandage becomes slack; rectify all this with your effort. And let the patient's food be gentle first, as we have presented, so that when the bone begins to harden.
You should thicken his food, because it is the nature of the arm and leg to harden in forty days; then you should loosen the bandage and use a bath and treat with ointments that are suitable for this. If the fracture is severe and crushed.
Do not remove the bandage until fifty days or two months.
Chapter 12.
On setting a broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, one is small and called the radius, which is closest to the thumb, and the other is large and is placed under the small from below; Thus, the largest radius may be broken alone or alone, or both may be broken at the same time. .
When the radius below is broken, its fracture is poor and its healing is difficult, and the worst is when both bones are broken at the same time. If the bone that is broken is the radius above the small radius.
The physician should, when setting it, make its extension slight and gentle until he equalizes it; if the large radius is broken, he should make its extension stronger, and if both radii are broken, he should make the extension much stronger. .
The shape of the hand should be placed when set and extended on a pillow, with the thumb upward higher than all the fingers, and the little finger below all the other fingers, and the patient seated cross-legged.
And let the pillow be opposite him in height so that the patient does not experience difficulty.
Then the assistant holds the arm from below, either by hand or with a ligature, and another assistant holds it from above, and then the physician adjusts the bone until he returns it to the best possible shape. If there are fragments in the broken bone, they are removed.
Return each fragment to its proper place as much as you can. If a protruding fragment appears and it pricks the skin, and there is no hope of setting it, then make an incision over it and extract it according to what we have previously mentioned. If the fracture is with a wound, I will mention it in another chapter.
Then you take the treatment from there. If a hot swelling occurs at the beginning of your setting, then apply a poultice with camphor made with rose oil and white beeswax, and let it be between thick and thin, and tie the poultice gently until the swelling subsides.
Remove the poultice and put on the bandage prepared from flour with white of egg, then carry the splints, and let the splint which is placed on the fracture itself be slightly wider and stronger. Know that in most cases, the number of splints for the arm is six.
If the fracture is in one radius or in both radii, then make your grip on the site of the fracture stronger and harder. And whenever you rotate with a grip up or down, make the grip looser a little, as mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And let the cloth that is wrapped around the fracture be a soft, moist cloth, not too hard, and let the thread with which it is tied be of linen especially, medium between thinness and thickness, as we described it. And examine the member and ligament after a few days.
And if something happens that needs to be repaired, such as an itch that occurs in the member, it should be soaked in warm water until the itch subsides, and the member should be left loose for a night so that it can rest, then return to tightening it.
If the ligature has loosened or the bone has been displaced, or anything of that nature, then you must correct it as best you can; and if food is prevented from reaching the part because of the tightness of the ligature, you should loosen it a little and leave it for some days until food can reach it, and then tie it up again.
If nothing of what we have mentioned has occurred to the patient, then he should not be untied until after twenty days or thereabouts; and the patient's hand should then be suspended from his neck, his arm being kept straight, and he must take care to avoid restless movements, and he should sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm may be healed in thirty days, or in thirty-two, and perhaps it may be healed in twenty-eight days; all of this is according to the different constitutions and strengths.
CHAPTER XIII
ON THE SETTING OF FRACTURES OF THE HAND AND FINGERS.
The knuckles of the hand and the phalanges of the fingers seldom become fractured, but they are often sprained; so whenever a fracture or a sprain occurs in the hand,
the patient should sit cross-legged, with a seat placed before him on a level with his lap.
Then the hand should be laid out flat on the seat, and the servant of the fractured bone should stretch it out, while the physician sets it in good alignment; when this has been done to his satisfaction, the splint and bandage may then be applied, provided no hot swelling has occurred; after which a splint is put over the top, according to the size of the part.
I have enveloped it in a soft cloth; if the fracture is directed downward toward the palm, then make a ball out of cloth and bid the patient hold it in his fractured hand, after which it should be bound with a long strip of cloth.
Let the splint be made of soft leather, so that it may conform to the skin as the whole hand bends; it should then be bound in its proper position. If the fracture is directed outward, then a splint should be placed on top and another one below in the palm, so that the hand may be held open and straight.
Then the bandage is wrapped around the hand and secured with a knot between the fingers, if the fracture is on one of the phalanges of the fingers, then if it is on the thumb, it should be straightened as it should be, then it is tied with the palm, and if you want to make a small splint for it.
And if the fracture is on any of the other fingers, such as the middle finger, the index finger, or the little and ring fingers, then it should be straightened and tied to the next healthy finger, or they can all be tied together, which is better, or you can put a small splint on it.
As we have said about the thumb, and when you check the cast, make sure it is not too close to the hot swelling, as this will help reduce inflammation and pain.
Chapter 14.
On treating a fracture of the thigh.
The femur often breaks and is apparent to the senses because it moves forward and backward, and its treatment is by tying a bandage above the fracture and another below, while the patient lies on his back.
Then each bandage is stretched by the server to its side in a straight position, this is if the fracture is in the middle of the bone, and if it is close to the hip joint, a soft bandage should be tied, either wool or similar.
To the groin area, so that it extends upwards, and the other bandage below the fracture, and likewise if the fracture is near the knee, then the bandage should be near the knee so that it extends downwards, then the doctor straightens the bone with both hands until he returns it to its natural shape.
And the bone joins well, then the bandage and compression should be carried out if no hot swelling occurs in the limb, but if it does, leave it for a few days until the hot swelling subsides, then return to its treatment.
And as for the binding, one should wind a wide, stiff turban around the fracture twice or three times and leave what is left over, then wind the leg until the heel reaches the base of the buttock, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, and tie the ends of the thread above from both sides.
Then wrap around the leg and thigh what is left of the turban, then place splints on the thigh in the same spot as the fracture, and make one splint from it for the shin bone, then fill the gap between the thigh and leg with soft rags so that the tension is even.
Then start the strong binding from the middle on the spot of the fracture with three or four turns, and the further you move away from the spot of the fracture with the bandage, make it looser and softer.
Then take the ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and leg, and tie it to the splints above, then pass the ends of the thread down until they reach the ankle, and also tie them to the splints on the other side.وأيضا فأدخل خيطا طويلا بين الجبائر والجلد فى موضع الكسر من الجانبين حتى يمرّ على العظام كلها ويرجع من حيث أتى، ثم شدّه بقدر ما ينبغى.
Also insert a long thread between the splints and skin in the spot of the fracture from both sides so that it passes over all the bones and returns from where it came, then tighten it as much as is appropriate so that the bandage does not move out of place; then leave the tightness on it as long as there is no pain or swelling or inflammation or anything like that for the limb. If something happens to it, be quick about loosening it and fixing what happened from all of that, just as we have mentioned several times before.
If there is a shard of bone that is poking out, you should smooth it out if you can, or else cut it and pull it out, and treat the wound as mentioned earlier until it heals. This fracture may be bound from the thigh without adding the leg with splints.
As we have mentioned in relation to the humerus and the arm, except that its fracture in this way does not cause lameness; but if it is fractured alone, without being joined to the leg, then its owner will always be lame.
Know that the thigh bone heals within fifty days, or a little more or less, depending on the difference in temperaments and other conditions.
Chapter Fifteen.
On the fracture of the patella.
The patella is seldom fractured, but it is often bruised. When it is fractured, it is either a crack or a fragmentation of its parts, and this can occur with or without injury.
You can determine all of this through sensation, and the reduction is to align the separated parts with your fingers until they are united and coalesced as much as possible with skill, gentleness, and precision; then apply a bandage, and if necessary, a round splint on top of it.
You should apply a compression from above in the appropriate direction, and then follow all the conditions that we have described in other fractures, such as hot swelling, etc., by treating each condition with its appropriate remedy until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen.
On the reduction of a fracture of the leg.وأما الساق فكما ذكرنا ف
As for the leg, as we have mentioned, there are two bones in it: one thick, which is called the shinbone, and the other thin, which is called the fibula. These bones can be fractured in the same way as the two bones of the arm. Therefore, its reduction is the same as that of the arm, and the procedure is the same. If both bones are fractured, the leg will be turned to all sides; if only the thinner bone is fractured, the leg will turn forward; and if only the thicker bone is fractured, this is self-evident.
You should therefore use traction, reduction, and splinting according to this, except that if the fracture of the leg is a severe one with many fragments, the traction should be less and gentler, and you should exercise your skill in reducing it.وإن احتجت الى الكيّ فاستعمله، وقد نذكر شيئا من ذلك فيما بعد إن شاء الله تعالى، وإن كان كسرا خفيفا فيجبر كما ذكرناه فى سائر الكسور سواء إلّا أنّه يشتدّ جبره ويستقيم على ما هو عليه أسرع من الذراع.
And in the leg is something more than the arm, and that you, when you have straightened the splints and finished all your work, take two pieces of pine wood which are used to flatten the rooms between the splits of the boards or be from palm leaves or the like.
Choose one that is slightly thick and not from thin boards, and let its length be the same as the leg from the knee to the bottom. Then wrap a cloth around each one twice along its length and place one on each side of the leg.
Let it be from the knee to the bottom of the foot, then tie the two pieces in three places at the ends and the middle, for with this tie, the leg is prevented from tilting right or left and is well-stabilized. A wooden rod along the length of the leg may also be used.
And put it in to prevent movement, and you should especially do this with a fracture, especially if there is also a wound. Then examine the leg every day and pay close attention to any swelling or inflammation or other issues. When something happens, address it as appropriate until it heals. The bone of the leg usually heals in about 30 days or so.
Chapter XVIIINormal text ends
On the fracture of the bones of the leg and fingers.وفى الساق من العمل شىء زائد على الذراع وهو أن
However, the heel bone is never fractured, but the bones of the leg may be fractured, as well as the fingers, which are rarely fractured but are often bruised in most cases.والكعب هى عظمة مدورة مركبة على أسفل الساق من تحت الكوز الصحيح، وهى مخلوقة ليقف عليها المرء ويستقل بها فى المشى والقيام والقعود ومصنوعة من عظم صلب جدا وأكثر ما يتلف منها عند الصدمة الشديدة هو الكوز الذى يليها وهو جزء من عظمة الساق.
The heel bone is a round, compound bone located at the bottom of the leg, just below the calcaneus, and it is created for a person to stand on, walk, sit, and stand on, and is made of very hard bone. The most damaged part of it when severely impacted is the calcaneus, which is a portion of the leg bone.Now, if the long bones of the leg are fractured and you see those bones protruding, have the patient stand with his foot flat on the ground as though he were walking, then stand yourself and place your foot on the raised part of those bones, then press down and adjust them.وإن
Then carry the bandage and the splint from above, and place under the sole of the foot a small board with two flat ends, then tighten it firmly after having wrapped the foot in rags and whatever else you need.
Then, after three or four days, loosen the bandage and you will find that the broken bones have healed or the dislocated bones have been reduced, so proceed as I instructed you above in reducing dislocated fingers. If a toe is broken, reduce it and straighten it as described to you for straightening the fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger, running its entire length and slightly broader than it; then place under the foot the board described to you above, and tighten it firmly. If two or more bones are broken, make the splint as broad as all of them together, and proceed in the same way.
Make a splint for each finger of the appropriate size, wrapped in a soft cloth, and tighten the board at the bottom of the foot; let each end of the board project slightly beyond the sole of the foot so that it may hold well.
You should not forget to take care of all that we have mentioned to you in regard to the various types of fractures, and deal with each symptom as it arises.
Chapter 18.
On the fracture of the pubic bone in women, and the bones of the pelvis and penis in men.
If a woman's pubic bone is broken, she should be made to sit cross-legged and then bent slowly backwards, while the midwife holds her from behind. The midwife should then pack her vagina with cotton until it is filled up like a ball.فإنّه يصحّ بإذن الله تعالى وقوعه لا محالة، لأنّ القطن ليونته تحول دون ذلك، وإنّما يفعل ذلك لئلا يتفسخ الكسر ويطبق الفرج ويضيق ويكون فيه آفة من الفساد.
Then the woman should be shaken gently and her trunk raised a little at a time, whereupon the cotton will come out until it lies like a ball at the entrance to her vagina, and the bone will return to its proper position; then she should be placed on a mattrass, so that when she wants to urinate, she can remove the cotton gently and urinate.وينبغى للقابلة أن تمسك بفرجها من فوق وتحت بمنديل وتكشفه وتراه حتّى تعرف موضع الكسر، والمرأة إذا أرادت أن تتغوّط فلتنحّ القطن عن فرجها وتحاذر أن تتغوّط فى القطن
And return it as you first introduced it, then go back to its original state, do this for seven days or so, it will heal. If you want to take a sheep's bladder, tie a tube of reed on its mouth and introduce the whole bladder into its vagina.
Then inflate the tube with force until the bladder inflates inside the vagina, then the fracture will return. Then stuff it with cotton and stay for a few days as we described until it heals. As for when the pubic bone of man or woman is fractured, use this to fix it.
And its adjustment as we described in the hip bone, and it should not be hidden from you the truth in these unusual fractures, which are rare, especially for those who have some experience and understand my book, because the fracture itself will guide you in most cases.
on the right way to fix and tighten it, so understand. As for a man's penis, if the thigh of a goose is broken, you insert the penis into it, then place a bandage of cloth on it, tie it, and leave it for three days or so until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
In the treatment of fractures with wounds.
Whoever has a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large like the thigh or arm or similar, should quickly start bleeding if the conditions of phlebotomy assist as we have presented.
If the wound is bleeding blood, you should quickly cut it by sprinkling alum powder on it if nothing else is available. Then take to fixing the fracture that same day and don't delay it.وإن كان جرحا ممتدا فافتحه ووسّعه وعالجه من حيث الجرح، وأمّا الكسر فاستعمل معه ما يحتاج اليه من الضمد والرباط واعتن بعلاجه كما تقدّم.
If it is an extended wound, open and expand it and treat it from where the wound is. As for the fracture, use with it what is needed of bandages and ligatures, and pay attention to its treatment as previously presented. If a hot swelling does not occur, if it does, leave fixing it until the ninth day so that the hot swelling subsides and do not approach it at all on the third and fourth days as it is exposed to bad symptoms.وإن كان ورم برد فلا بأس بجبره فى أوّل وقته، وقد قدمنا أنّ الكسر الذى لا يدخل فيه هواء ولا
If the broken bone is protruding from the skin and exposed, you should try to reduce it and smooth it out with your hand gently and with a slight stretch. If you cannot reduce it and smooth it out with your hand, reduce it with this instrument, which is made of iron, about seven or eight fingers in length. Its width should be equal to the wound.
For this reason, the doctor should have three or four of them made according to the need for treatment in each type of fracture, and they should be rounded with a slight thickness so that they do not bend when pressed upon during work.
The end should be sharp, with a curve at the tip, and the upper half should be thicker, while from the middle to the bottom it should be very thin. This is its shape: [A drawing of the instrument is shown here, with a curved tip and a tapered shaft].
This instrument is called a 'permy' in Greek, meaning a small lever. The sharp, curved tip should be placed against the protruding bone and pushed back with a quick motion until the bone is reduced and smoothed out. Then, the edges of the fracture should be gently pressed together.
If the broken end is thin and the instrument does not hold it well, then cut off that end of the bone so that the instrument can grip it. If you cannot reduce the bone using the method described above, then cut it with one of the cutting instruments mentioned earlier.
Or split it using one of the saws described earlier, then strip away any roughness or thin layers of bone that remain. If, after reduction, the patient experiences severe and distressing pain, know that the bone has not returned to its normal position.
If you are able to return it to its normal position, do so, for you will then have greatly benefited the patient. When your splinting of the bone is complete, immerse a cloth in a black astringent solution and apply it to the wound; do not place any cerate or anything containing oil on the wound.
So that no putrefaction or corruption occurs, then use splints when you have finished setting the bone and leave the wound exposed by cutting a hole in the bandages with scissors to the size of the wound.
Beware, above all else, of tightening the wound along with the fracture. Many ignorant physicians have done this and caused their patients either death or gangrene, or a cold. Your tightening should be gentle and relaxed, contrary to the tightening in other fractures.
If the wound is poor or large, and you fear some bad symptoms that we have described, and he feels disturbing pain in the area, then you should not place splints on him. Instead, make stiff bandages in the place of the splints and tie him with them.
If, after a day or two, you see that pus has begun to form in the wound, then remove the cloth that you placed on it with the bandage, and then use poultices and ointments that are part of our usual treatment for wounds, such as the quartan ointment and similar, and you should loosen the bandage.
You should examine the wound every day in the morning and evening until it heals, and you should erect the limb so that pus can flow easily downward. If many days have passed and the wound has not healed nor the pus stopped flowing from it, then you should know that there are small pieces of bone in there.
So you should probe the wound with a probe, and if any of those splinters are dislodged, then pull them out and remove them, but if they are not dislodged and are poking the limb and causing pain, then cut away around their roots and extract them in whatever way possible.
If a cold, gangrene or some other form of corruption occurs in the wound, then you should treat each condition with the appropriate treatment that has already been described in its chapter.
And among what you should reflect upon and keep in mind, if a large bone like the femur or humerus or similar large bones fracture and press against an organ, do not attempt to pull it out or push it in. So many people die from this, but instead leave it until it decays; perhaps it will fall out on its own after twenty or thirty days.
Then you can treat the wound if you see a place for treatment, otherwise leave it.
Chapter 20.
On the treatment of complications that occur after some fractures.
This complication often occurs after the fracture has healed, especially those near the joints, which makes the limb unsightly and sometimes prevents it from performing its natural function.فإن وقع هذا فى عظم الفخذ أو العضد أو غيرهما من الأعضاء التى تتحرّك حركة كثيره فإنّه يعرض فيه التعقّد بحدّة ويشتدّ ذلك ويصعب علاجه لأنّه لم يبق للكسر طاقة ولا قوّ
If this occurs in a bone of the thigh, arm, or other bones that move a lot, then the complication can become acute and severe, and it's difficult to treat because there is no longer any strength or power left in the fracture.Examine the complications; if they are recent, use drugs that constrict like myrrh, frankincense, gallnuts, and so on by taking some or all of these and kneading them into a drinking wine, egg white, or vinegar.وإن كان قد مضى على تعقّده مدّة فاستعمل فيه المراهم المقبضة مثل مرهم الزرنيخ او مرهم القلع أو نحو ذلك أو الكيّ بالأدوية القاب
If it has been a while since the complication occurred, then use astringent ointments such as arsenical ointment or lead ointment, etc., or cautery with drugs that constrict such as lead oxide, or you can place a tight bandage on it and leave it not to be unwrapped for several days, then unwrap it and re-bandage it until the complication goes away, God willing, or you can place a tight plate of lead on it.وإن كان التعقّد قد بلغ الحدّ الذى لا يمكن معه الكيّ او استعمال المراهم القابضة فانظروا ان كان هناك موضعا يصحّ فيه الكسر فيعمد الى كسره ويوجهه فى الموضع الصحيح ويضبّبه ثمّ يع
But lead has a property that removes all that it comes into contact with in the members; so if the complexions have become hardened and increased, and necessity requires their removal, then cut them from above and remove the resulting waste with some probes until they are gone, and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter 21
Treatment of fractures when they are healed and the member remains after that fragile and unlike its former nature.
When a fracture heals and the member remains after that weak and brittle, this is due to many reasons.وأبواب الرقة والضعف تتقارب وتشترك فى المعالجة حتى تتبيّن أحوالها، وللناس فيه مذهبان: أحدهما أنّه ي There are many doors of fragility and weakness, and their treatments converge until their conditions become apparent; and people have two opinions on this: one of them is due to the excessive dissolution and tying of the ligaments in a way that is not appropriate, or due to the excess of tightening the ligaments so that food cannot circulate in the member, or due to excessive movements at the wrong time, or due to the weakness and decrease of blood in the patient's body.وكلّها أسباب تصحّ وتصحّ معها المعالجة، وقد رأيت فى علاج الكسور مذاهب كثيرة: فمن قوم يطبّقون الكسر وينضدون عليه ضمادا رقيقا ويستعملون الحجامة والسعوطات والأدوية المسهلة للبطن وربما أطعموا العليل الذرور، ويقولون إنّه يقوّى العضو الضعيف ويرسّخه.
All of these are valid reasons, and there are many valid treatments for fractures; I have seen many different approaches to treating fractures: some people apply the fracture and wrap it with a thin bandage, and they use cupping, snuff, and laxatives for the abdomen, and sometimes feed the patient thuja, claiming that it strengthens the weak member and consolidates it.وينبغى مع ذلك أن يداوم على تناول الأدوية المنقية للبدن ويطعم البلغميات واللهبانيات والأشياء التى تذهب بفضول البدن وتعطّلها، وان لا يزال يستخرج من العضو الضعيف ما يتجمد In addition, one should continue to take purifying medicines, and eat phlegmatic and inflammatory foods, and other things that eliminate excesses from the body and inactivate them, and keep extracting the hardened substances from the weak member
Chapter 22.
In the treatment of broken bones, if they are bent and prevent them from functioning properly.
When a member has healed after a fracture, any crookedness or protuberance of the broken bone, or any ugliness resulting from it that spoils the appearance of the member. However, if the member does not prevent its natural action, one should not accept the claim of those who say that the head of the bone must be broken. Many ignorant physicians and bone-setters in our country do this.
This action is highly reprehensible and can lead to great danger, the least of which is injury. But if the crookedness and complexity are recent, it should be soaked in water that has cooked soft plants such as ivy leaves and roots, and king's crown, and the like.
And it should be bandaged with soft bandages such as well-made diakillon, or the sap of ivy leaves is mixed with chicken fat and sheep tallow, and applied as a poultice, or ripe figs are crushed with pigeon droppings, and other remedies that are called disruptors of scars.
And the complexity can be dissolved by constant, gentle massage that is done with the hands and by moving the member in all directions at all times. If the crookedness has occurred long ago and become severe and hardened, and if necessity demands it to be treated with iron.
Then the upper part should be split, and the connection of the bone released, and any excess complexity or bone cut with fine forceps, and great care and attention must be taken in doing this. Then the wound should be treated as already mentioned until it heals.
Chapter 23.
The jaw is the dislocation of one of the joints, either on both sides or on one side. The jaw impedes movement and makes the member ugly, and it causes great pain in the patient. Therefore, when this occurs in one of the jaws, it should be reduced immediately.وإن كان الفكّ من الجانبين فقد علمت أنّه لا يردّ إلّا بالدلك والرّفق والتحريك، وإن كان من جانب واحد ينبغى أن يضطجع المريض على جنبه الموافق للفكّ المكسور ويأخذ بأسنانه ويحركّها ويستعمل الدلك على المفصل المعقود
Do not delay it at all, for if it is delayed the area will swell and become difficult to move the jaw. Therefore, when it swells, it should not be delayed, moved or stretched. This is because spasms and painful sensations often occur in the sick person.
However, if this happens, the sick person should be bled immediately, then left until the swelling subsides slightly, then the affected part should be bathed with hot water and oil, then gently moved back into place and each part treated as described in its place.
I have also arranged the chapters on dislocation according to the order of the parts from the top of the body to the bottom.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of the lower jaw dislocation.وكلّ لحى استعصى كسره فعليه بالجذب الص
The jaws are rarely dislocated, but when they are, it is usually a slight displacement, causing them to loosen slightly, or a complete and total displacement, causing them to completely loosen.وكلّ لحى استعصى كسره فعليه بالجذب الصعب على يد الطبيب الماهر فربّما كان ذلك بخلعهما، فإنّهما لا يتخلّغان إلّا عن شدّة ويجب على الطبيب أن يعالجه على الحال قبل أن يأخذ الورم فيزداد التخلّغ ويغلظ فلا يمكن ردّه حينئذ. Down to the chest until the patient's saliva flows and he is unable to hold it, nor can he close his jaw and his tongue stutters when he speaks. However, if it is a slight displacement, it may return in most cases by itself with the slightest thing.وإن كان تخلّعه تامّا فقد يرجع فى بعض الأحوال إذا استعمل الطبيب ما يجب من الحركات الشديدة والضربات العنيفة وقد يعجز أحيانا فيتلف الفكّ ويشقّق، فإن احمرّ موضع التخلّغ واحتدّ الورم وأخذ يتفصّد ويعظم الكلام وكان مع ذلك شديدا على نفس العليل وروحا كان أحرى بالطبيب
However, if the dislocation is complete and total, it should be quickly returned without delay. The assistant holds the patient's head while the doctor inserts his thumb into the jaw joint from inside the mouth on one side if the dislocation is on that side.ويدخل أصبعه الآخر فى موضع الفكّ من خارج فمه ويردّه برفق فإن لم يكن فيه رقة وكان شديدا على نفس العليل وروحه فهو ميت لا محالة وإن كان هناك رقة ورجعت برفق فهو يعيش ويصحّ وإنما يرجع الفكّ أحيانا على وجهين إمّا أن يرجع كما كان وإمّا أ
He then inserts both of his thumbs, if the jaw is dislocated on both sides, and the rest of his fingers from the outside, he straightens it with them, and orders the patient to relax his jaw and let go so that it can move to either side. The doctor then straightens and pushes the jaw back into its place.
If it is difficult to put them back into place, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then use a compress with hot water and grease until they are easy to adjust. Do not delay putting them back into place, as we have said. When they are put back into place and straightened, and the patient's mouth closes without relaxation, then apply bandages made of linen with a cerate made from beeswax and grease.
Then tie it gently with a loose ligature, and let the patient sleep on his back with his head elevated between two pillows so that he does not move to the right or left, and he should not chew anything but have a soft liquid diet.
Until the pain goes away and the jaw heals, he can eat whatever he likes, but he should be careful not to force his mouth open wide when eating, drinking or yawning, so that the jaw can heal.
If the jaws are difficult to put back into place when they have become dislocated at any time, and do not return to their proper position, this often causes fever and constant headache, and sometimes the patient's stomach becomes upset and he vomits repeatedly. If you see this, know that it is damaged.
Many people die from this within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the collarbone and the tip of the shoulder.
As for the collarbone, it does not dislocate on the inner side because of its connection to the chest, but it can dislocate outward, and this can be felt by touch. To set it, let the patient lie on his back and extend his arms.ثمّ يأخذ الطبيب الفكّ ويميله ويحرّكه الى فوق ويستقصّ ويضع تحت الإبط قطنا أو زغبا لئلّا ينقطع الرئة، ثمّ يدفعه بقوّة حتّى يرجع مكانه ويأمر العليل أن يبسط ذراع
Then press the site firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on the bandage and splints and tighten them. As for its end nearest the shoulder and connected to it, it does not dislocate except rarely; if it ever dislocates one day, it should be reduced and adjusted as we have mentioned and as is convenient for you.
Then put on the bandage and splints and tighten them, and order the patient to keep quiet until he recovers. With this same treatment, you can also reduce the dislocated shoulder joint if it has come out of its socket.
Chapter 26
On reducing the shoulder joint.
Know that the shoulder joint dislocates in three ways: one, it dislocates towards the armpit downwards; two, it dislocates towards the chest, and sometimes, though rarely, it dislocates above the shoulder joint.
It does not dislocate backwards towards the back of the shoulder, nor forwards towards the front where the nerve is located; rather, it most often dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who are skinny, as it can easily go out and come back in for them.وإذا كان المنكب قد انفكّ الى الإبط وكان النتوء الى أسفل، فانظر من أعلى المنكب من جهتين: من جهة الصدر ومن جهة الظهر فإنّك تجد الموضع المرتخى من جهة الصدر لأنّه لم يقدر أن يخرج إلّا بالمرتخى وذلك أوّل ما ينفكّ فيه المنكب، وكذلك ينبغى أن
As for those who are plump, it is the opposite; that is, it comes out and goes back in with difficulty. Sometimes a person may suffer a blow or fall and their shoulder swells up hot, and they think it must have dislocated; you should examine this until you are sure of its condition.فإنّ تورّم الكتف معلّم وورم حارّ وليس به نفخة، فإن وقع ذلك فى المنكب فليس ينفكّ بل هو تورّم عروق تحت الجلد على الموضع الذي يلي المنكب من جهة الصدر، وهذا إن وقع فينبغى أن تضع عليه ضمادا يشدّه حتّى يسكن الورم.
Then you may proceed with his treatment, and recognize the jaw if it is pointing downward towards the armpit; if you compare the dislocated shoulder with the sound one, you will find between them a marked difference, and on palpation you will find the head of the shoulder under the armpit like an egg.
The patient is unable to raise his hand to his ear or move it through its full range of motion; if the jaw is dislocated towards the chest or upwards, you will find this evident on palpation and impossible to miss.
This dislocation can be reduced if the jaw is recent or if the patient is a child; to reduce it, have an assistant raise his hand above his head while you place your thumbs under his armpits and pull the joint firmly upwards into its socket as the assistant lifts his hand and extends it above his head.
Then have him lower it; if it does not reduce with the aforementioned method, and the dislocation is old, the patient should take a hot bath and use a liniment that softens and relaxes the muscles, such as cooking the roots of hellebore, fenugreek, and royal iris in water and applying it.
Then the patient should lie on his back, and a ball of wool that is neither too soft nor too firm should be placed under his armpit; then the doctor should place his heel on the ball and hold the patient's hand in his own and pull it downward.
Then have him push the ball with his foot, and it will reduce; or, if you prefer, reduce it in this way: bring a man who is taller than the patient and stand him on the patient's side, with his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit upward until the patient is hanging in mid-air. And have another assistant pull the patient's hand downward towards his abdomen; if the patient is light, something else should be attached to him to make him heavier, and the dislocation will reduce immediately; it may also be reduced in another way.
Take a long stick with a round head, not too thick or thin, and place it in the ground. Then have the patient stand upright on top of the stick, with a soft cloth placed on the head of the stick under his armpit.
Then, he extends his hand down from the other side, and also stretches his body to the other side with force, and the joint will quickly return to its position. If it is difficult to return it with all of the above methods, then use this treatment: Take a stick about two arm-lengths long. Its width should be about four fingers, and its thickness about two fingers, with a round head to facilitate its entry into the armpit in this way: .
Then, tie a soft cloth on the round head so that the stick does not hurt the patient. Then have the patient stand under the armpit, with his hand, arm and wrist stretched out and tied to the stick..
Then, place the arm on a horizontal beam, and stretch out the hand downward, and let the rest of the body hang from the other side; then the joint will enter in its proper position at once. When it has entered in any way, a ball of moderate size made of wool should be placed under the armpit..
Then, carry the bandage prepared from flour mill dust with frankincense and egg white around the shoulder as it turns on top, then tighten the ball under the armpit tightly, and wrap the bandage over the bandage from above, and hang his hand to his neck..
And let him not move his hand for seven days, and the patient's food should be small until he gets strong, then after five or seven days, the bandage is removed and he is exercised with movement; if it does not relax, it has healed..
If the joint is dislocated repeatedly due to moisture or for some other reason, cauterization with three pieces of iron on top as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization should be done. If all this is done and the bandage removed after seven days and the joint does not hold, then it has not healed..
I loosened the bandage and tightened it several times, but it would not stay in place and fell down and relaxed, and I could not raise it up again. Know that either the nerve at the head of the shoulder joint has been cut, or it has extended or relaxed. So know then that the joint will never hold in its place.
As for the jaw that is towards the chest and breast, and to the back, when it is dislocated, it is reduced by pushing and extending with the hands until it goes back into place. All other methods of binding and treatment are used until it heals. If, after healing, there is still stiffness in the limb and slowness in movement.
The patient should use the bath frequently until that stiffness softens and returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of an elbow dislocation.وإن كان الفكّ نحو الكوع فالأمر أوضح، لأنّ
And if the dislocation is towards the elbow, then it is even more evident, for the elbow joint comes apart with difficulty and can also be put back into place with difficulty. It can become dislocated in all directions, especially forwards or backwards, and its dislocation is not hidden from you, as it is right before your eyes and under your touch, no matter which way it becomes dislocated.وإن كان الفكّ الى الجانبين فأعرفه من هاهنا، هل هو الى الصدر أو الى الظهر؟ فإن كان الى الصدر فهو أسهل الفكاك وإن كان الى الظهر فالأمر أشدّ، والأكثر فى هذا الجانب أن يكون الفكّ الى
If the dislocation is towards the sides, then you should find out which side it is on, whether it is towards the chest or the back. If it is towards the chest, then it is easier to dislocate, but if it is towards the back, then it is more difficult. Most of the time in this case, the dislocation is towards
If a hot swelling occurs, it is difficult to put it back into place and it may never heal at all, especially if the dislocation is towards the back, for it is the worst of all types of dislocations and the most painful, and death often results from it.وإن كان الفكّ الى الجانب الأوّل فاعلم أنّه الى الصدر لأنّه أسهل ما يكون من الفكاك، وذلك أنّ المفصل مائل من الجانب الآخر الى هذا الجانب فيجتمع فيه عند الفكاك، وإن وقع الفكاك الى الجانب الآخر فإنّه يمنع الإيثار ويشدّ العضل على المفصل ويمن
And if it is from the type that can be reduced, let the assistant extend his hand with both hands and his arm outstretched, and the doctor's hand above and below the elbow, pushing the joint with the thumbs of both hands or with the base of the palm until it returns to its position.
And if the jaw is facing forward, it can be reduced by bending the hand once and striking the shoulder with the base of the palm. If the jaw does not return to its position, then use strong and forceful extension, which is that two assistants extend the arm.
The patient should also be held by two assistants so that it does not dislocate during extension, then the arm is turned to each side after wrapping a folded cloth or a wide bandage around the hand. If the doctor applies his hands directly to the joint, he should smear it with oil to help slippery the joint easily.
Then the joint is pushed hard until it returns to its position. After that, the bandage should be applied with contraction and drying with egg white, and it should be tightly bound. The arm should be suspended from the patient's neck and left for a few days.
Then it is loosened, and if the joint remains in its place, remove the bandage and leave it. If you see that the joint has not healed well, reapply the bandage and leave it for a few days until it strengthens, then loosen it. If stiffness occurs after returning the joint and loosening it
and the movement is difficult, then steam treatment in a bath and gentle massage and compression should be used until it softens, or place the joint of a fat lamb on the joint, then bind it and leave it for a day and a night, then remove it and admit him to the bath. When it sweats, rub the joint gently.وإذا زال فحلّ الرباط عنه وحلّه، فإن عاوده فليستعمل الترياق واستخراج الداء من موضعه فإن لم يرجع المفصل الى حالته الأولى فأعدّ الضماد عليه وأمسكه به شديدا وعلّق الذراع من عنقه واتركه أيّاما.
Then, re-bandage the hernia once, twice or thrice with a bath in between until it softens. If you so wish, put some cow's dung mixed with butter and tie it on the hernia repeatedly; this will soften it and return it to its original state.
Chapter XXVIII
On the treatment of a dislocated wrist.
The wrist joint is one that frequently dislocates, and it is easy to relocate the joint, unlike other joints; however, you should quickly relocate it as soon as it dislocates before the site swells or a hot swelling occurs.
To relocate it, you should place the patient's wrist on a board, and an assistant should extend his hand, while the surgeon places his palm on the joint's protuberance and pushes until it returns to its place; however, one should note that the dislocation may have moved towards the palm of the hand.وإن زال الى ظهر اليد فلا ينبغى أن يدفع من تحت بل من فوق حتّى يرجع الى موضعه، ويكون ذلك بعد أن يضع المريض على لوح ويمدّ ذراعه ويلصق معصم اليد بظهر اللوح.
If the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then it should not be pushed from below but from above until it returns to its place; this should be done after the patient lies down on a board and extends his arm, with the palm of the wrist sticking to the back of the board.The surgeon should then place his hand on the protuberance of the joint; if it returns immediately, well and good; otherwise, it should be bound with a bandage to reduce the swelling.وإن كان الورم باردا وكان المفصل قد زال من موضعه فشدّه بالضماد المسكن للورم واقعد العليل ثلاثة أيّام على هذه الحال، فأنّه يرجع من نفسه، وإن لم
If the swelling is cold and the joint has dislocated from its place, bind it with a bandage to reduce the swelling; make the patient rest for three days in this position, and it will return by itself; if it does not, leave it, as it will not tolerate being relocated after several days have passed, except that the joint will remain in its distorted position and will not harm the patient in any way, except that the hand will be weak and unable to grip anything.وإن كسرت عظمة الكفّ فليس من الحكمة ولا من الصواب ردّه حتّى يأمن الجروح التى تتخلّل بين العظام، فإنّ العظام
Then learn that the nerve has been cut or bruised and there is no remedy for it except to bind it tightly with a bandage; this may sometimes be beneficial, but often it is not. When the wrist is restored, apply the bandage we have described, then bind it tightly and leave it for five days.
Then loosen the bandage and exercise the hand; if it still feels stiff, apply warm water and massage it repeatedly until it softens.
Chapter 29
On the treatment of finger dislocation.
Fingers may dislocate in any direction; whenever one dislocates towards the palm or the back of the hand, extend the finger and push the joint back into place with your thumb until it clicks back into position; then bind the tip of the finger and attach it to the direction in which it dislocated.
Leave it for two days, then loosen the bandage and straighten the finger during the day; if this is done at night, bind it as before, and continue doing so for several days until it strengthens.
The same treatment is given if it dislocates to the palm of the hand; bind it towards the direction in which it dislocated and follow the previous instructions until it heals. The same applies if it dislocates in any other direction.
Chapter 30
On the treatment of dislocated beads on the back.وأما خرز الظهر فان كان بينهما عظمٌ و
However, if there is a bone between two beads on the back, and a complete dislocation occurs or many beads become displaced from their positions, there is no treatment for this because death comes quickly to the patient.وإن كان بينهما ترائب او عضلٌ فهنالك علاج ان أمكنك اخراجها من موضعها؛ فان لم تقدر على ذلك فشدّ ما حولها من العضل والترائب بمسامير ومغالب ورباط حتّى تمنع الحركة وتمنع الأ
If there is no bone between them but only cartilage or muscle, then there is a treatment for this if you can remove it from its position; if you are unable to do so, then tighten the surrounding muscle and cartilage with nails, clamps, and bandages until movement is prevented and incontinence is stopped. The sign of this is that the patient's bowel movements occur without intention and he cannot hold them back, and often one of his limbs, either the legs or arms, or just one of them becomes flaccid. However, if only one bead becomes displaced, it often does so.وإن أمكنك أن تحلّها حتّى ترجع الى موضعها فافعل فمن الناس من يعودون إلى الصحة، ومنهم من
And its disappearance is in four directions, so the one that disappears to the back is called a hump, and as for its treatment, you should look at it, if the hump occurred from youth, there is no treatment for it, nor will it heal at all, but if it occurred due to a fall or a blow and similar.
The former mentioned it with various treatments in a long speech, most of which does not return to the benefit, and I have abbreviated from that what is sufficient for little, compared to much of what they brought up, by my approximation to the meaning and explanation, and I depicted the tool contrary to what they explained.
So I say that the hump that occurs from the front in the chest, there is no way to treat it or heal it, as well as the one on both sides, and only the one that occurs in the back can be treated with what I am describing, which is to stretch the patient on his face.
On a flat, stable bench near a wall, and spread out under it is a wet mat so as not to hurt his chest, then place a vertical board planted in a hole in the ground at one end of the bench towards his head, and another board towards his feet at the other end of the bench.ثمّ تمسك رأسه بيده وتديمه نحو الخشبة القائمة حتى ينتهى إلى أن يدنو منها فترفع ذقنه وترغم أنفه نحوها، وتسقطه من قبل رجليه على خيط مغروز فى الأرض تحته يمسّ جلدة ظهره مسّا رقيقا وهو مائل الى الخشبة التى تحت رأسه، ثمّ تسحب الخيط إليه حتى يضيق
Then hold his head in your hand and bring it towards the upright board until he reaches it, then lift his chin and force his nose towards it, and drop him from the foot on a thread planted in the ground under him, touching his back gently as he leans towards the board that is under his head, then pull the thread towards him until it tightens. And let a servant hold the board, which should not be secured in the hole, and another servant holds the other board in that position, then wrap a soft, tight bandage on the patient's chest and under his armpits, and extend the end of the bandage to the board that is by his head and tie it to it.وأنت تعاين الحدبة من تحت جلدة ظ
Then a second bandage is applied over his hips, and over his knees, and around his ankles. Then all the bandages are gathered together and tied to the other board that is by his feet. Then each servant stretches out on his side the board with its bandages, but neither board is moved from its place.
However, as we have said, the doctor places his hands firmly on the hunchback until it goes back, or he places a board over it and then leans on the board with his feet until it goes back. If it does not go back with this treatment, you take a board that is about three arms in length.
And you dig into the wall, which we said should be near the sick person, a place to insert the end of the board, then you put the middle of the board on the hunchback and the doctor puts his feet on the other end and pulls very hard until he presses down on the hunch.
And it goes back to its place, and if you want to make it with the rope that is twisted by hand, you stick into the ground at the sick person's head at one end of the shop two boards that are an arm in length, and at his feet at the other end of the shop also two boards.
Let there be a distance of about a span between each board, and let there be a hole made in each board through which the rope is passed, and all the boards are secured to the ground so well that they do not move at all. Then insert a round stick, which is the twisted rope, into the holes in the two boards.
At one end there is a hole through which the stick, which is an arm in length and twisted, is secured, and in the other two boards there is the same; then you tighten the rope that you tightened on the sick person's chest in the twist at his head, and the ropes that you tightened on his legs in the twist at his feet.
Then a servant stands by each screw, twisting his hand with the tool with which the screw is twisted, and the doctor equalizes the hump as we have presented. This is the image of the screw, the vise, and the sick person:
Then, after the vertebrae return and the site is equalized, you should carry the dried bandage with egg white, then the splint, and then place a cast over the bandage made of a board whose width is three fingers or about that, and whose length is equal to what takes the hump.
And on some correct pearls, then tie with the ribbon that should be, and the patient uses soft food until he recovers. If some protuberance remains in the site at the end of recovery, it is necessary to use medications that relax and soften while using the board we described for a long time.
And a lead plate may be used for this purpose. Sometimes protuberance occurs at the end of the back beads, and it is thought to be dislocation, but that is an extra bone that has protruded, so do not expose it to this treatment, because death may occur.
Chapter XXXI.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that only the hip and shoulder joints are subject to dislocation, and they do not exhibit slight displacement or concavity, as other joints do. The hip joint is dislocated in four ways.
And that is because it dislocates inward, outward, forward and backward, and it most often dislocates inward, and seldom forward or backward. And the sign of its dislocation inward is that if you join the healthy leg of the patient with the sick one, the former is longer.وإذا كان الفكّ الى خارج فإنّ ساق المريض تكون أقصر من الأخرى الصحيحة، واذا كان الفك الى قدّام يكون أسفل الساق الذى يفكو
And if the dislocation is outward, then the patient's leg is shorter than the other healthy one. And if the dislocation is forward, it becomes the lower part of the leg which is dislocated, and the knee is more bent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg at the groin, and the site next to the groin becomes swollen with a prominent swelling, as the head of the thigh has gone there.وإذا كان الفكّ الى خلف يكون الموضع الذى يلى الأربيّة أرخى ما يكون وأحدهما راخ أو مخ
And the sign of him who has his jaw protruding outward, its symptoms will be opposite these symptoms. And the sign of him whose jaw is protruding forward is that he fully extends his leg but does not bend it without pain in the knee; and if he tries to walk forward, he cannot do so.
He retains his urine and his groin swells; when he walks, he steps on his heel, and the sign of him whose jaw is protruding backward is that he does not extend his knee and cannot bend it before bending his groin, and his leg is also shorter than the other.
The groin is relaxed, and the head of the thigh at the level of the hip joint is prominent; as for the treatment of this jaw, you should look: if the jaw is old and has been chronic in its owner and he has not attempted to treat it and remained in his condition, there is no treatment at all.
You shouldn't expose it; as for the jaw that is recent, and whether it is one of the four types of jaw, you should quickly twist the joint, stretch it inward and outward, and move it right and left, perhaps.
It will return and will not need any other treatment; if it does not return like this, you should prepare a strong servant who extends his leg from below, either with his hands or with a bandage tied to his leg above the knee, and another servant who extends it from above.
By putting his hands under his armpits and then tightening a soft bandage at the base of the thigh, and another servant, a third, holds the end of the bandage; its extension is either from the front from the groin towards the collarbone or from behind to the back.
They should all extend him at once until the patient rises from the ground and remains suspended; this type of extension is a shared type for the four types. If the jaw returns with what we said, otherwise, there must be a special treatment for each type that I mention.
If, however, the jaw is turned inward, the patient should lie on his back and a bandage should be applied to the root of the thigh between the head of the femur and the point below the inguinal region.
Then the bandage is extended upwards on the side of the inguinal region to the upper part of the body towards the clavicle, and then another assistant who is strong and has his arms outstretched embraces the thick part of the patient's thigh and pulls it outward with great force, for it will return to its position.
This type of treatment is easier than other types of treatments for this member, if it is difficult for you and does not respond to you by this type of treatment at all, you should tie the patient's legs with a strong, soft bandage on the ankles and knees.وإن احتاج الى ردّ عظم الذقن وكان لا يزال فى أوّل ذلك فينبغى أن تمدّ له رباطا من ناحية الأربيّة على الكعبين وعلى الركبتين وعلى الفخذين جميعا وأن تعقد تلك الرباطات فوق الذقن، ثمّ يأخذ خادم قوىّ بيده ويحتضنه ويمدّه الى خارج مدّا شديدا ويجعل ذ
If it is necessary to reduce the jaw bone and it is still at the beginning of that, you should provide a bandage for him from the side of the inguinal region on the ankles, knees and thighs, and tie those bandages above the chin; then a strong assistant takes hold of him by his hand and pulls him outward with great force, and there should be between each of them the distance of four fingers, and the affected leg should be more extended than the other by two fingers. Then the patient is suspended on a board in the house, and he should be about two arms' length from the ground.
Then you order a strong servant to embrace the head of the femur, and another servant holds on to the patient, and the other servant who is embracing the femur pushes with force, for the joint will return to its position quickly. As for its particular response if the jaw is turned outward:
The patient should lie on the couch as described for the humped back, and the bandage is tightened on his affected leg especially and on his chest; then the two boards are placed, one at his feet and the other at his head, and an additional board is placed in the middle of the couch, firmly secured.فإنّ ذلك يردّ الفكّ الى موضعه ويجعل مدّا شديدا ويحاذى له أربطة على العانة وعلى الموضع الذى تحت الأربيّة ويُمسَك بها ويُشدّ عليها، ويكون ذلك بعد أن يكون قد مدّ ذراعيه وجذبهما نحو العضو المطلوب الردّ.
He wraps wet rags around it so that the patient will not be hurt, and puts a board between his thighs so that he will not be pulled down when the tides come in; then each servant pulls on one side, while the doctor adjusts the hip with his hands, and if he responds to returning,
if he does not, then put the board on him and press it down as we mentioned earlier in the case of a hunchback, except that the patient should lie on his healthy side; if the dislocation is to the front, then the patient's leg should be extended at once while he lies in this position on the table.
The doctor puts the palm of his right hand on the patient's groin and then compresses it with his other hand, while making the compression extend downward toward the knee; if the dislocation is to the rear, then the patient should not be extended downward.
He should be raised above the ground, but rather placed on something solid; he should also be lying on his side, with his dislocated hip facing outward, as mentioned earlier, with his limbs bound.
As we said earlier, the compression with the board should also be used on the side where the joint dislocated; when the hip joint has returned to its proper place, and the sign of its return is not hidden from you - it is that the patient's leg can be extended.
When you see them both level, and the patient can flex and extend his leg without difficulty, then know that the joint has returned to its proper place; then bind the thighs together, and apply the bandage tightly so that the hip will not move in any direction.
The patient should then rest for three or four days; then loosen the band and the bandage, and measure the leg against the other; if you see that they are equal in length, know that the joint has healed, and let the patient walk; but if you see any relaxation.
Return, then dress it and bind it as you did before, and leave it also for three days, then unravel it, and walk slowly on it for some days until it strengthens, God willing.
Chapter 23.
On the treatment of a dislocated knee.
The knee can dislocate in three ways: it can dislocate inward, outward, or backward, but not forward. The sign of a dislocation is that you order the patient to bring his leg close to his thigh.
If it does not adhere to the thigh, then know that the knee is dislocated. The treatment for all types of dislocation is to have the patient sit with his legs outstretched, if he is strong enough to do so, and for you to sit behind him so that you can hold his waist and twist him gently backward.
You should lean forward and place the patient's leg between your legs, then grasp his knee with both hands, intertwining your fingers around it. Then, while you press the sides of his knee firmly with your hands, another attendant should straighten his leg until the knee goes back into place.
The sign that it has returned is that the leg adheres to the thigh without any forced pressure. Then dress the wound and bind the leg to the thigh, then wrap both of them with a bandage for three or four days. After that, release the bandage and only walk a little for a few days until it strengthens.
If it is impossible to return it using the method we have described, or if it does not return, then use strong extension with the ligatures that were previously described for treating the hip until it returns.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
The ankle can dislocate slightly or completely. It can dislocate inward or outward, and the sign of a dislocation is that you see the ankle swollen and protruding toward the side it has dislocated to.وعلاجه إن كان زائلا قليلا أن تجلس القاعد على الأرض وتمدّ رجليه ثمّ تجلس خادما بين رجليه وتضع يده تحت الكعب وتديره الى الجهة الأخرى حتّى ترجعه الى موضعه، وإن لم ترجعه فاعلم أنّه منفكّ على الكمال فاستعمل المدّ بالقوة حتّى ترجع
The treatment of its disappearance is easy to return, it is that it is extended gently by hand and leveled until it returns. And as for his treatment when it is completely broken, it should be that the patient sits down and a strong servant grabs him from behind his back in the middle.
Then grab your right hand at the top of his foot and your left hand at the bottom of his foot in the place of the ankle, then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left twice, then stretch it with the left and push the front of the foot towards the leg without violence.
You do that twice as described, then push the front of the foot to the leg in the third time while you pull at the ankle. If it returns in one or two times on this form and you saw the foot straight, otherwise repeat the operation because it will return.
If it refuses to return, the patient should lie on his back on the ground and insert a stake into the ground very firmly so that it falls between his thighs and has been wrapped in cloth so that the patient does not hurt, then a servant controls his thigh.
Then another servant extends the leg either with his hands or with a rope that he ties to the neck of the man, then each servant extends contrary to the extension of his companion and the stake is standing between the thighs of the patient holding it so that his body does not pull down when extended, then the doctor levels the jaw with his hands.
And another servant holds the healthy leg down, because the jaw will return quickly. When the jaw returns and you are sure of its return, then carry the bandage and the crutch and tie it tightly with ligatures and tie the foot to the bottom, and you should beware of the nerve that is above the heel from behind.
So that the ligature is not too tight on him and hurt him, then leave it for two or three days, then tighten it, then release it on the third or fourth day, and the patient should refrain from walking for forty days.
If one attempts to walk before this period, there is a risk that the jaw will become dislocated and ruined, and will no longer respond to treatment. If a hot swelling occurs, you should use what has already been described in other parts of the treatment and bandaging until it goes away.
Chapter 34.
In the treatment of a man's jaw.
You should gently realign any dislocated parts without force, and this is not difficult but easy. If the jaw is dislocated in some part of the heel, the patient should place his foot on a flat surface.وإذا كان فى بعض فصوص بطن القدم فينبغى أن يجعل قدمه على موضع مرتفع عن الأرض، ويجلس ويمدّ ساقه المفلوجة أمامه ثم يحمل الفكّ ويتعرّف موضعه فيدخله فيه ويحاذي بين الأجزاء فإذا لم يتقاربا بسهولة فينبغى أن يدخل
If it is dislocated in some part of the foot, he should sit and extend his affected leg in front of him, then you should lift the jaw and identify its position by examining the joint, and align the parts so that they fit together. If they do not fit easily, you should hold the jaw in place while he stands on a board as if walking, then you should stand facing him and place your foot on the swollen joint, pressing down firmly until it returns to its normal position and you no longer see any swelling.وإن كان الفكّ فى الكعب فينبغى أن يجلس المفلوج على
If the dislocation is in the heel, the patient should sit with his affected leg straight out in front of him, then you should place a board under the sole of his foot so that it supports the entire foot, with two ends protruding beyond the foot. You should then securely tie the patient's leg to the board for three days, after which you can untie him and prevent him from walking for several days until it heals and you are sure there is no recurrence, God willing.وإن كان الفكّ فى بعض فصوص اليد أو الرجل فينبغى أن يجعل المريض ذلك العضو على لوح مستو مع الأرض، ثمّ تقوم عليه ويداك تحت الفصّ وتديره إلى أحد الشقّين، فإن لم يدخل ب
If the dislocation is in some part of the hand or foot, the patient should place the affected
on a flat board, then you should stand over him with your hands under the joint and rotate it to one side or the other. If it does not go in easily, you should:Chapter 35.On the types of dis
When something like this happens and treatment and healing are attempted, it often leads to death.
Therefore, one should not attempt to treat such conditions unless they are expert, experienced, gentle, careful, not reckless or impulsive, and in the initial treatment, they should only use medications that soothe hot tumors and let the patient be.
If you hope for the patient's safety from harm with a mild illness and some hope appears in him, then it is permissible to return him to your care in the first instance before the hot tumor occurs.
If the member returns to what you intended, then use the treatment that soothes hot tumors and treat the wound with appropriate ointments. If there is a fracture and small pieces of bone are protruding, then remove them.وإن لم يظهر فيه الرجاء من الساعة ولم يسكن الورم الحارّ فأقصره على الشراب والمراهم الباردة الجيدة، فإن سكن عنه فاستعمل ما ذكرناه لك من التدبير وإن استحكم وازداد شدّا واستمرّ به الورم فأضمّنه وعالجه بما يصلحه إلى أن يسكن الورم الحارّ. If there is no hope, and the hot tumor does not subside, then restrict him to cold drinks and good ointments. If it subsides, then follow what we mentioned earlier in the treatment of simple diseases. If the tumor persists and becomes more severe, then use a poultice and treat it appropriately until the hot tumor subs
And do your best and refrain from entering into a path of risk, as I have already instructed you. This will preserve your reputation and be safer for your health, God willing.
