The author of this book, when I had completed for you, my children, this book which is the sum of knowledge in medicine, and had reached the ultimate goal in its clarity and exposition, I thought it best to complete it for you with this article which is the sum of manual practice.
For manual practice in our country and in our time is completely absent, to the point that its knowledge is almost lost and its traces are about to disappear. Only a few traces of it remain in the books of the early scholars, and they have been altered by hands, and fallen into error and confusion, so that their meanings have become obscure and their benefits distant.
So I thought it best to revive it and compose this article on it in a concise manner, explaining and demonstrating the various tools of surgery, for it is an aid and a clever device for what is needed.
The reason why there are no skilled surgeons in our time is that the practice of medicine is a lengthy art, and its practitioner must first master the science of anatomy as described by Galen."وإنّما حظّه من علم التشريح الكتابة فقط ويكون قد وجد فى نفسه القوة على العمل. His knowledge of anatomy is limited to books, and he must have within himself the strength and ability to perform surgery, so that he may understand the benefits and functions of organs, their temperaments, connections and disconnections, the identification of bones, nerves, muscles, their numbers, exits, blood vessels, both pulses and veins."وأن يدرى مواضع الأطراف والانفصال بينها وبين سائر الأعضاء ومواضع الغرائز كلّها.
And he should know the locations of joints, separations between them and other organs, and the locations of all instincts. That is why Abcrath said: "There are many doctors by name but few in reality," especially in the field of surgery. We have mentioned a part of this in the introduction to this book."وإنّما يغلب على أكثر من يتصدّى لهذا الفنّ الجهل وعدم المعرفة بالصنائع والآلات والأدوات الت
Most people who venture into this art are ignorant and lack knowledge of crafts, tools, and equipment, for if one is not well-versed in anatomy as we have described, it is certain that they will make mistakes that could cost lives, as I have seen many do in this field, claiming expertise without actual knowledge or skill."فمن أجل ذلك رأيت أن أحيى هذا العلم وأشرحه ليكون أصلا للعمل وبيانا لمن أراد تعلّم هذه الصناعة ويستغنى به عن غيره من الكتب فى هذا المعنى.
And that is because I saw an ignorant doctor who made an incision on a pig's tumor in a woman's neck, and he cut some of the neck's arteries so the woman bled until she died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who had advanced in removing a stone from a man who was old, and the stone was large. He was reckless and removed it with a piece of the bladder wall. The man died about three days later, and I was called to remove the stone. I saw the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, and I estimated that it would be impossible to remove it.
And I saw another doctor who used to make a living in our town by pretending to be a doctor.
Once a black slave had a broken leg near the heel, and there was also an open wound. The doctor, in his ignorance, quickly set the bone over the wound with bandages and splints, making it very tight and not leaving any room for the wound to breathe.
Then he sent him away to do as he wished, and then left him for several days, ordering him not to loosen the bandage. As a result, his leg and foot swelled up and he was on the verge of death.
So I was called to him, and I quickly loosened the bandage, and he found relief from his pain except that the damage had already been done to the limb, and I could not repair it.
The damage continued in the limb until he died.
And I saw another doctor who treated a cancerous tumor; after a few days, it became an ulcer, and the suffering of its owner grew great. This is because if the cancer is purely from a black humor, then one should never treat it with iron.
Unless it is in a limb that can be completely removed.
For this reason, my son, you should know that there are two types of work: work that is safe and work that is dangerous in most cases.
And I have warned in every place that comes from this book the work which contains the danger and fear, so you should beware of it and shun it.
So that the ignorant may not find a way to say and criticize, take strict precautions for yourselves and cautious and careful measures for your patients.
And use the best route that leads to safety and a good outcome, and avoid dangerous and difficult-to-cure diseases.
And purify yourselves from what you fear may bring suspicion on your religion and worldly affairs, for it is more permanent for your honor and higher in this world and the hereafter for your status.
Galen said in one of his recommendations: Do not treat evil diseases so that you are not called evil doctors.
This article has been divided into three chapters.The first is about the diseases of the brain, and their causes, symptoms, and treatments. The second
Chapter 1.The diseases of the brain, and their causes, symptoms, and treatments
On cauterization with fire and sharp drugs, arranged in a systematic manner from the head to the feet, with pictures of instruments, cautery irons, and all that is needed for manual work.
Chapter 2.is about diseases of the nerves, their causes, symptoms, and treatments
And Chapter 3 is about diseases of the nerves, their causes, symptoms, and treatments, with pictures of instruments.
is about diseases of the nerves, their causes, symptoms, and treatments
And Chapter 4 is about setting bones, dislocations, bandages, and similar matters, all arranged in a systematic manner from the head to the feet, with pictures of instruments.
Chapter 1.is about diseases of the brain, and their causes, symptoms, and
On cauterization.And Chapter 2 is about diseases of the nerves,
Before we mention how to use it, we should mention its benefits and harms, and in what temperament it is used.And Chapter 3 is about diseases of the nerves, their causes, symptoms, and treatments, with pictures of instruments.
I say that talking about the benefits and harms of cautery is a long speech, a subtle science, and a hidden secret, and several philosophers have spoken about it.And Chapter 4 is about setting bones, dislocations, bandages, and similar matters, all arranged in a systematic manner from the head to the feet, with pictures of instruments.
They differ in opinion about this, and I have abridged their words for fear of prolixity.
I say that cautery is beneficial in general for all bad temperaments, whether with or without matter, except for two temperaments: the hot temperament without matter and the dry temperament without matter.
As for the dry temperament with matter, they differed in opinion. Some said that cautery is beneficial, while others said the opposite: that cautery is not suitable for diseases caused by heat and dryness, since the nature of fire is heat and dryness.
It is impossible to cure a hot and dry disease with a hot and dry treatment. Those who say otherwise claim that cautery with fire can be beneficial for hot and dry diseases that occur in the bodies of people. Because when you add a person's body and moisture to the nature of fire, you make the person's body cold.
I agree with him, because my experience has revealed this to me many times. However, one should not imagine that this is the case unless they have practiced and trained extensively in cautery. They must understand the different temperaments of people, and the nature, causes, symptoms, and duration of diseases.
As for the other temperaments, especially cold and moist diseases, all doctors agree that cautery is beneficial for them and they do not disagree on this.
Know, my children, that one of the secrets of treatment by cautery with fire and its superiority over cautery with a burning remedy is that fire is a single substance that does not affect the action of the member that is cauterized, nor does it harm another connected member, except for a slight harm.
But cautery with a burning remedy can affect other members, and it may even cause disease in the member that is difficult to treat, or even kill. But fire, because of its nobility and the nobility of its substance, does not do this unless it is excessive.
This has become clear to us through long experience and attention to the craft and familiarization with the facts of the matter.
And for this reason I have dispensed with lengthy speech, and if it were not unsuitable for my book, I would certainly have revealed to you in the fire a profound secret and how it acts on bodies and cures diseases, in philosophical and demonstrative words that are beyond your comprehension.
Know, my son, that they have differed regarding the time suitable for cauterization, and they have made the spring the best time.
And I say that cauterization may be suitable at any time, because the harm caused by the season is surpassed by the benefit gained through cauterization. Especially if cauterization is for painful, strong and urgent afflictions that cannot tolerate delay, because of the greater evil feared to follow a slight harm caused by the season.فالكّى فى اول الربيع عندهم افضل من الكّى فى وسطه او فى آخره.
Do not think, my son, what the common people and ignorant physicians imagine, that cauterization which cures a certain disease will never return. They make it a reproach.
The matter is not as they think, because cauterization is like medicine that alters the temperament and dries up the moistness which is the cause of afflictions.فإذا عادت تلك الرطوبة او اقبلت مزاجا مّا لم يتفق معها الكّى عاد المرض كما كان.
If that moistness returns, or if a temperament comes which does not agree with the cauterization, the disease will return as it was. However, cauterization is superior to medicine in terms of its rapid success, strong effect, and powerful dominion.وأمّا الدواء فانّه يت
As for medicine, it is possible that the disease will return at some time due to the temperament of the patient, the strength of his illness, and the accumulation of humors in his body caused by neglect of himself in acquiring nutrition and similar causes.فإن كان المزاج والمرض متغلبين على الدواء فى ذلك الوقت لم ينفع الدواء فى دفع المرض بل يعود كما كان وربّما ازداد.
Except that the disease for which cauterization is used is a mild one and affects a part where there are few blood vessels and fluids. For example, cauterizing a tooth for pain and the like; it is possible that the pain will not return, which is the case in the majority of cases.
As for the common people's saying that cauterization is the last resort in medicine, this is a true statement but not for the reason they believe. They think that after cauterization, no other treatment will be effective, but this is not the case.
The meaning of cauterization being the last resort in medicine is that when we have tried all sorts of treatments for a disease and they have not worked, then if we use cauterization as a last resort, it will work. Not in the sense that the common people and many ignorant physicians believe.
The early scholars mentioned that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and this is because of the mildness of gold and its noble nature. They said that it does not cause inflammation in the site of cauterization, but this is not an absolute statement.
This is because I have experimented with it and found that it only affects some bodies, and cauterization with gold is better than iron. However, when you heat the iron in fire, you can't tell when it reaches the desired temperature due to the redness of the gold.
Also, iron quickly cools down, and if you increase the heat, it melts in the fire and becomes deformed, so the person performing the cauterization has to be very careful. That's why, in our opinion, cauterization with iron is faster and closer to being accurate when performed correctly, God willing.
I have arranged this chapter on cauterization into sections that are ordered from the head to the foot, so that it is easy for the student to find what he needs, God willing.
Chapter I.
The head has but one key-hole.
This cauterization is efficacious against excess of moisture and coldness in the brain, which are the cause of headache, copious catarrh from the head to the eyes and ears, excessive somnolence, toothache, and sore throat. In a word, it is good for any disease occasioned by coldness, as paralysis, epilepsy, apoplexy, and the like.واملاكى الكيّ على الرأس على ثلاثة اشياء:
The indications for cauterization of the head are threefold:First, let the patient be made to vomit by means of a gentle purgative which purifies the head, on three or four consecutive nights, according to the strength, age and habit of the patient.ثانيا:ان يبيت كل ليلة فى حمام مائى حارّ يغتسل فيه قبل النوم ويتركه بعد غسله على اخر الليل وان يشرب من الماء الحار قبل النوم وبعده وكل يوم طوال النه
Second, let him spend every night in a hot bath and wash himself there before going to sleep, leaving the bath after washing at midnight; also let him drink warm water before and after sleeping, and every day during the day.Then order the patient to shave his head with a razor, then seat him between your hands sitting cross-legged
and place the heel of your hand at the root of his nose between his eyes; then mark the spot with ink where your middle finger ends.وتعلم ايضا مواضع الكى على الرأس وهى اثنا عشر موضعا: اربعة فى المقدمة بارزة الجبهة واربعة فى القفا واربعة بينهما.
You should also know the sites for cauterization on the head, and they are twelve in number: four in the forehead above the brow, four at the nape of the neck, and four between them
When as much of the bone is laid bare as a skewer or a bean, raise your hand; if it cools, reapply the iron itself or something else.فإن احتجت الى اعادة الكيّ فعُد اليه بالحديدة او بغيرها والكيّ على الحديدة افضل من الكيّ على اليد. If you need to cauterize again, do so with the iron or something else; cauterization on the iron is better than cauterization on the hand.Until you see of the bone what I have told you, then take a little potash and dissolve it in water and saturate a cotton-ball with it, and apply it to the spot, leaving it for three days.فإن انكشفت عظام الموضع كله فأعطيه مرهم الكيّ مع ملح ف
Then hold a cotton pad soaked in butter on it and leave it until the sting of the fire goes away, then treat it with the tetracycline ointment until it heals, God willing.
They have said that the wound, whenever its pus remains open, is better and more beneficial.
Some have mentioned that the skin should be burned to the bone, and the cautery instrument should be held until some thickness of the bone is burned, then after that what has been burned of the bone is removed, then it is treated.
Others have said that one should overdo the cautery until it affects the bone strongly, so that it falls from the bone in the form of a small diamond or ring, and they claim that this lets off the fumes of the head through that site and leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it heals, and I do not see these types of cautery at all, except in some people and on the path of hazard, and leaving it with me is better, and with peace of mind, when it was, the head weakens whenever its natural connection is dispersed, as we have witnessed it in other members.
Especially when the patient's head is naturally weak, and the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion, so use it, you will be safe, God willing.
Chapter 2.
On cauterizing the head as well.
If a chronic headache occurs in the head of the patient and prolongs it, and the patient uses painkillers, and especially if he has cauterized the single cautery that we have described but none of this has benefited him, then look at. If the patient's head is strong by nature and not weak, and he feels severe cold, then cauterize another cautery above that slightly.فإن كان به ألم من تحت السرة الى الركبتين وورم وبياض وحمى فأكوه تحت الكيّة الأوّلى قليلا. Then press on each horn of his head with a cautery until the thickness of the skin is gone and the bone is exposed as we have described. And cauterize him in the back of his head, at the place that is known as the axe. Be gentle with this one and do not expose the bone, for the patient finds this to be very painful, unlike all other cauterizations of the head. I will mention this cauterization in its proper place.
The cautery for the horns and back of the head should be gentler than the cautery for the center of the head. This is its picture:
Chapter 3.
On the treatment of chronic migraine.
If there is pain in the temples, along with a headache, and the pain extends to the eye, then the patient should be purged with remedies that cleanse the head, and all other treatments that I have mentioned in the sections on diseases should be employed. If this is ineffective, then there are two ways of cauterizing it. Either by cauterization with a sharp, burning remedy, or with iron.وأما الدواء الذى يكوى به فهو أن يأخذ المرقد أظفار ذباب الصقور فيحكها حكاً رقيقاً
As for the remedy with which it is cauterized, take a single clove of garlic, peel it, and cut off its ends on both sides. Then split the painful area of the temple with a broad knife so that there is a place beneath the skin that can accommodate the clove.فإنّك اذا أوقدت فيه أحرق السنّ الوجع وقلعت المادة الفاسدة منه.
For when you light it, the clove will burn out the pain and draw out the putrid matter from it. Then insert it under the skin until it is gone, then tie it off tightly with a ligature, very firmly, and leave it for fifteen hours, then untie it and remove the garlic, leaving the wound alone for two or three days, then dress it.فان وجع الصدغ يفيق ان شاء اللّه تعالى ويمضى اليه الدواء فى العروق والاعصاب فيزيل وجعه ويفسده وان ش
Put cotton soaked in butter on it until the wound suppurates, then treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing. If you wish, you can do this with some of the burning remedies that I gave in Article 18 on burning remedies.
As for cauterizing it with iron, it is done thus: Heat the cautery which has this shape:
It is called a nail cautery because its head is like a nail with some indentations, and in the middle of it there is a small protrusion.
Then you put it on the sore spot and hold your hand, moving the iron slightly, while the amount you burn is half the thickness of the skin. And lift your hand so as not to burn the artery underneath, causing bleeding. Then soak a cotton ball in salt water and place it on the spot and leave it for three days. Then carry the cotton with butter and treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing.
If you wish, you can cauterize this migraine with the tip of a knife and be careful not to cut the artery in this non-chronic migraine especially.
Chapter 4.
On the treatment of chronic migraines.
If you have treated migraines with the remedies we have mentioned, and the treatment has not worked, and you see from the disease what we have mentioned does not work, either by medicine or cauterization by fire, then: You should heat the knife-like cautery until it turns white, after you have marked the sore spot with a line about half a finger long and leave your hand once while tightening it until you cut the artery and reach the bone.وإن وجعتك العرقية من الوريد وارتجعتها فلم تبرح مكانها حتّى تقطع الوريد.
Unless you should be careful that the jaw, which moves when chewing, does not burn the muscle or nerve that moves it and cause a spasm.وإن وجعتك تحت الاذن من الوريد وكان عليك عرقية معلّقة فلم تبرح مكانها، فنبغى أن تحمى المكواة السكّينيّة حتّى تبيضّ بعد أن تعلّم على موضع الوجع بخطّ طوله اصبع ثمّ ترفع يدك مرّ
And beware of the bleeding of the artery you have cut, for in its cutting there is danger. Especially for those who are ignorant of what they are doing and are not experienced and practiced surgeons; it is better to leave the operation alone.
The management of arterial bleeding will be discussed in detail later in the book, God willing. If you see that the condition does not respond to this cauterization,
If you see that the patient is strong enough, perform the cauterization in the middle of the head as described and treat the wound until it heals, God willing.
If you prefer, you can use the cauterization with the double-bladed knife which we mentioned in the chapter on arterial ligation; it is a better and more effective cauterization than this one.
Chapter Five.
On cauterizing ear pains.
If an ear pain occurs due to cold and is treated with laxatives and other remedies mentioned in the section on diagnosis, and the pain does not go away, then heat the cautery called "the point," which has this shape.
Then use it to dot around the entire ear as you move in a circle, or around both of them if the pain is in both ears. You should keep the cautery a little away from the base of the ear, after marking the spot with ink; the cauterization should be about ten dots in each ear or so, and then treat the spots until they heal, God willing.
Chapter Six.
On cauterizing the gum.وإذا حدث فى اللقوة وجع عن برد او حم
If a gum pain occurs due to cold or heat, the type that is treated by cauterization is usually the one that occurs from phlegm, as I mentioned in the section on disease diagnosis.وإذا كوىّ من وجع اللقوة فى الموضع الذى ذكرنا ولم يذهب الوجع فعولجه بالعلاجات الت
If cauterization is performed on gum pain in the place mentioned, and the pain does not go away, treat it with remedies that avoid cauterizing the type that occurs from dryness and spasms of the nerve.
When you have treated this kind of hernia with poultices, fomentation, and suppository medicine, but your treatment has not been effective, then the patient should be cauterized three times. The first one is at the base of the ear, the second a little lower down from the temple, and the third at the junction of the lips.
Make your cautery from the side opposite to the affected area, because it is on the healthy side that relaxation occurs.
The cautery should be made with one cautery at the upper tip of the ear under the horn of the head, a little, and another in the temple, its length being that of the thumb.
You should go down with the cautery until you burn through half the thickness of the skin; this is what the cauterizer looks like, it is a type of scalpel, although it is a little softer than that shown before. The blade should be slightly thicker, then treat the site as previously mentioned until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 7.
On cauterization of chronic stroke.
If the stroke has become chronic and you have treated it as mentioned but your treatment was not effective, and if there is no fever in the patient, cauterize him with four cauteries.واحدة من تحت صدغه، وأخرى عند أذنه، وثالثة فوق حاجبه، ورابعة على مقعدته، وتكوى كلّ واحدة منها كيّة كما The first is below the temple, the second at his ear, the third above his eyebrow, and the fourth on his seat; each of these should be cauterized as mentioned before: a cautery on each horn of his head, one cautery in the middle of his head, as mentioned before, and another cautery at the back of his head.وإن أزمنت السكتة وعالجتها بما تقدّم
If the stroke has become chronic and you have treated it as mentioned before, and if the description of the cauteries is as mentioned before, he may also be cauterized with a cautery on the opening of the stomach, which is even better; then treat him as mentioned before.وينبغى أن يكوى فى أوّل السكتة المزمنة على فم المعدة، كما
Chapter VIII.
On the Cure of Forgetfulness.
The patient, who suffers from phlegm, should first be given large doses of astringents and purifying blood-purifiers for the brain.
Then, his entire head should be shaved and a mustard plaster, as described in the article on plasters, should be applied to the back of his head several times, for it is a form of cauterization.وإنّما يفعل ذلك ليجلو الرطوبة عن الدماغ ويطلق انسداد الاوردة فيه ويحذف عطلة الذهن ويستخرج البخار الذي يسدّ مسالك النفس.
This is done to remove moisture from the brain, open up the veins and relieve congestion in the mind, and eliminate the steam that blocks the pathways of the soul.If he recovers from this, well and good; otherwise, give him three cauterizations on the back of his head, running from the top of the head to the bottom of the neck.
Leave a thickness of a finger between each cauterization, and treat the cauterizations as previously mentioned. If you wish to increase the dose and the patient can tolerate it, then give him the middle cauterization.وإن لم يرض فأكثر الكىّ وقرطس ما بين كل كيّتين اصغر قرطوس بما ذكرناه، فإن برئ بذلك والّا فليضمد بالخردل ويقدّم له الكىّ على الرتبة الاولى فان تع
If you wish to increase the dose, cauterize the temples, and then treat him until he recovers. If you wish to increase further, cauterize on the horns, then treat him as before, using a round maw in the shape that has already been described.فإن اردت الزيادة فاكوه على الصدغين ثمّ تعالجه حتّى يبرأ وتكون المكواة زيتونيّة
Chapter IX.On the Cure of Epilepsy and Se
The Treatment of Paralysis and Muscle Weakness.وصفة الكىّ للفالج والرقع والمقعدة وأوجاع العضل والخ
The treatment for paralysis, limpness, and pain in the limbs should begin with blood purification using astringents as mentioned before. Then, shave the patient's head, and then cauterize a single spot on top of the head, one spot on each temple, and one spot on the back of the head.وإن اشتدّت الحاجة فاكوه أربع كيّات تكون كأنها مروحة يتقاطعن فى وسط الرأس فإن برئ بذلك والّا فليضمد رأس العليل بالخردل ويقدّم له الكىّ على الصفة الاولى، فإن اردت الز
And three [needles] on the vertebrae of the neck; if you need to treat a more severe case of body weakness, and the patient can tolerate it, and the disease is strong and stubborn, then make four cauterizations on his back vertebrae. And make the cautery hot enough to burn most of the skin, and then lift your hand and treat it as mentioned before until it heals, God willing; the instrument should be olive-shaped.
Chapter 10.
On treating epilepsy.
It is only appropriate to cauterize an epileptic whose condition is caused by phlegm; first, the brain should be cleansed using large yarrow stems and other treatments mentioned in the previous section, if the patient is adult and can tolerate the medicines.
However, if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then use clysters and mastic mouthwashes to cleanse the brain beforehand for many consecutive days, while also improving his diet.
Then shave his head; then cauterize a single spot in the center of his head, as described earlier, and another spot at the back of his head. And on each of his temples, cauterize a spot; if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him as described for the patient with paralysis and body weakness, on the neck vertebrae and back vertebrae; the instrument should be olive-shaped, as mentioned earlier.
However, if the patient is a child, make the cautery gentler in this way.وإن كان علّته من قبل الريح، اكوه تحت شحمة الاذن اليمنى واليسرى كيّة كيّ
And if his condition is caused by wind, cauterize him under the right and left
On treating melancholia.وإن كان علّته من قبل البلغم، فينبغى أن ينقى دماغ
If the cause of melancholia is due to corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize him as described for the patient with paralysis.وإن كان علّته من قبل الريح، فيجب أن ينقى الدماغ من أجزاء الرياح بأدوي
If the cause of melancholy is a tendency towards black bile and the body of the patient is moist, then give him that which purifies the brain as mentioned earlier in the divisions.
Then shave the head of the patient, then make a tight cake from flax like a circle, then lower it into the middle of his head while he is sitting cross-legged holding on to each side. Then take one pound of old sheep's fat.
Then heat it on the fire with moderate heat as much as the finger can bear when inserted, then pour it into the middle of his head in the circle and leave it until it cools. Do this to the patient once a week with other good management until he recovers, God willing.
And if you wish to cauterize him, make many small dots without holding your hand on the cautery, but just touch it on, for this kind of cauterization moistens the brain with moderation.
Then carry out a poultice on cotton soaked in either lard or chicken fat.
Chapter 12.
On cauterizing the water that flows into the eye.
If it is clear to you that the water flowing into the eye has begun with the signs mentioned in the divisions, then act promptly by giving the patient something to purify his head and sweat him of all moistures, and have him take a bath on an empty stomach for several days.
Then order him to shave his head and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of the head, then cauterize twice on either side of the forehead if the water is flowing into both eyes, or on one side only if it is flowing into one eye only.
Then cut with the cautery all the veins and arteries which are under the skin, and let the cauterizations be lengthwise in width on either side of the forehead, and beware of the blood flowing.والماء الذى ينزل فى العين من الكيّ لا يزال حتّى يبرأ العين والعليل بحال حسن والاّ فالكيّ صعب.
If you see any of it, cut it off on the spot with any treatment that you can, and we will come to the wisdom in cutting and tying off the arteries and preventing bleeding.
And he may be burnt on the back of his head under the two bones with a deep burn.
Chapter 13.
On cauterizing chronic epiphora.
If the tears of the eye are chronic and constant, and they are due to the veins and arteries that are on the surface of the head from the outside of the head, and you are sure that this is from cold, thick humors that have reached the lacrimal gland, then apply the cautery which I described earlier in relation to the water flowing down. Cauterize in the middle of the head and two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries on the back of the head under the bones, and if you need to increase it, apply a cautery on each side of the tail of the eye at the edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
On cauterizing offensive smelling nose.وإن أزالته فبقوة الكيّ وشدّ
If you treat it as mentioned in the division and the treatment is not effective, then give the patient castoreum three nights in a row, then shave his head and apply the middle cautery with the olive-sized cautery. Then apply two cauteries with the nail-sized cautery above the eyebrows just under the hair, be careful not to cut the artery, and this is the picture of the nail-sized cautery.
Chapter 15.
On cauterizing ptosis of the eyelid.ويكوى من حدقته الى فوقه كيّة على الشقّ الذى
If the eyelid is relaxed due to illness or moisture, cauterize the eyelid with one cautery using this crescent-shaped cautery.
Or, if you prefer, cauterize two cauteries above the eyebrows on each side, and space them out from the temples, and make each cautery as long as the length of the eyebrow.ويكوى من حدقته الى فوقه كيّة على الشقّ الذى
Do not overdo the cauterization with your hand, but only to the extent that it burns a third of the skin. The image of the hot iron should be like this.
Chapter Sixteen.
On cauterizing the eyelid.
If the eyelids turn inward, affecting the eye, then there are two types of cauterization that can be performed. Either cauterization by fire or cauterization by a chemical agent that burns. If cauterization by fire is performed, the patient should be instructed beforehand to leave his eyelids alone if he is the type who rubs them, so that they grow longer and even out.
If the patient rubs his eyelids as they grow, you should tie his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until they have grown out and evened out. Once they have grown out and evened out, have the patient sit on your lap, then mark the eyelid with ink in the shape of an ace of spades.
The mark should begin near the lashes, then place a cotton ball soaked in egg white or saliva of a wild melon under the eyelid, then heat up an iron that looks like this:
Then you should cauterize it in the shape that you marked, little by little, in many times, until the surface of the skin, which is in the shape of an ace of spades, is completely burned. A sign that your work is done right is that you see the eyelid folded back and the hair has moved away from the eyeball membrane.
Then lift your hand and leave it for three days, then press on it with a cotton ball dipped in fat until the scabs come off, then treat it with ointment until it heals, if God wills. If some of the hair returns after some time and the eyelid sags,
then cauterize that spot again as you did at first. If the hair is in the lower eyelid, cauterize it until it returns to its natural position and does not rub the eye. As for cauterization by a chemical agent that burns, you should instruct the patient to leave his eyelids alone until they grow out and even out.
Then make a sheet of paper in the shape of an apricot leaf, and take from ordinary soap and unslaked lime, each the weight of a dirham or thereabout, and crush them both well together; do this with a pestle so that it does not dry out. Then spread some of it on the paper you have made, and place it on one or both eyelids; put a cotton pad dipped in egg white under the eye, and have the patient's head in your lap.
Place your index finger over the medication and squeeze it gently while moving it around, as the patient will feel a burning sensation from the medication; whenever he feels this burning, leave the medication in place and move your finger around. When the burning subsides, remove the medication and wash the eye with water.
Look, and if you see the eyelid raised as it is when blinking or with an object held close to the eye, then repeat the treatment on the area where the medication didn't work and which hasn't turned black; continue this process until you have completed the treatment and the eye blinks, then place cotton dipped in butter over the affected area to soothe the burns.
Then treat it with a honey ointment or similar until it heals; when performing the treatment, be extremely careful that no medication falls into the eye. If after a few days the eyelid relaxes and there is any hair in the eye,
repeat the treatment on that specific area of the eyelid which has relaxed, just as you did initially, then treat it until it heals. This is the image of the apricot leaf.
Know that people' eyes vary in size and shape, so adjust your treatment accordingly; those with experience in this field will easily recognize the correct approach.
Chapter Seventeen.
On treating the stye which occurs on the eyelid.
If you have treated the fistula with what we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases and your treatment has not been effective, then it is appropriate to cauterize it in this way.
You should order the patient to put his head on your lap, and an attendant should hold his head steady between their hands so that it does not move or jerk.
Then place a cotton pad, dampened with egg white or barzakhatona saliva, over his eyes and heat the iron to this shape.
It should be hollow like the shape of a goose feather quill, with one end for cauterization; if you prefer, the other end can also be punctured, but it is better to leave it solid like a pestle, except that the hollow version is better for your work, God willing.
Then squeeze the fistula if it is open to extract the pus and dry it, or if it is closed, open it and extract its pus; then place the hot iron on it, holding it firmly until you reach the bone.
And move your hand slightly away from the eye towards the nose so that your hand does not slip or the patient gets disturbed and the iron falls into the eyeball and damages it; if you reach the bone on your first cauterization, fine, otherwise reheat the iron and do it again if needed.
Leave it for three days, then apply a pad with butter and treat it with the drying ointment until it heals; if it has not healed after 40 days, apply the sharp, corroding medication to expose the bone and clean it as will be mentioned in its chapter, God willing.
Another method for cauterizing a fistula, mentioned by some predecessors, is to make an incision at the site of the fistula and insert a thin, hollow tube in it as shown in the figure.
Then pour into it the equivalent of a dirham weight of molten lead, holding the tube firmly so that it does not move at all, and making sure that the patient does not jerk his head; you should also place a cotton pad dampened with egg white or water over the patient's eye.
Lead burns the fistula and heals it in a wonderful way. If the fistula is healed by cauterization and treatment as mentioned, or otherwise, it is necessary to use nasal piercing and return the fistula to the nasal passage as will be mentioned in its special place.
Chapter XVIII.
On cauterizing lip fissures.
It is very common for a fissure to occur on the lip, called a hairline, especially on children's lips, as it often happens. If you treat this fissure as mentioned in the section, and the treatment does not work, heat up a small scalpel-like iron in this way.
Its cavity is on the thinness of the sword, then you put it hot with the wheel in the very fissure until cauterization reaches the depth of the fissure, then treat it with cerate until it heals, God willing.وإن كان الشقاق فى داخل الشفة وكان عظيما فإنّك تجعل المكواة على هذه الصورة وتضعها حامية بالعجلة على رأس الشقاق حتّى ينفذ الكىّ الى عمقه، وإن احتجت الى ثقب الشفة لتنفذ اليه فافعل ذلك.
Chapter XIX.On cauterizing the fissures of the gums.
In cauterizing the fistula that occurs in the mouth.وإن كان الناصور فى الفم فإنّك تكوى موضعه وتعالجه
If the fistula is in the mouth, you cauterize its site and treat it when it occurs at the base of the gums or in the palate or at the roots of the teeth, becomes swollen, then suppurates and the pus forms a fistula, then you treat it and the treatment does not work, you should heat up an iron to the size that fits into the fistula.
Then you insert it into the fistula while holding your hand until the iron reaches its depth and bottom, and do this once or twice, then treat it afterwards as mentioned until it heals, God willing.وإن كان الناصور عظيما وعميقا فإنّك تقطعه بالمقصّ الى قدر ما يسع فيه الجمرة وتدخل الجمرة حامية فيه ثمّ تعالجه بما ذكرنا من العلاج، وإن احتجت الى ثقب فى أصله لئلا يرجع فينبغى أن تفعل ذلك.
If the bleeding stops and he recovers, then there is no need to examine the site further. But if it does not stop, one must examine the area and remove the rotten bone as described later in this chapter, God willing.
Chapter 20
On loose teeth and receding gums.
If the gums become loose due to moisture and the teeth move, and you have treated them with remedies but to no avail, then put the patient's head in your lap, then heat the branding iron, whose image is shown after this, after placing the tube on the tooth.
You place the hot branding iron into the tube, and hold your hand there for a brief moment until the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth. Then you lift your hand and return the branding iron as many times as needed, then the patient fills his mouth with salt water.
He holds it there for a while and spits it out, for the loose tooth is stabilized, the receding gums strengthen, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
Chapter 21.
On treating toothache.وإن كان من وجع الضرس ما يعجز عن أكل الطعام فلا ش
If the toothache is due to cold, or there is a worm in it and remedies have not worked, then there are two ways of treating it: either with branding by fat, or by fire.فإن كان بالبرودة فكىّ بماء ورد حار ونارجيل وملح وزعفران وسمن برىّ فإن لم ينفع فأضف عليه ماء العقيق والزعفران وعليه الكىّ بالماء الحار والنارجيل والسمن
If it is due to cold, then brand with rose water that is hot, coconut, salt, saffron, and virgin fat. If this doesn't work, add agate powder and saffron to the hot water and brand with the hot water, coconut, and fat.As for branding with fat, take buffallo fat and boil it in an iron pot or a shell, then take a cotton ball, wrap it around the tip of the probe, dip it into the hot fat, and place it on the aching tooth quickly, holding it there until it cools down.
You repeat this several times until the fire reaches the root of the tooth. If you prefer, you can also dip a cotton ball or piece of wool in cold fat and place it on the aching tooth, then place the hot iron on top so that the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth.وإن كان وجع السنّ من دود فكىّ بالنار بأن تأخذ قطنة فتلينها وتجعلها على طرف المرود ثمّ توجّهها نحو النار حتّى إذا احميت غمستها فى ماء ورد وملح وزعفران ثمّ تعيدها على السنّ الوجعة بالعجلة وتمسكها حتّى تبرد.
And as for cauterization with fire, it is that you take a copper or iron tube and make its bore rather thick so that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient, then heat the cautery until it reaches the desired temperature, and place it on the tooth, holding your hand until the cautery cools down. Repeat this several times.
After that cauterization, the pain will go away either on the same day or the next day. Then you should fill your mouth with good butter and hold it for an hour, then spit it out. This is what the shape of the cautery should be like.
You can cauterize using any tip you want and to the extent that is possible. This is what the shape of the tube should be like.
Chapter 22.
On cauterization of swine.
If the swine is affected by phlegm and cold humidity, and does not respond to medication, and you want a quick resolution, heat up the hollow cautery, which has perforated ends and looks like this image.
Let the smoke come out from the other end as you cauterize, placing it on the swelling, once or twice if needed, until you reach the depth of the swelling. If the swelling is small, make the cautery the size of the swelling.وإن كان الورم كبيرا فأوسّعه واجعل المكواة على قدر ما يطيق، ولا تمسك يدك عن الحرقان الّذى يصيبها لئلّا تمنع المكواة من الوصول الى موضع الداء، وإن احتجت الى زيت فاستعمله.
And if the swelling is large, open it up and make the cautery as big as you can bear, and do not hold back from the burning sensation that affects your hand so that the cautery can reach the root of the disease. If you need to use oil, go ahead.Then leave it for three days, and apply a cotton ball soaked in butter until the burnt part heals, then treat it with ointment and bandages until it heals, God willing.وإن كان الورم باردا مائلا الى البياض ووقع به الكىّ مرارا ولم تنفعه
Chapter 23.On cauterization of cold swellings.اذا
On cauterization for hoarseness and difficulty in breathing.
If the moist humors prevail upon the windpipe, especially if this is accompanied by a cold temperament, the patient should first be purged with laxatives, then he should be cauterized with a cautery in the notch of the throat at the base of the larynx in the low-lying spot.
Beware of reaching the larynx with cautery, nor burn of the skin except a little, then cauterize him again at the joint of the neck in its last bead with a powerful cautery and let the cautery be nail-like in the way that has already been described.
Then treat him as already mentioned until he recovers, God willing.
Chapter 24.
On cauterization for lung disease and cough.
If the cough and lung disease are from cold humors and there is no fever or tuberculosis, and if the disease is chronic, cauterize him with two cauteries above the collarbones in the low-lying soft spots, and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
Let the cautery be nail-like in the way already described, and if you wish, let your cauterization be by drops with the cautery that is called 'the drop', and its image has already been described in the section on earache; let there be thirty drops or thereabouts.
Then treat him as already mentioned until he recovers; you may also make a cautery with three prongs in this way, and with it hasten the cauterization, for you will cauterize with it in one go three cauteries; this is the image of the cautery:
Chapter 25.
On cauterization of the armpit.إذا كان الأبَهَرُ
If the humerus is dislocated due to slippery humors, or if it does not hold firm in its place when reduced at first so that it becomes habitual for him, then dislocates again with the slightest movement as we have witnessed, he should be reduced first. Then the patient is laid on his back or on the right side, and the skin inside the armpit is lifted upwards with the fingers of the left hand if the joint has been dislocated inwards.
Then the two-pronged tongs, which look like this, are heated.
Then it is cauterized with the tongs until it penetrates to the other side, and the shape of the cautery is four cauteries; or a three-pronged tong may be used, in which case the shape of the cautery will be six cauteries, and the prongs are placed on the tender spot.
This is an illustration of the three-pronged tongs.
An additional prong may be added, making a total of eight cauteries; then crushed pepper mixed with salt is applied to the cautery, and the patient must remain still and not move the limb for a period of time until it heals. This usually happens when the dislocation is upwards, but this is rare.
A single cautery mark in the shape of a nail, or several cauteries in the shape of drops, are made above the shoulder joint; this makes the joint stronger and reduces moisture, resulting in a speedy recovery for the patient.
Chapter 26.
On cauterization of the stomach.
If the stomach experiences excessive cold and moisture, leading to a disruption of its natural balance and frequent discharges, and all other treatments have failed, then the patient should lie on his back with his legs and arms extended, and three cauteries should be applied. A cautery is placed below the rib cage, about a finger's width away from the breastbone, using a nail-shaped tong; two additional cauteries are placed below this on either side of the first one so that the shape of the cauteries forms a triangle. The space between them should be such that they do not merge when they become inflamed. The depth of the cautery should be about two-thirds of the thickness of the skin. The shape of the cauteries should be as follows:
This is how it should look and no more.
If you wish, you can give him one large cauterization in the center of the stomach in this manner.
The cautery instrument used for this single cauterization should be in the shape of a circle, like this:
The stomach can also be cauterized in small spots for those who are afraid of this cauterization; that is, you mark the spots on the stomach with ink to the extent you desire, then cauterize them with a puncturing cautery instrument, then treat him with the treatment mentioned until he recovers.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On cauterizing the cold liver.
If there is pain in the liver due to cold and moisture, or due to excessive windy heat, causing it to deviate from its natural balance, and if treatment with what was mentioned in the previous chapter did not work,. it is appropriate that the patient lies on his back, and three cauterizations are marked with ink on the liver, exactly in this shape and amount, below the diaphragm, where the human elbow ends.ويكوى ذلك بالمدد المذكور فى التقسيم ويبرأ العليل ان شاء الله تعالى ويجب أن يكون الكىّ على هذا الصفة.
The cauterization should be performed using the method mentioned in the previous chapter, and the patient will recover, God willing. The cauterization should be performed in this manner: after each cauterization, there should be a space of the thickness of a finger, and the cauterization should be straight along the length of the body. Do not press down with the cautery instrument, but apply it gently.وإن كان البدن د
If the body is thick, then burn only half the thickness of the skin, no more. The patient should be standing, but if he cannot stand, he should be lying down with his legs extended and his arms raised. This is the shape of the cautery instrument:
You can cauterize these spots with a scalpel if you are careful and skilled in the craft, but be careful not to overdo the cauterization and burn the skin all over, or else you will burn the abdomen and reach the intestines; for the skin there is thin, so take heed.والمكواة السكّينيّة على هذه الصورة.
Chapter XXVIII.
On cauterizing an enlarged liver.
If a patient has an abscess in the liver, and you want to know whether this tumor is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will experience a weightiness and pain without any sharpness.
And if it is in the membrane of the liver, there will be a sharp pain along with the intense pain and you will see that it has exhausted the doctors' treatments. The patient should lie on his back, then mark the swollen area with ink.ثمّ تؤرّقه الليلة الاولى بثلاثة دراهم من الكيّ على الموضع الذى رأيت فإن كان الورم فى لحم الكبد لم يبق به وجع وذهب الورم ولم يعد.
Then, heat the iron in the fire; this is the iron which resembles a nail. This is what it looks like:وتجعل على ناصية المكواة زيتًا وتدخلها فى الموضع الذى تراه فقد أصابته الح And you will burn the skin completely with a single burn, going all the way to the membrane until all the pus comes out; then treat it as you would a regular abscess until it heals.وإن كان الورم فى الصفاق فإنّ الكىّ يعجّل به فى السير الى ما تحت الصفاق ولا يبرأه ويكثر الوجع ويعيا الأطبّاء علاجه وقد رأيت من ذلك ما لا يحصى عدّا.
And if the tumor is in the membrane, cauterization hastens its course to what is under the membrane and does not heal it, increasing the pain and exhausting the doctors' treatments. I have seen many cases like this. This type of cauterization should not be used by anyone except those whose experience in medicine is long and who have dealt with these diseases through experimentation many times. In my opinion, it is better to avoid it.وإنّما ينبغى أن يعالج خراج الكبد بالكيّ من كان متعاطاه لعلاج الامراض الباطنيّة ويجوز الك
Chapter XXIX.فى بطّ ورم الطحال بالكىّ.
On cauterizing an enlarged spleen.The chapter on cauterizing the splenetic vesicle.و
The ancients mentioned cauterization with the roots of hellebore for a cold shawpa, as follows: Take one root from the dried hellebore, which is long and about the thickness of a finger, then dip it in oil and heat it in the fire.ثمّ تحمى المكواة فى الزيت أو فى النار فإنّه أبلغ حتّى يكون كالأجاج. Then he cauterizes with one brand between the connection of the collarbone to the neck, and two small brands below the Adam's apple, slightly oblique towards the side under the beard, and two large brands above the breasts between the third and fourth ribs.
He also cauterizes two brands between the fifth and sixth ribs, oblique to the back slightly, and another brand in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach, and three brands from behind, one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the spine below the level of the branding that is between the hands.
Your hand should not go deep with the branding, but it should be in the surface of the skin, sniffing. Some of the former said that some people used to use an iron like a needle, heat it and insert it between the ribs until it reaches the soul of the tumor.
And the period is as we mentioned in the tumor of the liver, and in this padding with branding from danger either that the sick person dies at the moment or a fistula occurs in the site, which has no cure.
Chapter 30
On branding the spleen.
If you treated the disease of the spleen by what we mentioned in the division of treatment, and your treatment was not effective, then branding it is in three ways, all of which are correct: one is to brand it with three or four brands aligned along the length of the spleen.
In the form of the brands of the liver that we mentioned, and there should be between each brand and brand as thick as a finger or more slightly, and the shape of the branding iron is the same as that which we mentioned in the branding of the liver, and do not go deep with the branding, and the image of the patient is thrown on his back.ويكرّر ذلك الكىّ على الموضع حتّى يصحّ عليلك ان شاء الله تعالى، ويقول البعض أنّه يكفى فى هذا الموضع كيّة واحدة فيما بين اتّصال الترقوة بالعنق وكيّتين صغيرتين دون الاوداج قليلا مائلة الى الناحية التى تحت اللحية وك
And you will find another spot in the elbow and raise the skin facing the spleen where the left arm of the sick person ends, and raise the skin facing the spleen to the end of the left arm of the sick person, and your skin raising should be across the body so that the burns fall along the body.
Then you should insert the two irons, which are very well protected, until they pass through the skin from the other side, then take out the iron, so that there will be four burns. If you want, you can burn with the other iron, which has three spikes.
Then you should treat the burned area after leaving it to discharge pus for many days, as this is more effective than all other treatments mentioned earlier.
Chapter Thirty-One.
On burning hydrops.
Burning is only beneficial for hydrops, especially if you have treated the patient with various treatments mentioned in the classification, but your treatment has not been effective. In this case, you should burn four burns around the navel and one burn on the stomach.
And another burn on the liver, and a burn on the spleen, and two burns on his back between the vertebrae, one facing his chest and the other facing his stomach. The depth of burning should be close to the thickness of the skin. Then you should leave the burns open to discharge pus for a long time.
And do not neglect the patient's treatment after burning, as you should provide both medical care and the best possible treatment to hasten his recovery. The shape of the iron used for burning the back should be peg-like, as mentioned earlier, and the one used for burning the stomach should be olive-shaped.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
On burning feet and legs.وأمّا الكىّ فى الساق والقدم، فانّه يصحّ
And as for burning in the leg and foot, it is suitable when they swell in hydrops and are filled with yellow water. You should burn on the back of the foot in the depression between the little toe and the ring finger.
And hold your hand with the iron and do not bend it, then raise your hand and do not return it again, for it will drip yellow water, and the iron should be in this shape.
Then you should brand the legs with two brands on each leg, and the branding should be done with the pointed end of the iron, one brand below the knee and another below it towards the middle of the leg, and two brands on each thigh.
And leave the branding open without treatment for a long time, and then treat it with what we have mentioned before.
Chapter Thirty-Three
On Branding Diarrhea.
If diarrhea is caused by cold and moistness, until it weakens the binding and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines, then this should be treated with various remedies, but if it does not heal, and you see the patient bearing the branding and strong enough, brand him a large brand on his abdomen. As mentioned above, brand the stomach with a round iron and four brands around the navel, gently with a nail-like iron, and one large brand on the cotton over the coccyx or two brands.
If you see that the moistness is abundant and the patient can bear it, brand him a brand on the groin, one on each hip, and sometimes two small brands on the stomach near the large brand; this is a successful remedy whose benefit will not fail, God willing.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
On Branding Piles of the Anus.وإن كانت البواسير مع الرطوبة الزائدة حتّى أ
If there are chronic piles in the anus, many or one, caused by thick, cold, or corrupted moistness, and it is treated as mentioned in the chapter on diagnosis, but the treatment does not work, brand the patient three brands on the lower end of the coccyx, slightly below the tailbone.
And if you see his face swollen, you should cauterize his stomach with a large cautery as has been mentioned and cauterize his liver. And another one on his spleen with an awl-shaped cautery, and leave the wound open for a while then treat it until it heals, Insha'Allah.
Chapter Thirty Five
On cauterizing warts.
After cutting the wart, heat the cautery that resembles a peg then insert it into the cut wart and hold it there until you reach the end of the vein from which the blood flows; do this once or twice.ثمّ كىّ موضع الثؤلول بمكواة مطرّاة بماء الذهب واكتحل بدم الثؤلول بعد ان يبرد ويتماسك مع الكىّ.
Then cauterize the wart with a cautery moistened with gold water and apply to the cut a little of the blood of the wart once it has cooled down and become thick; this is more effective. If there are many warts, cauterize each one as we have described, then treat them with suitable ointments until they heal. To cauterize a large wart, use a larger cautery on the cotton; this will be even more effective.
Chapter Thirty Six.
On cauterizing an anal fistula.وإن كان ناصور مقعدىّ فامسكه حتّى يتغوط ثمّ ادخل المكواة على مخرجه حتّى ت
If it is an anal fistula, hold him until he defecates then insert the cautery into its opening until you reach the end of the fistula. If the patient does not respond to the incision and treatment that we have described in its place, and if he is reluctant to do so, then cauterization may cure him. When a fistula occurs and becomes chronic, with pus and corrupted fluids flowing from it, you should first measure it with a thin probe.وإن لم يكن له مخرج فاعلم انه قد اتصل بالطحال أو بالدماغ وإن كان فى مقعدة امراة وأسفل البدن وكان القيح لا يخرج الا مع الغائط فقد اتصل بالرحم، وقد يكون رحماً منتف
If it does not have an outlet, know that it is connected to the spleen or brain. If it is in a woman's buttocks and lower body, and the pus only comes out with stool, then it is connected to the uterus. It can also be a uterine fistula. Then find out the depth of its socket with the probe and heat the cautery that resembles a peg; insert it into the fistula straight ahead in the direction of the socket and the depth where the probe entered, and repeat the cauterization until all corrupted tissues are burnt, once or twice or thrice according to your need.وإن كان مخرجه فى مقعدة الرجل وكان على جنب أو من الورك أو من تحت القضيب وكان القيح يخرج منه مع المنى أو كان من خلفه وكان القيح يخرج مع الغائط وكان عقيصاً صلبا
And beware of burning a nerve if there is one, or a large vein, and if the fistula leads to the bladder or to the intestine.
So beware of all these places, and you should do this only if the fistula is in a fleshy place and you estimate that it is not permeable, then treat the site until it heals. And if the site is sealed and the discharge stops and it remains like that for some time, then know that it has healed completely.
And if the discharge does not stop, then know that it is permeable or that there is rotten bone in its depth, or something else that will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter 37.
On cauterizing the kidneys.
If there is pain in the kidneys due to cold or severe wind, and this results in the decrease of the patient's sexual desire, then you should cauterize him on both sides, on each kidney with a nail-shaped cautery, as mentioned earlier. Sometimes we cauterize them three times, so that there are three cauteries in a row, which is more effective for benefit.
Chapter 38.
On cauterizing the bladder.وأمّا إذا حدث فى المثانة وجع عن برد
If there is weakness and relaxation in the bladder due to cold and moistness, to the extent that the patient cannot hold back their urine, then cauterize him with one cautery at the bottom of the navel on the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and one cautery to the right of the navel, and another to the left.
After cauterization on each side, to the extent of a thumb joint, cauterize him in the lower back, or two cauteries if you need to do so. The cautery should be nail-shaped, as mentioned earlier.
Chapter 39.
On cauterizing the uterus.وإذا حدث فى الأرحام وجع شديد
If there is intense pain in the uterus due to a build-up of cold and moistness, which prevents conception, causes corruption of its lining, or makes it painful during intercourse, then cauterize three cauteries around the navel as mentioned earlier for cauterizing the bladder. And you should heat an iron on cotton below the back, or two irons, and the iron should be spike-shaped.
Chapter 40.
On dislocation of the hip joint.
Rogue humors may penetrate into the hip joint, causing it to become dislocated. The sign of this is that one leg becomes longer than the other when you measure them, and you find a gap in the site of the dislocation. You should therefore apply a circular hot iron to the affected hip itself.
After you have outlined the hip with ink, as it rotates to place the hip joint in the center of the circle, and the iron that matches its shape is used for the gastric ki, if this iron is not available, then use a large olive-shaped iron.
Make the hot iron deep enough to penetrate through all the layers of the skin, then treat it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 41.
On burning the sciatic nerve.ويكوى من عرق النسا ما بين الحقّ والجلد كي
And you should burn the sciatic nerve between the hip joint and the skin with a hot iron if there is pain in the hip joint, caused by cold humors and fluids, and you have treated the patient as described in the chapter on diagnosis, but the treatment has not been effective, and the condition has become chronic. In this case, the patient should be purged of thick humors using hellebore, or similar substances.
Then, apply the hot iron in two ways: either with burning remedies or with fire. The burning with fire is done in various ways, one of which is to apply three triangular burns to the hip joint itself, as follows.
Make the burns deep enough, with an interval between each burn equal to the thickness of a finger. Use an olive-shaped iron for this. If you prefer, you can also apply a single circular burn in the center of the hip joint, as described in the chapter on dislocation of the hip joint.
To form a circle around the entire hip and burn through the thickness of the skin, this is the description of cauterization for sciatica if the pain is constant in the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, then cauterize two points on the thigh on the spot where the patient indicates the pain is felt, and one cautery above the ankle, four fingers' width to the lateral side, using a thin blade; the depth of the cautery should be only through the thickness of the skin.
If he indicates that the pain extends to the toes, cauterize there with a small point three or four times, or more if needed; and if he indicates pain below the knee towards the leg, cauterize there with one small blade cautery.
And be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not burn a major nerve or artery and thus cause the patient serious harm, or a long-term affliction.
I have seen one and another who cauterized above the ankle and overdid it, causing the leg to become cold, the frost extending all the way down to the foot, and the entire leg becoming useless; then diarrhea and death followed. If the pain is in both sides, cauterize them using this same method.
Some scientists among the physicians have mentioned cauterizing the hip as follows: make a cup-shaped instrument of iron with an inside diameter of half an inch, and at its mouth it is as thick as a date pit or less; inside this cup there is another cup, and inside that one another.
The distance between each cup should be the width of a thumb joint; the cups are open on both sides, and their height is about one or two joints; they are attached to a handle made of iron that is securely fitted into the cups, and this is what it looks like: [image of the instrument].
Then heat it in the fire until it turns red and sparks fly out, then place it on the side of the hip while the patient lies on his healthy side, and cauterize three round cauteries in one go; then leave it for three days, dress the wound with butter, and leave the wound open for a few days.
This kind of cauterization we rarely used because of its ugliness and terrible appearance, and because so few people can endure it, although it is very good cauterization if one endures it and hits the right spot.
And as for cauterization with burning medicines, it is that you make two cups like the throat which the hinge of the door descends into, made of brass or iron.
They should have a rim of about two inches or so, and there should be a space between them of about the thickness of a finger, and they should be open at the bottom and open at the top, and they should be held together in this way.وأنت تجعل الأسفل فى موضع الكىّ والأعلى على الموضع الذى تريد أن تجعله يرتفع فيه ويضيق.
Then you place the bottom in the place to be cauterized and the top on the place where you want to cause it to rise and tighten. Then you pour between the circles from sharp water, which has been slightly warmed by fire, and hold it for about an hour with a sand timer, and the patient endures its stinging and burning, because he will feel a stinging like fire.وكلّما احتاج إلى ذلك كررت عليه الكىّ بالبارد والماء الحاد.
And whenever it needs it, you repeat the cauterization with cold water and sharp water. Then you raise your hand with the instrument and wipe the sharp water from the hip with fresh water, then leave it for three days and carry on tallow until the burn goes away, then leave it for a few days, from which pus will flow, for it is most beneficial.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals. If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, you make a mold that holds water in the same way as you made for the hip. This is the description of sharp water, and I have included it in the article on the preparation of medicines.
Take equal parts of lye salt and unslaked lime, pound them and place them in a new pot that has been punched with a single small hole at the bottom, just big enough for the mortar to fit through. Place another glazed pot under the bottom of the first pot.وأنت تقطر على هذا الجير المذاب ماء قليّا مدفأ حتّى يغلي، ثمّ ترفع القدر عن النار وتتركه يسكن ويبرد ثمّ تصبّ ما بقي من الماء القلى المدفأ عليه.
You should pour on the coal and lime some fresh water, as much as would cover them by a finger's width, after having firmly closed your hand around them and left the pot until the water has run down to the bottom of the pot, then collect all that water and pour it over another piece of lime and coal, which have also been prepared in the same way.
This will then be very sharp and effective for many medical procedures, including cauterizing various members because it acts like fire itself; among the remedies there are some which can also be used to cauterize the hip joint, such as thapsia, honey of blaunhet, lime and soap, ground together.
Galen relates a story of an ancient man who used this treatment for sciatica and hip pain, and he greatly emphasized its effectiveness, claiming that it needed no other treatment and healed in a single application.
He even said that sometimes patients were carried into the bathhouse and came out healed; this remedy is made from the green scytale plant, though if the green variety is not available, then the dried one should be used instead. It should be ground up with some fat and applied to the hip, leg or thigh where there is pain.
It should then be wrapped and left for three hours, or as long as the patient feels the pain subsiding; then they should go to the bathhouse, and if their body becomes sweaty, they should enter the pool, and with God's permission, the pain will go away. If it doesn't work the first time, repeat the process after ten days.
With God's will, it will heal. You should know that no one should be cauterized with these remedies unless their body has been purged first; Dioscorides mentioned that the ash of goat droppings, when used for cauterization, is beneficial for sciatica.
The cauterization should be done in this way: take some wool and soak it in old oil, then place it on the deep spot between the thumb and the radius, closer to the radius; then take a dry goat hair.
He kindles it until it becomes red hot, then places it on the wool and leaves it until it goes out, then takes another one and continues to do this until sensation is restored in the middle of the arm by the hip, and the pain subsides, God willing. This type of cauterization is called cauterization with a hot iron.
Chapter 42.
On cauterizing back pain.
Pain in the back may occur from many causes, either from a fall or a blow, or excessive vomiting, and so on, and it is due to the flow of a cold, moist substance, and cauterization only occurs in this type alone.
When the pain is due to the flow of a cold substance, after the patient has vomited, one should cauterize his back where the pain is, in three rows across the width of the table itself, marking the spot with ink in each row, and cauterizing five or more times according to the patience and strength of the patient.
The cauterization should be done with a pointy iron, and if you like, you can cauterize him three or four times with a medium-sized nail iron in this way.
Chapter 43.
On cauterizing the beginning of hump.وأما الكىّ لابتداء الحدبة فعند أ
Cauterization for the beginning of hump is a common ailment in young children, and its sign in a child is that he experiences shortness of breath when standing or moving, and you find at the end of his vertebrae a bead that has protruded out from the rest of the beads.
If you see this and want to stop it, cauterize him with an iron that is round in this way: Take the cauterization on each side of the vertebra evenly, and if you like, cauterize him around the vertebra with a pointy iron in two or three rows, and let the dots be close to each other. Then treat the wound until it heals as mentioned before.
And beware of using cautery on the hump that is from nerve spasm.
Chapter 44.
On cauterization for gout and joint pains.
If the joint pains are caused by cold humors that flow to any part of the body, and if these pains occur in the legs, physicians usually call this gout especially.
If gout caused by cold is treated with various remedies which we mentioned in the classification, and the pains don't go away, cautery will get rid of it. This is done by cauterizing around the joint of the leg several times with a medium-sized olive-shaped cautery iron.
If you need to cauterize the face of the leg, do so with a point cautery iron. If the pain rises to the knees or any other joint, which often happens, cauterize each knee three or four times on each side with this same olive-shaped iron.
If you need more cauterization than this, do so but don't go deep with the iron, only as deep as the thickness of the skin. If the pain rises to the hips or back, use what we mentioned in its chapter.
If the pains are only in the hands, cauterize around both radius bones as a double circle, then if the pains remain in the fingers, cauterize each joint with a point on each knuckle and on the palm. If the pains rise after days to the elbows or shoulders, use what we mentioned earlier.
Cauterize both of them on all sides, and the patient must take good care and use remedies, for if he improves his diet and expels phlegm, he will recover with this cautery, God willing.
Chapter 45.
On cauterization for hernias.وإذا عرضت الفتق فى أىّ موضع
If a hernia occurs in the groin, and some of the intestine and the tunica descend into the testicle, and this is a recent occurrence, then you should order the patient to abstain from food for that day and use laxatives to cause a bowel movement.
Then have the patient lie on his back, and order him to hold himself until the tunica or intestine protrudes; then push it back with your finger. Then mark with ink below the hernia, on the pubic bone, a sign that resembles a semi-circle, with its ends pointing upwards towards the body.
Then heat an iron of this shape.
Then the intestine or tunica is pushed back into its cavity, and an assistant places his hand over the site to prevent the intestine from protruding again, while another assistant holds the patient's legs apart and puts a pillow under him.
Another assistant holds the patient's chest and keeps his hands still, while you apply the hot iron to the mark, keeping the iron upright and holding it firmly until it reaches the bone, or returning it to its position if it does not reach the bone on the first try.
Be very careful to prevent the intestine from protruding while you are applying the hot iron, or it may cause the patient either death or great harm. Know that if you do not reach the bone with your first application of the hot iron, your work will not be successful. The size of the iron for children should be appropriate to their size, and likewise for adults.
Then, three days after the operation, treat the site with butter until the heat of the fire subsides, and then with other ointments until it heals; the patient should remain lying on his back for forty days so that the wound can close.
The patient's diet during this time should consist of foods that soften the stomach, so as to prevent the intestine from protruding when he straining, defecating, or engaging in strenuous activity; once the forty days are up, a tight bandage should be applied and kept on for another forty days, while the patient reduces his level of activity and avoids overeating, drinking too much, or shouting loudly.
If this procedure is used in this way, the hernia will be completely cured, God willing. I shall mention the treatment of hernias by incision in its proper place, God willing. As for a hernia that occurs elsewhere in the abdomen and is recent, if you want to prevent it from increasing in size, make a circular scar on it equal to its size. Let what is burned of the skin be like two-thirds of it, then treat it as we have mentioned; it will not increase, God willing. Some of the ancients mentioned that the hernia should be cauterized with a triple-pronged iron in this way.
After you have marked the hernia with ink and the horizontal line is on the upper side of the hernia and the other line is on the lower side, and your hand goes down in the middle with one nail-shaped cautery, the first cautery is easier and better, God willing.
Chapter forty-six.
On cauterizing a fissure.
If a pain occurs in some members due to a fall or a blow, and that pain lasts a long time and the treatment with medications does not work, it is appropriate to cauterize with a point-shaped iron, and the cautery of each member should be according to its size, large or small, weak or strong.
And if it is settled in it, if it heals from the first cautery, otherwise you should return to cauterize it again, because it is customary for these pains to move from one member to another nearby, so you should follow it with cauterization until the patient heals.
Chapter forty-seven.
On cauterizing leprosy.وإن وقع فى بدنه جذام فينبغى أن
And if leprosy occurs in his body, it is appropriate to cauterize him, especially the type of leprosy that occurs due to the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.وإن كان الجذام مستحكما فى العضو فينبغى أن يكوى كلّ عضو من أعضائه بمكواة مثلثّة أو مكواة نقطيّة لأنّه لا ينفع مع الجذام الق
If you wish to cauterize, and the leprosy is recent and has been treated as mentioned in the section on classification, and has not progressed or become stationary, and you are afraid that corruption will overcome the entire system of the patient, then cauterize five times on the head. The first one is in the middle of the head as usual, the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, two on the temples, and one from behind on the nape of the neck. Press your hand firmly while cauterizing slightly so that it affects the bone slightly.
And remove the scabs from him so that it is easy for the heavy vapors to breathe, and cauterize him also on the spleen as mentioned before. However, if leprosy has continued with the patient and became manifestly apparent, you should cauterize him with these cauteries that we have mentioned in the head. And one cautery on the tip of the nose, two on the cheeks, two on the neck vertebrae, six on the back vertebrae, a large one on the sacrum at the base of the tailbone, another above it in the same area, and two on the hips, one on each hip. And two on the knees, one on each knee, two on the shoulders, two on the elbows, two on the breastbones, and you should cauterize him on every joint of his fingers and toes, and on each heel and wrist.
And be careful of the nerve on the back of the heels so as not to burn them, and he can cauterize a cautery on the pubic bone, another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver. Know that the more you cauterize, the more beneficial and effective it is.
Know that the patient does not feel pain from cauterization as the healthy person does, because his body has gone numb. The instruments of cautery should be large or small according to the organs and joints, as mentioned in the qualities of the irons.
Then treat the burn with ground carnation mixed with honey and other remedies until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Forty-Eight.
In the treatment of numbness: If a body part becomes numb and is treated with remedies, ointments and bandages but does not heal, then pierce the numbed body part with cauterization according to its size, whether large or small, and let your cautery burn deeply into the thickness of the skin.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals. Sometimes cautery is used for some numbness that occurs in the hand and foot in the vertebrae of the back at the exit point of the nerve which moves that body part, so that the numbness goes away.
This should only be done by someone who is expert in anatomy and the exit points of nerves which move the body,
Chapter Forty-Nine.
In the treatment of vitiligo.
If vitiligo has persisted for a long time and no medical remedy has worked, then cauterize it slightly to a depth equal to the thickness of the skin, so that the whiteness goes away and its color changes.
Then treat it with ground lentils mixed with rose oil, stork's-bill leaves and pigeon's blood or mackerel blood, one part each, and mix them all together and spread the mixture on a cloth and apply it to the affected area until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
In the treatment of cancer.اذا تقادم الورم وعولج بالأدوية المتعارفة
If the tumor has persisted and has been treated with conventional remedies, if the cancer is in its early stages and you want to stop it, cauterize it with a round cautery all around it, just as a circle turns. Some scholars have mentioned that it should be cauterized heavily in its center, but I do not see that to be the case, because I expect it to ulcerate, and I have witnessed this several times.
So the correct approach is to cauterize all around it in a circle, as we mentioned before, or with many small cauteries.وإن كان قد تقادم حتّى أخذ فى التقرّح فاكوه بمكو
Chapter 51.
In the treatment of abscesses.
If an abscess occurs in a person and it is slow to mature, either due to the nature of the causative factor or because the patient is elderly and has low blood flow, or if time is a factor, and you want to speed up the maturation of the abscess, then make many small incisions around it.
Then leave it, as it will mature faster. If you want to flatten the abscess with cauterization, then use an iron rod that is shaped like this:
And bring it down into the center of the abscess until it penetrates the skin, and let the cautery be from the bottom so that it is easier for the pus to flow out. Then treat it as appropriate until it heals.
Chapter 52.والمقصود به من الكىّ ما وقع تحت اللسان على
And the purpose of this chapter is about cauterization, specifically what falls under the tongue:In
An ulcer is a form of tissue damage that spreads through an organ, similar to how a fire consumes dry wood. If you observe an ulcer in a location that can be treated with cauterization by fire, then use many small and large iron rods, according to what is suitable for the location of the ulcer.ثمّ كىّ ما حول الآكلة لا الذى فيها فإنّ الذى فيها إنّما هو الفساد وقد صار كالورم الصلب وأمّا ما حولها ففساد متحرك.
Then cauterize around the ulcer, not within it, for what is within it is the damage, which has become like a solid tumor, while what is around it is moving damage. Then cauterize it from every side until all the damage is removed completely, and then leave it for three days. During this time, apply powdered sulfur with oil on the cauterized areas to remove all the scabs and damaged tissue.ثمّ ترجع إلى المداواة بالادوية العفصية والمرهميّة على ما تقدّم ذكره من ذلك فى باب الآكلة حتّى تندمل.
Then return to treating it with astringent and ointment remedies, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on ulcers, until it heals. Then treat it with growth-promoting ointments. If after three days, you see that healthy flesh is growing without any sign of damage, then there is no need for further cauterization. However, if there is still damaged tissue, repeat the cauterization process on the remaining affected areas.
Then he can use this, which is more effective than fire and I have mentioned its treatment with the sharp drug in division, so take it from there when you need it.
Chapter 53.
On treating ingrown nails and non-ingrown nails.
This disease often occurs at the bottom of the feet, and it is a rough thing that hurts the man. There are two types of cauterization for this: either cauterization by fire or cauterization by sharp water.وأما الكىّ بالنار فأمر سهل فمتى احتجت الى ذلك فخذ مسامير رفيعة من الحديد صلبة كأنها إبر وأحرق بها موضع الألم واقطعه منها فإنه يقوم مقام بالنار اسرع نفعا وقد ذكرت علاجها بالدواء الحاد
And as for cauterization by fire, it is an easy matter. So when you need that, take fine nails of hard iron, like needles, and burn the painful area with them and cut it out, for it is faster and more effective than fire. As for cauterization by fire, it is to heat the hollow comb-like iron needle made of iron to the size of the nail on all sides and be thin at the edge, then lower it while hot on the nail, then move your hand with the needle around the nail until the needle reaches the depth of the nail.وينبغى أن يكون المسامير رفيعة صلبة متى استعملتها فى الكىّ حتى لا تتكسر فإذا احتجت الى الكىّ فى رأس المسمار فلا ينبغى أن تكوىّ بحديد رقيق ولا بحديد غليظ بل
And it should be fine and hard when you use it for cauterization so that it does not break. And if you need to cauterize the head of the nail, you should not cauterize with thin or thick iron, but with a medium thickness. Then leave it for three days to suppurate, then dress it with crushed wild thyme and salt and leave the dressing on it overnight, for it will come out from its roots. Then treat the wound site with a growth ointment until it heals.And if the nails are not ingrown, you should not cauterize them at all. بل ترفعها من أطرافها برفق حتّى تنزعها مع موضع الجرح، وإن لم يسلّم موضعها من الانشقاق فعوّضته بال
But you should lift them gently from their tips until you remove them with the wound site, and if the site does not heal without splitting, you can compensate for it with the sharp water. And this often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet, so you should take a tube of copper or iron or eagle feathers and lower it on the nail or wart, then pour a small amount of sharp water into the tube.ثمّ تضمده بالخبازى والمرهم المنبت للحم، وإن احتجت الى الكىّ فلا بأس به حتّى ينزع المسمار من أصله وقد عالجته بالدواء الحادّ، وإن كان الثؤلول عظيما كبر قبضة اليد
Take hold of the hand and turn it with a slight flexing of the wrist, so that the rim of the tube can reach the root of the nail; the sharp water will then find its way to the root of the nail, and the patient must bear the smarting of the sharp water for a little while.
Then leave it, for the nail will come away at its root; thus you deal with them one by one until you have removed all that are in the body; then you treat their sites after they have been removed, with ointments that promote flesh growth.
CHAPTER XLVII
ON THE TREATMENT OF FRACTURED BONE ENDS.
If a person has a numbness in an extremity due to cold, or from a feverish condition or anything else, you should apply cauterization four or five times on the spinous processes of the vertebrae, one cauterization between each spinous process, and one cauterization on the chest. And you should apply a cauterization with the olive-sized cautery iron on his abdomen, for this will relieve the numbness and quickly bring about the maturation of the cold disease.
CHAPTER XLVIII
ON THE TREATMENT OF BOILS ON THE BODY.
Boils may arise on the body from foul, thick, cold humors; therefore, when they first appear, you should apply a gentle cauterization to the top of each boil with burning cedar wood, or the root of wild garlic, or with an lens-shaped cautery iron.
And boils should be cauterized in this manner at first; they will not increase, the humor causing them will be eliminated, and the patient will recover, except that this should only be done after phlebotomy has been performed on the patient.
CHAPTER XLIX
ON THE TREATMENT OF HEMORRHAGE FROM AN ARTERY AFTER A VESSEL IS CUT.وإذا نزف العرق من عروق اليد
And if there is copious bleeding from a vein in the hand Many times bleeding occurs from an artery that has been cut due to an external wound, or when an abscess is opened, an organ is cauterized, and so on; it is difficult to ligate such vessels.فإنّى أرشد الى طريقة يسهل بها ذلك ويشتدّ الضبط وذلك بأن تغمس يدك فى م
Then, if this happens to anyone, quickly put your hand over the mouth of the artery, place your index finger on it and gently tighten it until the blood is confined under your finger and nothing comes out. Then you put in the fire small and large olive-wood cauteries and blow on them until they are very hot.
Then you take one of them, either small or large according to the wound and the place where the artery has burst, and you bring down the cautery on that very vein after having removed your finger quickly and hold the cautery until the blood stops.
If, however, the blood gushes out when you remove your finger from the mouth of the artery and put out the cautery, take another cautery quickly from those in the fire that are ready and keep doing this with one after another until the blood stops.
Take care not to burn a nerve that may be there, and know that when an artery bleeds you cannot stop it except in four ways: by cauterization as we have said, or by cutting it off if it has not already been cut. If it is cut off, its ends will contract and the blood will stop; or it may be bound tightly with threads, or the remedies that stop bleeding and compressing bandages applied firmly.وأما الوريد فليس يضيق بقطع الدم وحده بل يجب أن يربط ربطا محكما ولا سيّما إذا كان كبيرا.
A vein, however, does not stop bleeding by being cut alone; it must be bound tightly, especially if large. If anyone who has no doctor or medicine at hand finds himself in this predicament, he should quickly put his index finger on the mouth of the wound as described.
He should hold it tightly until the blood is confined and comes out over the wound, and on the vein and finger; he should not remove his finger, but keep splashing cold water on it until the blood congeals and thickens and stops. During this time, you should look into what else may be needed: cauterization or medicine.
Chapter II.
On incisions and punctures, phlebotomy, and similar surgical procedures.
Khalf said that we have mentioned in the first chapter all the diseases that are suitable for cauterization by fire and burning medicine, their causes, their causes, their instruments, and the forms of the cauteries, from the horn to the foot.
And in this chapter, I will follow that same path to make it easier for the student to find what he needs...
Before I begin, you should know, my sons, that this chapter contains more pitfalls than the first chapter on cauterization...
For this reason, the warning in this chapter should be more severe because the work in this chapter is often accompanied by the risk of death when opening a vein or incising a tumor, draining an abscess, treating a wound, or removing an arrowhead, etc. Many of these procedures are associated with significant risks and the possibility of mortality.
I advise you to be cautious in cases where there is suspicion, as you may encounter various types of people in this profession with different kinds of illnesses. Some of them may be weary of their sickness and indifferent to death.والبعض الآخر يعظم عليهم مرضهم ويغلظ عليهم عند التطبيب ويخرجون إليكم شاكين ما بهم من الألم وقد استحدثوا في أنفسهم أمراضا من شدة ما بهم من الأوجاع فهؤلاء وغيرهم ينبغى أن تعرفوا مواضع الغرر من أ
Some patients may magnify their illnesses and make them seem worse than they actually are due to the severity of their suffering and the longevity of their ailments. Some diseases may indicate mortality through their persistence and severity. You should also be cautious of those who offer you their money in exchange for treatment, as their desire for health may override the reality of their condition. It is not advisable to solely rely on such patients' reports.وينبغى أن تعرفوا مواضع الغرر فى وجوههم وأعراضهم وأعراضهم من الصفراء والسوداء وما يدلّ على الموت فتدبروا ذلك واعملوا به والله المعين لكم على ماأمّنتم عليه..
You should be more cautious than ambitious and greedy. Do not proceed with any treatment without certain knowledge of the desired outcome. Use your knowledge to inform your patients about the potential risks and benefits of each treatment option, and always strive for the best possible outcome..وإنّما ينجح الطبيب ويفلح فى هذه الصناعة بمعرفة الأدواء والأعراض والعلامات ومعرفة مواضع الغرر والسلامة وعلامات الموت.
And that you may thus gain praise and glory, remembrance and thanks; May God guide you, my children, to righteousness, and deprive you not of right judgment and prosperity; for He holdeth the power thereof, there is no God but He.
I have arranged this chapter on the same subject as the previous chapter on cauterization from the head to the foot, so that it may be easy for you to find what you want, if God wills.
CHAPTER I.
The treatment of water which collects in the heads of children.
This disease often occurs in children at birth, if the midwife applies pressure to the head of the child too harshly; it may also occur from an obscure cause which is not known.
I have not seen this disease in anyone but children, and those whom I have seen affected by it soon died; therefore I decided to refrain from treating it. Indeed, I once saw a boy whose head was filled with water, and his head grew larger every day.فمن رأى ذلك وأحسّ به فليضغط موضع الرشاء بإناء مملوء ماء حارّا من غير أن يوقّد عليه حتى يبادر الى إسقاطه قبيل أن يتلفه الماء فإنّ الماء إن أمسك له أربعين يوما لم يزل If one observes this condition and feels it, he should press the spot where the umbilical cord is attached with a vessel filled with hot water, without lighting a fire under it; thus he should hasten to extract the water before it damages the child, for if the water remains for forty days it will not depart, until the child is no
The humidity may collect either between the skin and the bone or beneath the bone on the peritoneum; and if it is collected between the skin and the bone, and the swelling is small, one should make an incision in the middle of the head, a single horizontal incision about two fingers' width long, so that the humidity runs out. This is the shape of the incision:
But if the humidity is more and the swelling greater, make two intersecting incisions thus: .وتضرب موضع الشقّ بالماء الحارّ لتنزع الجلد عن العظم مع الموضع وتثبت الجلد بمكانه فى الموضع الذى ينبغى أن يكون فيه
And if the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the stitches of the head open from all sides, and the water goes down when you squeeze it with your hand to the inside, and this is not hidden from you, then you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this way.
After the incision, all the moisture comes out, then you tighten the incisions with cloth and bandages, then anoint it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day, then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and do not leave the head tightly bound, and feed the patient with every dry food that has little moisture.
until the member gets stronger and heals, another prescription for incision is to look where the bone of the swelling and the water gathering appears, because it may be in the back of the head more or in front of it or on the right or on the left.
So you should make an incision where the swelling and water gathering appears to you, making sure not to cut an artery and cause bleeding that would kill the patient with that bleeding while evacuating moisture.وإن لم ترَ عظم الورم ولا اجتماع الماء فشقّ على اليمين واليسار فى مؤخّر الرأس وقدامَهُ لأنّه لا بدّ أن تصادف موضع الورم وتفرغ الرطوبة كلّها، واعلم انّ الرطوبة تحت العظم إذا كانت قديم
And if you do not see the bone of the swelling or the water gathering,
Cut the two arteries behind the ears known as the carotid arteries.وصفة قطع الحالبين اللذين تحت الورك من الجانبين فإنّه يذهب إلى الرأس وعقد العض
And the prescription for cutting the two arteries under the hip from the sides is that it goes to the head and the knots of the muscles, when one has suffered from acute attacks in the eyes or chest, and the treatment of medicines did not work, the best treatment for this is to cut these two arteries.وصفة قطع الوريدين اللذين يمرّان تحت اللسان.
And the prescription for cutting the two veins that pass under the tongue is to shave the patient's head with a razor, then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the artery appears, then tighten the neck of the patient with the end of his garment, then look where the pulse beats and their location are the two lowered places behind the ears and rarely hidden except in some people.وصفة قطع الوريدين اللذين فى جانبيّ الأنف.
Then mark them with ink, and then cut them with a scalpel to the bone. This should be done as wide as the head. If you wish, insert the scalpel under the artery and cut it up to the top. The length of the cut should be about two fingers pressed together.
If the vein is cut, the blood will flow out in a pulsating manner, and it will spurt forward in a continuous stream. If the artery does not become apparent to the touch, you should estimate three fingers from the ear, then mark with ink and cut to the bone. The appropriate procedure is
to send out six ounces of blood, more or less depending on the strength of the patient and the fullness of his arteries. Then look at the wound; if any membrane remains on the bone, cut it away.
to prevent a hot swelling from occurring. Then tie the wound with a piece of linen, and treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter 3.
On cutting the two arteries in the temples.
If a person suffers from a chronic migraine, or acute attacks of vertigo caused by intense heat and inflammation in the muscles of the temples, or from a severe chronic headache, and if medical treatment has not been effective, we have tried cutting or cauterizing the arteries in the temples as described.
The procedure for cutting the arteries is to shave the hair in the temples and locate the visible artery in the temple, which can easily be detected by its pulse; however, it may be more difficult to find in some individuals.ثمّ تعلّم عليهما بالمداد ثمّ تقطعهما بالمبضع النشل قطعا الى العظم ويكون ذلك بعرض الرأس وإن شئت أدخلت المبضع من تحت الشريان وتنتره الى فوق بالقطع ويكون طول القطع نحو أصبعين مضمومتين.
Then mark them with ink and cut them with a scalpel to the bone, making the incision as wide as the head. Alternatively, if the artery is difficult to find due to extreme coldness, have the patient tighten the back of their neck with a cloth, and then rub the area with a piece of cloth or apply warm water to it until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the knife which is shown here. Then you gently strip off the skin until you reach the artery, then insert a hook into it and pull it upwards until you extract it from the skin and free it from the adherences underneath on all sides. If the artery is thin, you twist it with the tip of the hook. Then you cut off a portion of it, as much as its ends are spread apart and constricted, without causing bleeding. If it is not amputated or severed, blood will not flow at all. Then you expel six to three ounces of blood.ثمّ تمسح الادرار النازع من الفتحة التى أدريت منها الدم بمنديل ثمّ تضع عليها قطعة من الكتان أو الصوف وتشدّها برفق حتّى تعصر الوريد ولا تجدع منه شيئا بل تقبض الوريد كلّ
If the artery is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong, twisted thread, either from silk or from bowstrings, so that decay does not quickly reach it before the wound heals and causes bleeding.ثمّ تمسح الادرار النازع من الفتحة التى أدريت منها الدم بمنديل ثمّ تضع عليها قطعة من الكتان أو الصوف وتشدّها برفق حتّى تعصر الوريد ولا تجدع منه شيئا بل تقبض الوريد كلّه.
Then you wipe the discharged fluid from the opening where you drew the blood with a napkin, then place a piece of linen or wool on it and gently tighten it until you compress the vein and don't cut off any of it, but rather constrict the entire vein. Then you cut off the excess between the two ties; you do this in that moment or after some other time. If you wish to cauterize it to the bone with a scalpel so that its edges are amputated and it functions just as well, or better, as we said before.
However, if the patient has a fever or is of a bilious temperament, cauterization is more beneficial because it helps to eliminate moisture and is therefore even more effective in healing; after cutting the arteries, the wound should be packed with old wool and tightly bandaged. After recovery, it should be treated with dry remedies that promote meat growth and with compression until it heals, if God wills.
If during your work bleeding occurs from an artery, promptly ligate it either by cauterization or by filling the site with alum and applying pressure with your hand until the bleeding stops. If you do not have any of these things available, place your finger over the wound until the blood clots.
And wet the wound with very cold water until the pain subsides and apply a bandage as appropriate. A lighter and easier method than ligating the artery is to cauterize the vein with this double-bladed instrument after marking the site with ink.
And you should apply it very hot until it reaches the bone and the vein is cauterized in two places so that its ends are separated, for this cautery will not adhere. This is an illustration of the instrument.
The two blades should be sharp like small razors, but less sharp than a regular knife, for if they are as sharp as a razor, the cold will reach them quickly and the flesh will not cut through quickly. If they are a little thick, the heat of the fire will adhere to them.
And cut through the flesh quickly. This method is better than any other, lighter and easier. The distance between the blades should be about the thickness of a finger.
Chapter 4
On treating the constant flow of hot tears into the eyes.
If the tears are constant and the flow is from the veins on the skull from the outside, and no treatment with any medicine of medicine has been beneficial, and you see that the patient's face has turned red.وكان يجد حرارة فى عينيه وألمّا شديدا، فاعلمن أنّ ذلك من الرطوبة التى قد تراكمت تحت الجلد، فأمّا إذا كان سيلانها من داخل العين ولم يكن من خارج فهذا علاجه عندنا إن شاء الله تعالى And he feels a crawling like that of ants in his forehead, and his eyes are swollen, watery, with his eyelashes worn away and his eyelids swollen from the sharpness of the tears, so the first remedies have failed to treat this condition, and they call it treatment with the sword, which is that you order the patient to shave the hair on his forehead.وإنّما سمّوه بالعلاج بالسيف لأنّك تأمر بحلق الموضع الذى تجد فيه هذا الدبيب، فاذا حلقت موضعه وجدت تحته عروقا مكسورة وربما وجدت معها شعيرات مكسورة فتنزعها وترمّيها، وتأخذ ماء السيفون وتسخنه على نار خفيفة ثمّ تمسح به الموضع من خارج حتى يدخل الى العروق فى الموضع الذى انكسرت فيه الشع
Then make three parallel incisions along the forehead, each about two finger widths in length. The first incision should be parallel to the length of the nose and located in the middle of the forehead; the second should be a little below the movement of the muscle in the temple; and the third on the other side.
Take care not to cut the two arteries on the sides, and keep your hand away from the junction of the jaws. The distance between each incision should be about three fingers, and you should have some sponge or dry cloth at hand to absorb the blood.
Then insert a sharp-pointed scalpel that looks like this: [image of a scalpel] From the incision near the temple to the middle incision, you should strip away all the skin between the incisions along with the membrane over the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision to the third incision, and then remove this scalpel. You should also insert another instrument called a scalpel into the first incision, sharp on one side and smooth on the other. This is what it looks like:  [image of a scalpel]
The sharp side of the instrument should be facing upwards towards the tissue attached to the skin, and the smooth side facing down towards the bone. Push it until you reach the middle incision, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without cutting into the surface of the skin.
Then do the same in the middle incision to the other incision. After an appropriate amount of blood has flowed, compress the areas where there is clotted blood. Then, in each incision, place a wisp of cotton that has been soaked in a solution of wine and oil or vinegar and oil.
To prevent a hot swelling, on the third day loosen the bandage and apply copious amounts of warm water. Then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rosewater and other remedies used for wounds until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Five.
In the treatment of tears and discharges into the eyes from the brain.
When a person has frequent, severe, and persistent discharges from the brain into the eyes, you will see them looking emaciated and small, with weakened vision and ulcerated eyelids, and their eyelashes falling out. There will be intense pain and a frequent runny nose deep in the head, and you will see from these symptoms that this material and discharge come from many deep veins. The best treatment for this is to have the patient shave his forehead, then make an incision in the middle of the forehead.
There will be intense pain and a frequent runny nose deep in the head, and you will see from these symptoms that this material and discharge come from many deep veins. The best treatment for this is to have the patient shave his forehead, then make an incision in the middle of the forehead. Or, raise it slightly horizontally and start the incision from the left temple to the right temple, going into the bone and keeping your hand away from the muscle of the chewing cheek so that when the bone is exposed and all blood dried with a sponge.
Then separate the lips of the incision with old cotton or a ply of flaxen thread, then tighten above with bandages and soak the bandages in wine and oil so that hot swelling does not occur. When you remove it and see that hot swelling has occurred, you should scrape the bone until the meat starts to grow on it.
Then treat it with the astringent treatment that promotes meat growth, such as taking two parts wheat flour and four parts calcium sulphide and preparing an ointment from them to be used in meat growth in such wounds.
Chapter Six.
In the treatment of what falls into the ear.متى حدث لأحد أنّه سقط فى أذنه حشيش
When a person has something fall into his ear, it is usually one of four types: either a mineral stone or semi-stone like iron and glass, or a vegetable seed such as chickpeas and nuts, or something liquid like water and vinegar.وكلّ ذلك على ثلاثة أجزاء إمّا أن يكون متماسكاً من نفسه لا يتفرّق أو متفرّقاً متحلّلاً أو رطبّاً سائلاً.
And if it is an object, when a pebble or something similar to a pebble falls into the ear and does not grow in the ear, then face towards the sun with your ear, and if you see the pebble, then drop some oil of violets or olive oil into it, then try to remove it by moving your head or by snuffing with a handkerchief. And close the nostrils when sneezing comes, after putting a ring made of cloth or wool around the ear and stretching the ear upwards, for it often comes out with this treatment. If it does not come out, then try to remove it with a gentle probe whose form is as follows.
If it does not come out with the probe, then make a small, gently curved tube of brass and insert one end of the tube into the ear hole.
And seal around the tube with soft pitch mixed with oil so that there is no passage for air except through the tube, then pull it out with your breath strongly and often, it will come out with that. If it does not come out as we described, take a small amount of gum mastic or gum arabic which is used to catch birds, and put it on the end of the pestle.
After wrapping a cotton ball tightly around it, then gently insert it into the ear hole after the ear has dried of moisture. If it does not come out with all that we have described, then promptly proceed to incision before hot swelling or convulsion occurs.
The prescription for incision is to bleed the patient first in the scalp, and then release some blood from him according to his strength. Then have the patient sit between your hands, turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear, at its lowest point near the lobe.
The incision should be crescent-shaped so that you can reach the pebble, then remove it with any tool you can, then stitch the incision quickly and treat it until it heals.And if a pebble falls into the eye, put some oil of violets or rose water in it, and try to remove it by moving your eyelids up and down.
And if the object that has fallen into the ear is one of the grains that grow and swell, then try to remove it by what we have mentioned. If it does not respond to removal, then take a thin, delicate knife in this shape.
And try to cut that kind of grain that has fallen into the ear, and you should only do this if you are sure that the grain has been moistened by the vapor of the ear until it becomes many small pieces, then remove them with a blind hook or a soft probe or by sucking.
As we have mentioned, it is easier to remove water that has entered the ear by having the patient sneeze with a handkerchief first while filling his ear with some old cotton wool. While lying on his side with the affected ear uppermost, if the water comes out as a result, that is good.
If not, take some small, smooth pebbles the size of fingertips, heat them gently over a fire and insert one into the ear canal. The patient should then jump on that foot on that side and hit the pebble in the ear with another stone. This action creates a vibrating effect that can dislodge the water.
He should continue doing this with one pebble at a time until all the water is gone. As an alternative, take a reed or a feather, insert one end into the ear and burn the other end over a fire until most of it is scorched. Then reinsert another reed.
Do this several times until all the water is gone, or use a tube as mentioned for removing an object like a pebble. If the intruder is small in size, such as a flea, treat it as described in the previous section. أما إذا كان الحيوان دخيل كبير الحجم، مثل القرادة، فانتبه جيداً.
If the intruder is a large body that can be felt by touch, try to remove it with a probe or pincers; this type of removal is usually easier than others. If you have treated the ear with the methods mentioned in the previous section for insect larvae and your treatment was not successful, then:
Look at the ear in the sun, and if you see anything of the worms, remove it with a probe or delicate tweezers. If nothing appears to you from them, take a tube, which is like this.
The lower end is narrow and the upper end is wide, and insert the thin end into the ear as much as the patient can bear, then suck with strong suction. Do this several times until all of the worms come out. If it does not come out, seal around the tube with wax as I mentioned to you in the case of a stone.
If it does not come out with what we have mentioned, use the catheters which I have mentioned, and the ancients have tried them in killing worms, and you will find that in the article on catheters. And pour oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, and its picture is:
As you see, make it of silver or copper, narrow at the bottom with a small hole, and wide at the top. If you like, the probe inside the tube can be made of solid copper, and if you like, take a stick and wrap cotton tightly around its end.
Then pour the oil or liquid, or whatever medicine you want, into the tube while it is in the ear, then insert the probe with the cotton from above and squeeze your hand gently until the oil enters the ear canal and the patient feels it.
Let the patient feel it inside, and let what you pour into the ear be slightly warmed in the fire, but beware that the thing which is dropped into it is not very cold or very hot, for the ear cannot bear that.
Chapter 7
On the treatment of a blockage of the ear.
Some children may be born from their mothers' wombs with their ears not pierced.
It may also happen to some people that there is a blockage in the passage of the ear due to an injury or a piece of flesh growing in it. This blockage may be deep inside the ear hole and not visible to the eye.
And if it protrudes slightly outside the hole and is perceived by the sight, then that which protrudes deep into the ear and is not perceived by the sight is usually difficult to see. And that which is perceived by the sight, you should put the patient's ear in the sun. And look inside it, if you see the plug visible, open it with a soft spatulum which has this shape:.
The end of it is slightly wider and limited in some parts, while the rest of the spatulum is smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear. If the plug is due to flesh that has grown in the ear canal, hold it with a delicate probe and cut it gently until all the flesh is removed.
If the plug is deep in the ear, take a smooth, thin wire and heat it slightly in the fire then insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the plug along with what the patient feels as a heavy hearing, gently rub it.
Be careful not to injure the ear drum, then put a plug in the ear according to the size of the hole which you have moistened in Egyptian ointment do this for days until you are sure that the wound is healed or take a plug and moisten it in water and sprinkle powdered pitch on it.
And use it, if you see the ear swollen and hot, then remove the plug and replace it with another one which you have moistened in cerate made of rose oil until the hot swelling subsides, then treat it until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the rest of the treatment which stops the aforementioned bleeding in the article on cauterizations.
Chapter 8.
On the treatment of warts that appear on the eyelids.
These warts which appear on the eyelids may be moist and dry, you should hold them with a probe or probe and cut them with a scalpel from their roots, then put powdered pitch on the spot.
If blood flows from it, remove it with a gentle lenticular cautery iron and cauterize it after cutting; for it often returns if anything remains of its roots. If you cauterize with fire, you will burn those roots and it will not return.
Chapter 9.
On the treatment of cold in the eyelids.
Something like a cold often occurs in the eyelids, something severe and rigid.وعلاجه أن يطلى فوقه بدهن الورد ودهن الباذنجان وجوز الهند وعصارة القراصيا وسواها من الأدهان التى هى أشدّ حر
Its treatment is to smear it with rose oil, eggplant oil, coconut oil, and other oils that are more heat. This is due to the fact that it is called "cold", which is the accumulation of thick moisture in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid. The procedure is that you should look at it; if the cold is protruding on the surface of the eyelid and moving in every direction, then it is easy to deal with by making an incision across it.وإن كانت مستورة تحت الجفن تحرّك مع تحريك العين الى كل ناحية فاقطعه من العرض أو من الطول على حسب ما تراه، ثمّ اعالج موضع الشقّ
But if it is concealed under the eyelid and moves with the movement of the eye to every direction, then cut it from across or from length according to what you see. Then strip it from each side gently until it is released, then hook it with a hook and cut it, but if you cannot cut it except after you have cut through the eyelid, then do not worry, because this does not harm the patient. If the incision is large, gather it with a stitch and treat it until it heals.وإن عرضت فى طرف العين من الأجفان البرودة وكان الطرف معطوبا واللحم متمزّقا وجب أن تتخلّص من المقتضى وتحاذر أن تعطب شيئا من العصب أو من العروق، فإن كانت لحمية فقط فأزلها وألقها، وإن كانت لحمية وعروقية فشقّ على طول العرق حتّى يظهر وحذ
But if the cold appears at the edge of the eyelids, and the edge is inflamed and the flesh torn, it is necessary to get rid of the required nerve and beware of damaging any nerve or vein. If it is only muscular, remove it and throw it away, but if it is muscular and venous, make an incision along the vein until it appears, and be careful not to damage any nerve or vein. If it's small, there's no harm in you, because the ointment will heal it and join it together. But if the cold is inclined towards the inside of the eyelid towards the inner surface, turn over the eyelid and hang the cold with a hook without needing to make an incision and cut it from all sides.وإن
If the eyelid has been cut through, this will do no harm; then wash the eye after removing the membrane with salt water and treat the area with a healing agent until the patient recovers.
Chapter Ten
On the treatment of styes which appear in the eyelid.
A sty is a lump that forms in the layers of the upper eyelid, and it most commonly affects boys, weighing down their eyes and causing discharge in the mornings, making it difficult for them to look at sunlight. This is because tears quickly flow into their eyes.
And so you will feel the sty between your fingers when you press on the area; have the patient rest his head in your lap and close his eyes.
Then take a piece of linen and use it to make a wick the size of the area surrounding the sty; place this over the sty, then press your fingers all around it to bring the sty to the center of the circle.
Then split the wet area with a scalpel, making a horizontal incision no larger than that used in phlebotomy; as for its depth, you should split the skin all the way down to reach the sty.
In most cases, the sty will protrude through the incision in the shape of a white piece of fat; pull it out with a cloth that you have wrapped around your fingers, moving your hand right and left until it comes out completely. Be careful not to over-incise or else the scalpel may harm the eye.
If the sty does not appear through the incision, you should increase the size of the incision gently until it appears and then pull it out as mentioned before; then immerse a piece of cloth in vinegar and water and place it on the area, securing it with a bandage; some people also crush salt.
He puts it in the cavity of the incision to dissolve what remains of that moisture, then treat it until it heals. If there is a hot and swollen wound at the site, treat it with soothing bandages until it heals.
Chapter 11.
On various methods of eye cauterization.
If there are excess eyelids growing on the eyelid, below their natural position, and they persist, they will harm the eye and cause various diseases such as constant tearing, drooping of the eyelids, cataracts, and thickening, which can lead to the loss of sight.
There are four methods of eye cauterization: either by fire, or by a sharp drug as mentioned in the previous chapter on cauterization, or by cutting and sewing, or by a splint, which I will describe later.
You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it turns over, fine; if not, insert a needle with a thread through the bottom of the eyelid; the needle will go through the thread from above, near the hair itself, and you pull the thread upward with the eyelid.
You turn it with a rod, then make an incision in the back of the eyelid, below the excess hair, with a scalpel from the larger to the smaller canthus, then remove the thread and place a small pad of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and mark on the eyelid with ink.وتقول له اذا نظرت الى الركن الأيمن فتحول الى الركن الأيسر والى الركن الأيسر فتحول الى الركن الأيمن فإن استجاب فى النظرة الأولى فذلك هو المطلوب وان لم يستجب فى النظرة الثانية فذلك دليل على أنّه لا ينظر ودليل آخر على أنّه مصاب بمرض الع
You tell the patient that if he looks to the right corner, he should turn his gaze to the left corner, and vice versa. If he responds on the first try, that's what you're looking for; if not, it's a sign that he can't see, and another sign that he has a disease similar to that of a fig leaf, except that the shape should be raised to the amount you want from the eyelid, because people may differ in this regard.
Some require less cutting, all depending on how relaxed the eyelid is. Then, with a scalpel, make an incision along the two lines you have marked, starting from the larger eyelid to the smaller one. The incision should be made close to the natural lashes and be as thick as a pencil lead.
Then, insert the needle into one of the skin's corners and strip it all away. Then stitch the two lips together with a thin woolen thread using a needle, wipe away the blood, and adhere any remaining threads to the eyebrows with some sticky substance.
You may do that, or not, as you wish. Then leave the sutures and threads in place for about three to four days, then treat it. If you prefer, you can leave the wound open and treat it with something that dries and constricts; the eyelid will rise when the wound heals, and stitching is better.
This is the method of narrowing the eyes that was mentioned by previous authors, except that it requires more effort from the patient and is one of the best methods with no risks involved. There is another method of narrowing the eyes which involves marking the eyelid in the shape of a laurel leaf as described above. Then lift the eyelid with three needles, either spaced out or grouped together in this shape:..
Then cut away any excess of the eyelid with a small pair of scissors, making even cuts like this: .
If you are unable to hold the needles in place and they don't stay put, then take a needle with a thread and insert it through the center of the shape, and also insert another thread near the larger eyelid and a third thread near the smaller one. Then gather all the threads between your fingers evenly, and lift your hand gradually.
Then lift the marked skin as described above, and stitch together the two lips of the wound and treat it until it heals. If you experience a hot swelling when cutting or incising, then soothe that swelling with cerotum or similar ointments.
The lower eyelid may also invert, and its lashes turn inwards. In this case, the aforementioned incisions, sutures, cauterization with fire or with a sharp medicine are more beneficial and gentler on the patient than incisions and sutures.
Cauterization with reeds is done in the following way: the eyelid is turned inside out, and an incision is made on the inner side as described before. Then, two thin reed or wooden sticks are made, their length equal to that of the eyelid, and their width less than that of a scalpel.
Their edges are carved on both sides to hold the sutures, then they are gently brought together and tied over the remaining eyelid, which is tightly bound. After a few days, the stretched skin dies, turns black, and rots away.
Until it falls off by itself. If this is delayed, cut it away with a pair of scissors, then treat it until it heals. Once the eyelid has healed and risen, the lashes will no longer stab the eye. This is how you make the reeds: their length and width are as mentioned before:.
Chapter 12.
On removing hair that pokes the eye with a needle.
Take a thin needle, thread it with a length of smooth, thin silk thread about an inch long, then tie its ends together very gently.
Then, thread another thin string through the loop, making it shorter than the first one, and tie its ends if you like. The patient should then rest his head in your lap, close to the sun so that you can see what you're doing, as this is a delicate operation. Then, insert the needle at the base of the hair that needs to be removed.
Pass it through the eyelid quickly until you've removed the hair above the natural hair, then pull the string up through the loop and thread that hair into the loop as well if it's one, two, or three hairs, but no more.
Then you pull with your hand until the hair comes out with the loop in the eyelid along with the natural hair. If you pull on the loop and the hair does not come out with it, you pull the loop down with the thread that you placed in it until the loop comes out of the upper hole.
Then you put the hair back in and pull on them until they rise into the upper hole and you see them with your own eyes. Then release the loop and the thread and remove them, and leave it tightly bound for two or three days until the hair is firmly in place and the meat grows back over it.
If the hair is short, either add a long natural hair to it so that it rises with it, or leave it until it gets longer after some time, then you can lift it..
Chapter 13.
On the treatment of entropion in the upper eyelid.
The condition that this entropion is exposed to is called a rabbit and this entropion can be either natural or accidental, the accidental being from a wound or incision or burning or the like..
The procedure for treating it is to make an incision in that scar and to separate its edges and insert a flax thread between them and tie it, so that it heals. It is not advisable to use things that dry and contract in its treatment..وإن كان الشقّ من كىّ فليكن الكىّ فى موضع الحاجب، ويحدد الحاجب ويعرقل، فإن تمّت الشفاء واستمرّت العين صحيحة فلا بأس وإن احتاجت الى اعادة الكىّ فعُرْقِلَتْ وربطت حتّى تبرأ، وينب
However, if the incision is from burning, the burn should be on the eyebrow area, and the eyebrow should be defined and immobilized. If healing is achieved and the eye remains healthy, there is no harm in doing this, but if it requires burning again, it should be immobilized and tied until it heals..For you are not to do that, the entropion will return even worse than it was, but rather use things that relax, such as a poultice of milk that has been cooked with poplar buds and flax seed, and diachilon ointment that has been dissolved with some oils, and apply it to the thread.
And the treatment of it is to use every means to prevent it from healing in its original shape, and this operation which we have mentioned is only a repair of the hernia and not to return the appearance of the place to what it was at all.
CHAPTER XIV.
TREATMENT OF HERNIA IN THE LOWER LIP.
This hernia which is from below is called in truth a true hernia and it is natural, and the acquired one is from a wound or incision or burning and the like.وأما الشترة التى تكون فى الجفن الأعلى فهى التى تسمى الشترة الكاذبة وهى تكون بقوة الطبيعة وذلك أنّ الأبخرة الحارة الرطبة تصعد إلى الدماغ وتحدث فيها احتقانا وتكاثرا فينتشر ذلك الحرارة والرطوبة إلى العضو الذى يكون فوقها وهو الجفن
And as for the hernia which is in the upper eyelid, it is called a false hernia and it is due to the natural power, and that is because the hot and moist vapors rise to the brain and cause congestion and proliferation there, then the heat and moisture spread to the organ above it, which is the eyelid.The method of treatment is to take a needle with a thread folded in half and pierce it into the flesh and pass it from the left lacrimal gland to the right lacrimal gland so that the thread becomes at the ends of the flesh, then pull the flesh up with the needle and cut it with a broad scalpel.ثمّ ترجع الخيط إلى الوراء وتقطعه حتى تعود المأقين ال
Then go back with the thread and cut it, and if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be, otherwise take a spatula and put it on the split site and turn the eyelid with it and cut two incisions in the inner side of the eyelid and the ends of the incisions are at the angles of the cutting that you cut so that they meet to form an angle.ثمّ تأخذ خيطا وتخيط الزاويتين معا وتجعل الخياطة داخليّة ثمّ تمسح موضع الشقّ كله بمرهم العين الذى قدّمناه فى علاج الجروح. Then take a thread and stitch the two angles together, making the stitch internal, then wipe the entire split site with the eye ointment we presented in the treatment of wounds.Until when it is healed, its shape becomes similar to
It is the Greek letter lambda, then remove that flesh as much as the acute side of it is below what adjoins the eyelid, then gather the dispersed parts with two stitches, stitch it with wool thread and then treat it as we mentioned from the soothing drugs and twisting until it heals.وإن شئت أن تعالج الشترة الكاذبة التى تكون فى الجفن الأعلى بطريق أخرى فخذ مبضعا عريضا وتشقّ شقّا فى الجانب الداخل من الجفن من زاوية القطع إلى زاوية القطع حتّى يلتقى الشقان.
And if the foreskin has been torn from a cut or sutured or cauterized, then one should make a simple incision without the hair of the foreskin as well, as mentioned earlier. Then, separate the lips with a twist, as mentioned.
In summary, the treatment of phimosis, whether from above or below, is to perform the procedure according to the appearance of the foreskin, as it may vary greatly in appearance. The experienced surgeon will find a way to treat it effectively.
until it returns to its natural shape, or at least approaches it. The disease itself will guide you to the appropriate treatment and instrument in most cases.
Chapter 15.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Many people may experience this adhesion of the upper eyelid to the white of the eye, preventing it from moving freely and performing its natural functions. A thin rod should be inserted under the eyelid.
You can lift it up or extend it with a hook, and then cut the adhesion with a gentle blade that is not as sharp as a regular scalpel, but rather dull, so as not to disturb the patient during the procedure and prevent the blade from cutting too deeply into the eye. The cutting should be done as if you were peeling off the adhesion.وإنّما قلنا إنّه لا يقلق العليل عند العمل بالمبضع لانّه لو كان بحدّة القطع لآذاه كثيرا عند عمل المبضع فيه، وقد يعرض ذلك لمزيد من الاذى على أنّ هذا القطع هو أفضل ما يردّ العين الى حالها ويصححها.
We said that the patient would not be disturbed by the procedure because if the blade were very sharp, it could cause a lot of pain. This cutting is the best way to restore the eye to its normal condition and heal the adhesion completely. Then, wash the eye with salt water or inject it from the syringe with zinc oxide dissolved in water. Finally, separate the eyelid and the eye with a cotton thread.
You should place a damp pad over the eye, and after three days, you can use compresses to soothe the area until it heals.
Chapter XVI.
In cutting the preputium and repairing wounds of the vulva.
The preputium is of two kinds: either it is nervy and resembles a thin, tough membrane, or it is non-nervous and resembles a hard, white membrane which, when the iron touches it or pierces it, is easily cut.
Its attachment is from the largest meatus to the point where it just covers the pupil, preventing light and eye movement. The procedure for cutting it is for the patient to rest his head on your lap. You then
open his eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand, then grasp the preputium with a bent probe and stretch it upwards. Then take an awl and insert into it a hair of horse or ox, and strong thread, bend the tip of the awl slightly and pierce it in the middle of the preputium. You then
pass the thread through the awl and tie the preputium with the thread, stretching it upwards and stripping it with the hair to the edge of the pupil, as if you were spreading it with the hair to the end; then cut the rest at the root of the meatus with a delicate scalpel or small pair of scissors, leaving the natural meatous membrane intact. And if
you do not want to cause excessive tearing from the cut, you can extend the preputium with a probe alone or with thread as mentioned above, then strip it with a smooth-tipped scalpel in this shape: . And if
you are careful not to touch the corneal membrane with the scalpel and cause a perforation in it, then after cutting, you put in the eye some powdered salt or zinc vitriol poultice and leave it until the next day, then treat it as appropriate until it heals. And if
the preputium is non-nervous and you cannot insert an awl or probe into it, then this type of preputium is often treated with remedies and it heals as described in the division; if you want to cut it, open the patient's eye. You then
Take a sharp, smooth, fine blade for this procedure. Gently peel off the skin with a sharp knife, being careful not to tear it. If you notice that it is dislodging and crumbling, and the knife has made an impression, then drop a few drops of your eye medication into the eye, from a syringe or a red-hot needle, or a fine powder, and bandage the eye until the next day.
Then, go back and work on it again until it is completely removed, except if you encounter a warm, painful swelling in the eye; leave it alone, and treat the warm swelling until it heals, then go back and work on the skin with the knife until it is healed.
If the swelling is causing extreme pain in the eye, then hook it with a needle and cut off some of it without cutting too deeply so that it does not cause a tear. Then drop some eye medication into the eyes, from a syringe or a red-hot needle, until it heals.
Chapter XVII
On cutting out the pinguecula and any excess flesh that grows in the eye.
Some people may develop a red, fleshy growth that covers the eyeball or comes close to or even hangs over the eyelids; sometimes the eyelids may even turn outward. It resembles a rosebud.
The procedure for this is for the patient to lie his head in your lap, then open his eyes wide, and you pluck out the red flesh with suitable tweezers.
Or you can hold it with forceps or a spatula and cut off the flesh bit by bit until it is all gone, being careful not to hurt the eye during the procedure; you may use either the knife we described for cutting the skin or a small pair of scissors.وإن كان لحمًا زائدًا ميتًا فقطعته بالسكين او القاطع فحذّر ان تسقط شيئًا منه الى داخل العين فإنّه يضرّها ضررًا شديدًا، وأمّا إن كان لحمًا حيًّا ينبض نبضًا خفيفًا فاعلم أنّه منبت للعين ويجب عليك أن ترده الى مكانه وتداويه حتّى يبرأ As is seen in the way sutures are applied and their appearance in the following chapter.
If you have been cut and all the "V-shaped" sutures are removed, fill the eye with powdered salt or irrigate it with red ochre or similar caustic medications, and apply a compress to the outside of the eye with egg white to prevent inflammation from heat.
If there is still a part of the sutures remaining and you are concerned about bleeding and fear inflammation from heat, then leave the eye and treat it with medications that soothe inflammation, then return to operating on it until it heals. Similarly, do this for any excess flesh that may occur in the eye as a result of this type of injury.
However, you should avoid treating a weak eye by cauterization or through an incision, and do not insert your hand into any of these procedures until you are sure that the organ can tolerate it.
Chapter 18.
On suturing the eye.
The "spurs" are red blood vessels that grow on the eye, preventing sight and weakening the eye over time. Therefore, you should first examine the eye with the spurs; if it is strong and does not have any other disease besides the spurs,
then you can proceed with the suturing, which is to have the patient rest his head in your lap, then lift those blood vessels with a needle or two, depending on your skill, and they should be fine and gently curved in this manner:
or two double-curved needles joined at one end as shown below:
Then, with a fine pair of scissors, gently lift those blood vessels and wipe away the blood from time to time until you see that the eye is free of those blood vessels and all bleeding has stopped. Be careful not to harm the eye with the tips of the scissors, and make sure your work faces the sun for half the day.
Be very steady in your work so as not to cut anything other than those blood vessels. When you are finished, irrigate the eye with green or red vitriol to eat away any remaining spurs with its sharpness. If you cannot sutur all of it at once, then dress the eye with something that soothes the pain of the eye.
And leave it for a few days until the pain subsides and you are sure that the hot tumor has subsided, then repeat the operation on her in this way until she is healed. This is the shape of the scissors that hurt her.
[The patient's head should be in the student's lap, and another student should dry the tears and examine the interior and exterior of the eye, and you] The original method of operation is to open the eye with fixed openings or a triangle held by a student.
Looking intently and the patient's head should be in the student's lap, and another student should dry the tears and examine the interior and exterior of the eye, and you have the option of starting with forceps from the top of the eye or from the bottom, but it is better to dry two vessels on the upper side, one at the end of the crown and the other at the beginning.
And hold it between the middle and index finger, then hang a hook under them, then hold it between the little finger and the ring finger, and lift your hand gently until you see all the vessels raised, cut from the smaller west, whether with scissors or with a sharp knife.
And insert the probe on a needle and explore all the vessels until they rise above the suture, do not cut off the probing, as the tears and blood will smear you.
Then cut with scissors what exceeds the crown from above and below so that nothing remains embedded except in the cornea, if you can lift it off the cornea, peel it off with the probe, which is better. In some people, it becomes available.واخرج المهتّ من العين وادخل اخرى لتعلم الاولى هل ارتفعت ام لا فاذا وجدت تحتها صلبًا او لينًا فاعلم انك قد اتيت على السبل كله فان كان فيه عروق مرتفعه فاقطعهن بالمقص وامسح الدم
And take the probe out of the eye and insert another to see if the first one has risen or not, if you find under it something hard or soft, know that you have come to all the vessels, if there are raised veins, cut them with scissors and wipe the blood away. And when you cut it, it will
Chapter XIX.
In replacing the bone in the nose.
The physicians call the bone "nassora", if you treat it with cauterization or with sharp, burning medicine as described above and it does not heal, then there is no remedy for it except to split open the tumor when it is ripe and extract all the moisture within it or the pus.
Until the bone is exposed, if you see any damage or blackness, remove it with an instrument like this:..
You call the "coarse-headed" tool, made from Indian iron, with a round head like a button, engraved like a file or chisel, very thin. You place it on the site of the damage in the bone and then rotate it between your fingers while tightening your hand slightly until you see that the damage has been removed..وإنّما تفعل ذلك لتسكن الألم، ثمّ تكىء الموضع بالزيت المطبوخ بالحنظل، فان لم ينجعل الموضع وعاد الريش الى أوله فأبق فى الكىّ حتّى تنجعل، وقد يبقى أثر الأسود او الخراش كالأديم الرقيق فلا بأس به.
And you do that several times and then treat the site with dry, astringent remedies. If the wound heals and the meat grows in it and stops bleeding for a period of 40 days without any recurrence or any incident happening to it.وإن حدث به شيئا من هذه العوارض فليس ينفع الكىّ فى هذا الموضع وانما يعالج بالادوية المسهلة الباطنة التى تفتح سدد الأبصار وتنقيها من الفساد الرطب او من الورم العارض فيها، وقد ذكرنا تركيبها فيما
If something happens to it, cauterization is not beneficial in this site, but rather treating with internal remedies that open obstructions and cleanse the eyes of the putrid moisture or tumors.And if it does not heal and there is no other option except to return the nassora to the nostril hole in this way: you expose the bone again with iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is exposed, take a forceps on this image:.وأنت تعلم أنّه لا بدّ من وجود الجذور، فان لم ترها فلا شكّ انّها باقية، ثمّ تجعل أطراف العظمين المتداخلين تحت المنزح على ما
You know that the roots must exist, if you don't see them, there is no doubt that they remain, then make the ends of the bones that are intertwined under the syringe as it would be the tip of the iron triangle and its return to a point as you see it, then put it on the bone itself, and this should be near the nostril and move your hand away from the eye a little, then turn with the forceps until the bone penetrates and the patient feels it.ثمّ أدرها حتّى تجعل العظمين متداخلين وتنتهى من ذلك الى موضع الناصور، وامسك يدك عن الدوران وانقش بهذا المش
Let him find out if air escapes from it by holding his hand over his nose. When this happens, treat the area with astringent and drying remedies as I have told you. When the flesh grows back and the place hardens, then the discharge that used to come out will return inside the nose, which will be easier for the patient, God willing.
Chapter 20.
Treating Protruding Eyes.
If the entire eye protrudes and there is no defect or impairment of vision, you should ease the patient's condition, then bleed him in the head, and then apply a cupping glass in the back of the head without any restrictions, and gently suck out the blood. If however, there is an injury to the sight or a deficiency, do not use the cupping glass on the back of the head, but instead use it around the eyes as I have instructed you before. Then ease the patient's condition by gently massaging his face and head with your hands, and apply cold remedies to the eyes, such as cold water, or a poultice
Then place a poultice made of acacia gum, myrrh, frankincense and aloes over the eye, and then tie the eye firmly above the bandage with many bandages. The recipe for the bandages is to take soft wool and fold each strip into four folds to make many bandages.
Then place them one on top of the other as needed by the eye, and then tighten it with a stiff cloth tightly, and repeat the cupping and gentle suction without restrictions. Then remove the cupping glass and leave the eye tied up for a day and night.
If the bandage becomes loose during that time, it should be tightened again. Then remove the bandage after a day and night as we have said. If you see that the eye has returned to its place, otherwise, re-apply the poultice, bandages, tightening, and cupping until it returns.
Chapter 21.
On cutting the Optic Nerve.وأمّا العنبية فلا
If a hernia occurs in the optic nerve layer and protrudes, emerging outside the eyelids like the shape of a gourd, disfiguring the person because of it and you want to cut it, then proceed as I describe.وأول عملك فيها أن تضع محجمتين فى القفا من غير شرط وتمصّهما مصّا رقيقا ثمّ تشدّ العين برفق وتضع عليها الضماد وتشدّه شدّا رفيقا وتبد
You pass a needle into the root of the tendon from below upwards, then you pass another needle with a doubled thread from the side of the eye and pass it through, leaving the first needle in place.
Then you cut the doubled thread and tie some of the tendon around the needle, tighten it well, then remove the needle and place on the eye some wool soaked in egg white and leave it until the threads fall out with the tendon, then treat the eye with whatever strengthens it.
Until the wound heals. You can also tighten the tendon from every side with a circle of cloth until the eye protrudes nicely, then use a thin spatula to reach the bottom of the eye and release the watery egg white, and the eye will descend and wilt in its place; then you tighten it until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
On treating a hernia.
This condition, which is called hernia, is a swelling that gathers in the eye, resembling water but not being water itself. Now, here is how to treat it: you have the patient sit on a chair upright, then you take his head in your hands from both sides.
And you move him until you see the swelling go to the bottom with your eye, then it remains and does not go away, and the light comes out and the patient sees things as he used to; if the swelling does not go down with what we have mentioned, then we know that it is water. If the swelling does not go down,
then have the patient sit between your hands, then take a thin spatula and make a small incision above the corneal membrane at the point where the sclera joins the corneal membrane in the limbus, so that the material comes out.
If it comes out, then instil into the eye hot water in which you have mixed honey, or water in which you have boiled a ring and honey, then treat with the rest of the treatment until it heals..
Chapter 23.
We have already mentioned the different types of water in the previous chapter, and which ones are suitable for dripping into the eye, with clear and explanatory speech, so you can find it there in a healthy state. So then, you should sit the patient in front of you, cross-legged and facing the light, close to the sun.
And tie and tighten his healthy eye, then lift the eyelid of his eye with your left hand if it's the left eye or with your right hand if it's the right eye.وتقطر فى عينه الماء البارد، فإن لم ينزل الماء أو احتبس فيه أو نتن ريحه، فأمسك عنه وإيّاك ان تجعل فيه ماء حارّا فإنه يضرّه، بل اجعله معتدلا واجعل القُطرة من الحجم الذى ذكرته لك.
Then you place the tip of the eyedropper close to the edge of the cornea, with a thick rod in the white part of the eye, from the side of the smaller pupil, then push the eyedropper with force while turning it with your hand until it penetrates into the white part of the eye and you feel that the eyedropper has reached an empty space.وإن كان الماء مرتفع الحجم، جعلت القُطرة فى مقدار نصف حبّة السمسم الصغيرة على قدر ما يحمل الاكليل من ذلك المقدار.
And if the water is elevated in size, make the drop the size of a small sesame seed depending on how much the edge can hold. It should be at the distance between the boy and the end of the blackness, which is the edge of the eye, because you can see the brass in the sight of the beholder as the cornea is clear, then move the eyedropper upwards to where the water is.
Then compress it from below repeatedly, and if the water comes out immediately, then the patient will see what is in front of him immediately, and the eyedropper will still be in his eye, then let it rest for a little while, and if the water rises again, lower it again without removing the eyedropper.وإذا أردت أن تديم المقدح فى عينه وتكثّره لئلا يسقط أو تنحدر دمعة فى العين فأبق المقدح على شفتيك كأنّك تمضغ شيئا من الطعام فإنّ المقدح فى فمك يحرّكه من الجانبين في
Then, if it does not rise, carefully remove the syringe while twisting your hand a little at a time, then dissolve in water some pure salt of Andranis and wash the eye from within, then place on the outside of the eye all around, some cotton or wool that has been dampened.
We rub the eye with rosewater and egg white and tie it up with a bandage from the healthy eye; we, however, and those of our time, put on crushed cumin mixed with egg white. If the syringe does not penetrate the eye because of its hardness, for some people's eyes are very hard indeed. You should take a scalpel, called a "perforator", which looks like this: [an illustration of a scalpel].
You should puncture only the conjunctiva with it, and not go too deep; rather, you should merely create a slight opening for the syringe to enter as we have described. When your work is complete, prepare a comfortable bed for the patient to lie on his back in a dark room.
He must abstain from all movement and coughing, and his diet should consist of foods that soften his natural constitution. He must not move his head to the right or left at all, and the bandage must remain in place until the third day, then you can remove it in that dark room and test his eyesight.
Show him things, then re-apply the bandage until the seventh day. You should not do this during the treatment or immediately after using the syringe, but you should avoid doing so before the water rises quickly due to intense gaze.
If a hot swelling occurs, you should remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with something that reduces the swelling; once the swelling has subsided, then you can release his eyesight and place over his face a veil that will train his eyesight while he is in that dark room for a few days.
He should leave the house gradually and take care of the cause of his condition. Know that in order for a student to master the use of the syringe, he must observe it being used several times; only then can he proceed with the treatment. I have heard from some Iraqis that they make hollow syringes in Iraq which are used to suck out the water.
And I have not seen anyone in our country do this, nor have I read it in any of the books of the ancients; perhaps it is a recent invention. And this is an image of types of drills so that those who are ignorant of them may understand.
They are made of copper, especially, and their tips are of the same thinness, triangular-tipped and sharp.
CHAPTER XXIV.
ON THE TREATMENT OF TISSUE GROWTH IN THE NOSE.
There are different types of growths that can occur in the nose; some resemble a many-legged scorpion, others are hard, discoloured cancerous tissue, and still others are soft, discoloured tissue.وكلّها تحتاج إلى الكيّ إلاّ أنّى أكره الكيّ لما فيه من الألم الشديد والاعتراض الذى يكون بعده، وقد رأيت لهذا علاجا مفردا مخصوصا فمن احتاج إليه فعليه به وهو أن يتخذ مرهم اللومجة ويطلى به موضع النابت
All of these growths require cauterisation, but I am averse to cautery because of the intense pain and complications that can follow; however, I have found a single, specific treatment for this condition. If a patient has one of these soft, non-malignant growths, you should seat him facing the sun, open his nostril, insert a probe into the growth, pull it out gently, then cut what you reach with a sharp, thin scalpel from just one side.ومن الحكمة أن تجعل الصنّارة معقّبة وتدخلها من الجهة التى لا تقطع منها لتدخل فى النابت إلى مداه فإن لم تر به حكّا، فاستظهر بقطع ما أدركت منه بمبضعه وإن وجدت به حكّا فامضغ عليه مرهم اللوم
It is wise to make the probe hooked and insert it from the side you are not cutting so that it can enter the growth and reach its full extent; if you do not feel any resistance, cut what you have reached with your scalpel. If you encounter resistance, apply lumiga ointment until you know that all of the tissue has been removed. If some of it remains and you cannot cut it, gently remove it with one of the fine instruments until nothing is left; if the blood becomes profuse or an inflammation occurs.وإن عرض ورم بارد فاطّلبه بالزيت حتّى ينكشف
If a cold tumour occurs, treat it with oil until it is exposed; then treat it as appropriate. If it is a malignant tumour, quickly cauterise it to stop the bleeding and remove all the tissue; then drop vinegar or a liquid into the nose after the cautery; if the nostril opens and moisture passes from the nose to the throat
Know that he has healed, if the moisture has not drained as it should, know that within there is flesh that has grown on the top of the loose bones to which the instrument did not reach when cutting; then you should take a thread of linen with some thickness.
And tie many knots in it, and put between each knot the length of a finger or less, and the sick person should find a way to push one end of the thread into his nose with a stick, or anything else he can manage after shaping it like a button, and then breathe out through his nose until he reaches the pharynx.
And one end will come out through the mouth, and often children do this in the scriptorium; it is an easy matter for whoever wants to do it. Then tie both ends of the thread that came out through the mouth and the one that remained in the nose.
Then use the meat-cutting action with the knots in the thread; do this until you know that the meats have been cut by the knots in the thread. Then remove the thread and put a cotton swab soaked in Egyptian ointment into the nose, do this for three days or more.
Until the ointment has eaten away all that remains of the meats, then insert a lead tube into the nose for some days until he is healed; if he needs a drying treatment, that should be used.
This is the image of the catheter through which oils and medicines are dripped into the nose:.
He puts a small silver or bronze lamp open on one side, with an opening on that side as well.
If you like, make the tube closed like a reed and the tip of the catheter flat.وأدنى ما يصنع من الفضّة أدنى من اللون الغامق فى الكرشة، ومن النحاس ما بلغ
The silver should be made no thinner than the color of the liver, and the brass should reach the handle at its end as you see, so that he can hold it when he heats the ointment or anything else that flows in there.والمسعط ينبغى أن يكون من الفضّة الصافية او من النحاس الأحمر، فإن لم يكن فضّة ولا نحاسا فمن
Chapter XXV.
In warts growing on the tip of the nose.
It often happens that a wart grows on the tip of the nose, which increases in size over time, becoming unsightly.
Therefore, it is best to remove the wart as soon as it appears and remove all of it, then apply either cauterization or a burning medicine that performs the same function as cauterization. If you fail to cut it off before it becomes large, and it hardens and turns a discolored color with little sensitivity,
do not use iron on it, as it is a cancerous growth, and I have often seen those who cut this growth only to return with a great affliction to their owner. However, if the growth is soft to the touch and not discolored and you see that complete removal is possible, then discharge the patient, cut it without caution or delay, and treat the site with something that dries and constricts until healed.
Chapter XXVI.
In sewing the nose, lip, and ear.وأمّا خياطه الأنف فإنّك تأخذ سلكا من And as for sewing up the nose, you take a wire from a piercing or something similar; if there is a separation of the connection in one of these cartilage structures due to an injury or the like, be aware that it is rare for treatment to be successful in these cases, except in some people.وإذا خيطت فاستعمل فيه السلك الرقيق المستقيم حتّى لا يلتوي، واجعل الخيط فوق السلك والخرزتين اللتين على طرفيه حتّى يلتحم عليه
And if it is sewn, use a thin, straight wire so that it does not twist; place the thread above the wire and the two beads at its ends until it heals. So, when any of these things occur, examine whether the wound is still soft with its blood, then bring the lips of the wound together with sutures and treat it until it heals. If, however, the separation has occurred and each lip has become healthy, you should strip off the thick skin of the surface of each lip until it bleeds.ثمّ تعالجه بالكيّ أو الدواء المحرّق فإن عاود فافعل به ذلك مرّة بعد أخرى حتّى ينزع ويبرأ، وينبغى أن تجعل الخيط قريبا من الشفة حتّى لا يبقى أثرا والله أعلم.
Then bring together the two lips with a suture, tighten them, and sprinkle powdered mastic and frankincense over them. Apply an adhesive plaster of honey ointment or other adhesive ointment over it, and leave it in place for two or three days, then loosen it.
And change the dressing, leaving it until the stitches drop out by themselves; then treat it with ointment until it heals. The formula for the suture is to bring together the separated parts of the wound, either with needles as we have described in the case of abdominal sutures, or with thread as I have already explained to you.
Chapter XXVII.
On removing nodules which occur in the lips.
Many people may suffer from small, hard bumps within their lips, some resembling cloves, and some smaller or larger. It is necessary to turn the lip inside out and cut each nodule with a scalpel, then lift it out with a hook.
Cut it on all sides, then fill the hollow after cutting with powdered alums to stop the bleeding. He should gargle with vinegar and salt, and treat the wound with an astringent until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
On cutting off excess flesh from the gums.وأحياناً يعرض فى اللثة من فوق الأسنان لحم زائد يش
It often happens that flesh grows on the gums above the teeth, and it is called by some abuluss. It should be lifted up with a hook or held with forceps and cut at its base. Then let the bleeding or blood flow, then put powdered alums on the wound.
Or use one of the astringent, drying plasters. If that flesh grows back after treatment, it often does, so cut it again and brand it with a hot iron; it will not return after branding.
Chapter XXIX.
On filing teeth with iron.وإذا أضطربت اسنان الصبّى او البالغ و
Chalky, rough patches may appear on the surfaces of teeth, both inner and outer, as well as in between the gums. They can turn black, yellow, or green, leading to decay in the gums and disfigurement of the teeth.
The patient should sit in your lap with his head in your lap. You should carefully extract the tooth or teeth in which you see the chalky, grainy substance, as well as any black, green, yellow, or other discoloration, until it is completely clean.
If the discoloration disappears after the first cleaning, then you should repeat the process another day, and a third time if necessary, until you achieve the desired result. Keep in mind that different teeth may require various tools of different shapes and forms to effectively remove the discoloration.
This is because the tool used to clean the inner surface of a tooth is different from the one used for the outer surface, and the tools used for between the teeth are yet another shape. You should have a variety of tools prepared for this purpose.
Chapter 30.
On Extracting Teeth.
You should treat a toothache with every means possible and avoid extracting the tooth if at all necessary, as there is no going back once it's extracted. It is a precious gem.If there is no other choice but to extract it
When the patient decides to have the tooth extracted, you should make sure that the toothache is stable before proceeding.وإن كان ضرسا مكسورا فنظر إن كانت القطعة المكسورة مستديرة فهى أسهل لأنّها تخرج بالمجرد اليسير وإن كانت مسطحة فأقل شيئا فشيئ If the tooth is broken, examine whether the broken piece is round or flat. A round piece is easier to remove with a simple tool, while a flat piece requires more intricate tools.It is common for patients to be misled by the pain and mistakenly believe it originates from the wrong tooth. We have seen this happen multiple times with blood-letting therapists.
When you have identified the correct tooth, you should cut around it with a sharp instrument to loosen the gums on all sides, then gently wiggle it with your fingers or fine tweezers, a little at a time, until it becomes loose.وإذا تحرّك فلا تزاوله.
Then the two large dogs will be able to hold him well, and the head of the sick person between your knees, firmly pressed so that it does not move. Then pull out the tooth straight so as not to break it. If it does not come out, take one of those instruments and gently insert it under it from all sides, moving it as you did before.
If the tooth is hollow or worn down, you should fill that cavity with a piece of cloth and seal it firmly with the tip of a thin probe so that it does not crumble when you grip it with the forceps. You should also gently cut around the gum on all sides.
Use caution so as not to break the tooth, leaving some of it behind, which would cause the patient even greater pain than before. Avoid the practices of inexperienced bloodletters who extract teeth without following the methods we have described.
They often cause great harm to people, and the slightest of which is that the tooth breaks and all or part of its roots remain. Sometimes they dislodge some of the jawbone, as we have seen happen many times. After extraction, the patient should gargle with a drink or vinegar and salt. If there is bleeding from the site, which often happens, then crush some alum and pack it into the wound.
If the alum does not help, then use a different kind of forceps with long, thick tips and a short handle so that it does not bend when you grip the tooth with it. This is what the large forceps should look like: .The tips of the forceps should be long,.
as you see, thick handles so that when you grip them they do not give way or bend. They should have short tips and be made of Indian iron or steel, with the tips well-tempered and serrated so that they can grip firmly and tightly.
The limbs may also be made like files, which are strong and well-set.
Chapter XXXI.
On the Extraction of the Roots of Molars and the Removal of Bones from the Jaws when Fractured.
If, when a molar is extracted, any of its roots remain and are broken, you should apply to the site a cotton pad with oil for a day or two until the site softens, then insert a probe or forceps into it. which resemble the beak of a bird called a 'balariga' and this is how the forceps look:.
They should be made like a file on the inside, or like an escalpel. If these forceps do not dislodge it, you should cut away all the flesh around the root with a scalpel and then insert into the socket a tool that resembles a small crowbar, which looks like this:.
It should be short with a slightly thick end, not hollow, so as not to break. If the root does not come out with this instrument, you should use other instruments like these, the first is tri-pronged and slightly thick:.
Picture of another delicate triangle:.
We can also use this double-pronged instrument, which also looks like this:.وإذا كان المنكسر من عظام الفكين ما لم يبق فى مكانه فامسك به
And if the broken bones of the jaws have not remained in place, hold them with forceps or any of the other instruments and tools mentioned earlier for tooth extraction. We can also use this large hook-like instrument, which looks like this:.وإذا كان المكسور من عظام الفكين مخلّعاً فاستعن بهذه الآلات التى قدّمناها فينكسر المكسور ويخرج، وربّما خرجت معه الق
And if the broken bones of the jaws are dislocated, use the instruments we have already mentioned; the broken bone will be displaced and come out. There may also be a triple-pronged instrument with slightly thick prongs, curved at the end, not hollow, as this is less likely to break. You should know that there are many instruments for teeth extraction and other tools that are too numerous to mention; a skilled practitioner may invent his own instruments according to his experience and the nature of the diseases themselves.
Because there are diseases for which the ancient authorities have not specified instruments due to the variety of their types, if a bone in the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth is broken or gangrenous, then examine it in its place with an appropriate instrument from those mentioned for removing roots.
We will use a tool whose picture is as follows: .
It should be slightly thick to restrain the bone so that it does not slip until the bone is removed, and treat the site with appropriate remedies for that, if there is a slight decay in the bone, then remove its decay and darkness until it is cleansed, then treat it until it heals,.
Chapter 32
On the extraction of molars that grow on top of others.
Molars, if they grow in the opposite direction of their natural path, are unsightly, especially if this happens to women and slaves. You should examine them, and if a molar has grown behind another molar,.
and it cannot be extracted or moved, then extract it. If it is attached to another molar, cut it with this tool, whose picture is as follows: .
It is similar to a small beak and should be made of hard Indian iron, very sharp at the tip. Your cutting should be done over several days because of the hardness of the molar and to avoid destabilizing other molars. If it is protruding and well-established due to its hardness, then smooth it with an Indian file, whose picture is as follows:.
It should be made entirely of Indian iron, with a thin engraving, like the file used to make needles. You should file down the molar little by little over several days with caution so as not to destabilize and cause the molar to fall out, then smooth it out and strip it with some scrapers..
If part of a molar is broken and it hurts the tongue when speaking, you should also smooth it down to remove the roughness of the break and smooth it out so that it does not hurt the tongue or spoil the speech..وإن كان ضرسا قد زاد طوله أو عرضة عن قدر الكفاية فى الفم فينبغى أن ينشر حتّى يرجع إلى قدر ما يحتاج إليه.
Chapter XXXIII.
In ligating the loose molars with silver or gold threads.
If the front molars become loose and move as a result of a blow or fall, and the patient is unable to chew anything without the teeth falling out, and you have treated them with astringent remedies but to no avail, then:
The trick is to tie them with a gold or silver wire, and gold is better because silver can oxidize and rot after a few days, while gold remains unchanged forever and does not undergo this process. The wire should be of intermediate thickness and thinness, depending on the size of the gap between the molars.
The process of ligating is as follows: take the thread and insert its bend between the two healthy molars, then weave the two ends of the thread between the loose molars, one or more, until you reach the healthy molar on the other side with your weaving.
Then you go back and weave from the side you started from, and gently tighten your hand with skill so that it does not move at all. You should tie the thread at the base of the molars so that it does not slip. Then cut off the excess thread with a pair of scissors, gather them together, and twist them with wax and hide them between the healthy molar and the loose molar.
So that it does not hurt the tongue. Then you leave it tight like this as long as it lasts. If it comes undone or breaks, tie it with another thread and enjoy it like this forever. This is a picture of the molars and the ligature in two healthy molars and two loose molars as you see:
And you can replace a fallen tooth or two in its place and ligate it as described above, and it will remain. However, this should only be done by a skilled practitioner. Sometimes bone from a cow's bone is carved to look like a tooth and placed in the space where the tooth fell out. And he tightens, as we have said, and remains and enjoys that.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
ON THE CUTTING OF THE LIGAMENT WHICH LIES UNDER THE TONGUE AND PREVENTS SPEECH.
This ligament, which lies under the tongue, may be either natural, with which man is born, or it may be accidental from a wound that has healed.ويكون الطبيعيّ فيمنع الكلام حتى يقطع ويعالج على ما نذكر، ويكون العرضيّ من جرح يكون تحت اللسان فلا يمكنه الكلام حتى يبرأ الجرح، فإذا برئ وبرئ موضع
The procedure is as follows: open the patient's mouth and tilt his head back on your lap, then lift up his tongue. Cut the nerve ligament across the width so that the tongue is released from its constriction. If there is any rigidity or contraction due to a healed wound, insert a probe into the wound and cut it across the width to sever the ligament and release the contraction.
Be careful not to cut too deeply into the flesh and damage a blood vessel, causing bleeding. Then have the patient gargle with rose water or a mixture of vinegar and cold water, and place a piece of flax under his tongue to hold it in place every night.وإن لم يكن فى موضع القطع نزف ولم يثبت الدم، بل كان متحركاً فعولج على موضع القطع بماء الورد او بالخلّ والماء البارد، ثمّ ضع تحت اللسان فتيلة من كتان يمسكها العليل فى كلّ ليلة.
If there is no bleeding and the blood does not clot, but is moving, then treat the cut with rose water or a mixture of vinegar and cold water, and place a piece of flax under his tongue to hold it in place every night, so that it does not adhere again. If there is bleeding, apply powdered pitch to the spot; if the blood is too profuse, press on the spot with an elliptical iron tool suitable for this purpose.وإذا كان جرحا جديدا فضع If it is a new wound, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.فإن برئ الجرح وذهب النزف وكان فيه رقة وعقد فاستعمل معها الف
CHAPTER XXXV.على الكلام الممنوع من جرح يكون تحت اللسان وان
ON THE REMOVAL OF A TONGUE-SHELL CAUSED BY A WOUND UNDER THE TONGUE, AND ON EXTRACTING A FROG THAT HAS
A swelling may occur under the tongue, resembling a small frog, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function and may even grow to fill the mouth. The treatment for this is to open the patient's mouth towards the sun and examine the swelling.
If you see that it is dark in color or black and solid, with no feeling for the patient, then do not touch it, as it is cancer. But if it is inclined to white and has moisture, then pierce it with an awl and split it with a gentle knife, and free it from all sides.
If you are overwhelmed by blood during the operation, then put powdered alum on it to stop the bleeding, and then return to your work until you remove it completely. Then let him gargle with vinegar and salt.وإن كان ورم فى الحلق من جهة اللوزتين فإن أمكنك فتح فمه على قدر ما يصحّ معك النظر الى الورم فأمّا إن احتجت الى ضمّه وشدّه بشيء حتّى تفتح فاه وتصل الى موضع الورم فأف
And if there is a swelling in the throat on the side of the tonsils, then if you can open his mouth as much as possible to see the swelling, that is good. But if you need to hold it and pull
Chapter XXXVI
On the treatment of tonsil swelling.وإن كان الورم من وراء الحلق فاعلم أنّه
And if the swelling is at the back of the throat, know that there may be glands inside the throat, similar to those outside, called tonsils. If you treat them as mentioned in the division and they do not heal,
Then look: if the swelling is dark in color and solid, with little feeling, then do not touch it with iron. But if it is red in color and thick at its base, then do not touch it with iron either, for fear of bleeding, but leave it until it ripens. Then either it will form a blister or it will burst on its own.وإن كان مع الورم حرارة فاعلجه بالحديد حتّى يبرأ، وإن لم يكن به حرارة ولم يؤلّم العليل فعالجه بالماء البارد أو اللبن الرائب أو الخلّ، وإن كان يؤلّمه وأظهر قيحا فاعمله كما ذكرناه فى ورم اللوزتين.
And if it is white in color and round, and its origin is thin, then this is what should be cut, and the procedure is that you should look before operating to see if the hot swelling has completely subsided or decreased somewhat.
Then let the patient sit facing the sun with his head in your lap, open his mouth, and have a servant hold his tongue down with an instrument that looks like this:
You should make the instrument of silver or copper, thin as a knife. When you press it against the tongue and see the swelling clearly, take a probe and insert it into the tonsil, pulling it outward as much as possible without pulling any of the surrounding tissues.فإن انزلقت الصنارة وخرجت من فمه فقد أمكنك ذلك، وإن لم يمكنك فامسح موضع الورم بمنضدة من زيت الورد أو خضراوات أو ماء ورد حتّى يلين ويصير لونه أبيض مثل سائر اللوز.
If the probe slips out of his mouth, you have succeeded. If not, wipe the affected area with a pad of rose oil, or a vegetable poultice, or rose water until it softens and turns white like the rest of the tonsil.Then cut it with an instrument that looks like this: it resembles scissors, except that its tips are curved, each one facing the other, and very sharp. It is made of Indian iron or Damascus steel:.
If you cannot obtain this instrument, then cut it with a scalpel, which looks like this:
It is sharp on one side and dull on the other. After cutting one tonsil, cut the other in the same way. Then, after the cutting, let the patient gargle with cold water or a mixture of vinegar and water.فإن انفصلت اللوزة من مكانها فانتزعها بيدك وان زالت فاتركها فى مكانها وعلّلها بما ذكره ابن سينا فيما بعد من الكتاب فى علل أوجاع الحلق وهى:.
If the tonsil detaches from its position, remove it with your hand. If it does not detach, leave it in place and treat it as Ibn Sina mentioned later in the book on the causes of throat pains. These are:.And if he experiences bleeding, let him gargle with water in which pomegranate rind, or myrtle leaf, or something similar has been boiled until the bleeding stops, then treat him until he recovers. There may also be other swellings in the throat besides the tonsils, which you should cut in the same way as the tonsils.
I have treated a woman for a tumor which had grown inside her throat, extending to the larynx, and was slightly painful; it almost blocked the throat, and the woman breathed through a narrow passage, and it prevented her from eating and drinking water.
She had almost died, had she lived for one or two more days, and the tumor had sent out two branches which had come out through her nostrils. So I acted quickly and pierced one of them with a hook, then pulled it out, removing a sizable piece.
Then I cut it where I could reach it from the nostril, then did the same with what had come out through the other nostril. Then I opened her mouth, pressed her tongue, and pierced the tumor with the hook, cutting some of it away; only a little blood flowed from it.
The woman's throat was unblocked, and she immediately drank water and ate food. We continued cutting away at the tumor for a long time, as it kept regrowing, until finally it was gone.
She improved, and the tumor inside her throat stopped growing. Then I left that place, and I don't know what happened to her after me.
Chapter 37
On cutting a uvular tumor.
What you call a grape when it descends into the uvula and swells, becoming white and elongated; that's what is called a pillar. And if it's thick at the bottom and round, then it's called a grape. If it's treated as mentioned in the dissection and the treatment isn't effective
And if the hot tumor has subsided in her, and it was thin, you should cut it off; and if what there is of it is rounded and not long, and it'is dusky or blood-red or black, or has no feeling to it, then it should be left alone.
There is a risk to the sick person, so if you see it in the condition mentioned, with its whiteness and length, the sick person should sit facing the sun and his tongue be pressed down by the instrument previously described, then the hook is inserted into the hole.
You should pull it down and cut it with one of the two instruments mentioned for cutting tonsils, and you should not cut more than what is above the normal level, because if you cut more, you will harm the voice and speech.
After the cut, you should treat it as we described for cutting tonsils until it heals. If the patient is afraid to cut it, you should use a trick to burn it without fear or caution, and the way to burn it is with a sharp remedy, which is that you put the patient's head in your lap.
Then you press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned, then take sharp water that I mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, knead it into a paste of unquenched lime, and make it neither thick nor thin. You fill the hollows of this instrument with it, and this is its picture:
The end of the instrument that you put the medicine in has hollows like a spoon, and you place the instrument with the medicine on the soft palate itself while the patient is lying on his side so that the saliva flows out of his mouth from inside his throat so that nothing falls into his throat and hurts him.
Then you hold your hand with the medicine while you press it on the soft palate for about half an hour until it turns black and the sting of the medicine subsides. Or, if you like, take a cotton pad, wrap it around the end of a stick, moisten the cotton in the medicine.
Insert the stick and cotton through the tube from above so that the cotton adheres to the soft palate. Do this repeatedly until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the grape, then leave it alone, as it will wither and fall off after three or four days. If you need to reapply the remedy, you can.
And after cauterization, wipe around the ulcer with a cotton pad soaked in fat and dry it with what is around it from the medication, then gargle with cold water and treat from the outside with rinses and from the inside with irrigations until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and further from fear.
The uvula can also be treated more gently than cauterization and cutting, it is treated with fumigation in this way: take rhubarb, savory, thyme, sage, chamomile, and other herbs; gather them all or some of them in a pot and immerse them in vinegar.
And let it boil, the pot being anointed with wisdom clay, and there should be a hole in the middle of the lid, on which the hollow instrument is mounted in this way, made of silver or brass:
And insert the end which has the pomegranate in the patient's mouth until the smoke rises to the uvula on the tube, so that the uvula becomes soft, and then return to it several times until it wilts. And beware of making this treatment at the first occurrence of the swelling.
For it often increases the swelling, and you should only do that when the hot swelling subsides. And if this tool is not available to you, take a reed, and fix a egg shell at one end so that the patient's mouth is not burned.
Because the egg shell prevents the hot smoke from burning the mouth, and this is one of the best treatments with its safety,.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On removing thorns and anything else that lodges in the throat.
It is often the case that a bone, or fish bone, or something else lodges in the throat; you should remove what is visible, after pressing the tongue with an instrument in the sunlight.
So that you can see what is in the throat, and if it does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before his food is digested in his stomach; for perhaps the lodged object will come out with the vomiting, or the patient will swallow a piece of beetroot or cabbage stem.
Take a piece of dry bread or a piece of soft sponge, tie it to a string, then swallow it. When it reaches the thorn's location, quickly pull on the string. Do this several times.
Often, the thorn or bone will get stuck in it and come out. If it doesn't come out with the methods mentioned, then use a lead instrument in this way: .
It should be slightly thicker than an applicator and curved at the tip. The patient should insert it gently into his throat while tilting his head upward, being careful not to cause a cough that might affect his airway. Alternatively, the doctor can insert it with his hand,.
and the patient is better equipped to know where the object is stuck and can push it downward or pull the instrument upward, as needed, until it comes out.
Chapter 39.
On removing a thorn lodged in the throat.
If you've treated the thorn with the methods mentioned in the section on therapeutic medications, but it hasn't worked, then examine the patient's throat in the sunlight after pressing his tongue with the instrument I described to you.And if you see a red spot where the thorn is lodged, treat it as follows:
If you see the thorn, pull it out with a small hook or a slender, sturdy needle. If that doesn' t work, take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient's throat near the thorn, then insert a heated iron rod into the tube.Then pour honey over the iron rod, and when it becomes hot, remove the rod from the tube. This will cause the thorn to come out. Next, have the patient drink warm milk or water to wash down any residue.
Do this several times, and have the patient abstain from drinking water for the rest of the day. Then take a pitcher filled with cold water, open your mouth over it, and gargle without swallowing any of it. Stir the water from time to time with your hand.And if you see something floating in the water that resembles the thorn, pick it out with your fingers and examine it. If this does not work, have the patient drink a cup of honey mixed with milk or water, then vomit into a vessel. Examine the vomit for the thorn.If you still cannot find the thorn, have the patient drink vinegar mixed with water, then vomit again and
If the leech falls on the wound when it feels the water, and if it does not come out as described, then evaporate the throat with urine and myrrh using the instrument described in the incense of the glottis. Do this several times, for it will fall out.
The method of using incense is to take a vessel with live coals in it, and the vessel is covered with a lid that has a hole in the middle. You then fit one end of the instrument into this hole, drop the incense, and the patient puts his mouth over the other end of the tube and seals his mouth so that the incense does not escape until he feels that the incense has reached his glottis.
If the leech falls on the wound, and if it does not fall out, then the incense should be repeated several times. The patient should endure thirst and eat salt and garlic, and not drink water. It is certain that the leech will come out with this treatment. This is an image of an instrument to attract the leech from the glottis when you see it:
It resembles pliers as you see, except that it has this bend that goes into the glottis. Its two ends resemble the beak of a bird and have the roughness of a whetstone when they grip something, they do not let go:
And another instrument that compresses the tongue is an iron ring, as wide as the mouth, that is placed over the tongue. It enters the mouth vertically on one side, keeping the mouth open against the will of the patient and preventing him from closing it until you remove it:
Description of the instrument that opens the mouth according to this measurement exactly.
Chapter Forty.
In it, he makes conversation about the swelling and splitting of tumors.
Tumors have many types, and they differ in their opening and splitting due to two factors: one is the type of tumor itself and the other is the humidity it contains.
The second type depends on the location in the body, because a tumor that occurs in the head is not like a tumor that occurs in the anus, and a tumor that occurs in a fleshy area is not like a tumor that occurs in a joint; each has its own specific treatment method.
There are tumors that should not be incised until the pus inside has matured and reached completion, and there are tumors that should be incised while they are still immature, such as tumors close to joints.
Because if a tumor occurs near a joint and its condition persists until it rots the surrounding area, it may corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing disability in that member, or the tumor may be near a vital organ.
This is because if you delay incising the tumor until it matures, you will harm that vital organ; or it may be near the anus, in which case it should be incised while still immature, so that the cavity does not rot and penetrate into the anus, causing a fistula.
It should be known that the time for incising tumors that have fully matured is when the pain of the tumor subsides, the fever goes down, the redness and inflammation decrease, the head of the tumor softens, and other signs appear.وإذا حدث الورم فى اليد أو الرجل وكان به ألم وعظم ضخما وورما وتغيّر لون الجلد عليه وأخذ يتحرك مع حركة اليد أو الرجل وكان به حمى وعرق ووجع ونبض وحسّ، فإنّه يجب أن تبطّ وهو نيّ.
If the tumor occurs in the hand or foot, and it is large and painful, and the skin color changes, and it moves with the movement of the hand or foot, and there is fever, sweating, pain, pulse, and sensation, then it should be incised while still immature. The incision should be made at the lower end of the tumor, if possible, to allow the pus to flow downward, or in the thinnest part of the tumor that is most prominent; the incision should be made lengthwise along the body if the tumors are in the hands or feet.وينبغى أن يبطّ الورم من أسفل الى فوق مرّة أو مرّتين حتى يذهب الورم، ويقوى موضع البطّ بالرباطات والقضبان إذا كان فى اليد أو الرجل.
And the locations of muscles, tendons, nerves and arteries, in general, in all flat positions that have no bending, and as for those that bend, go gently according to that position, and if the tumor is in the fleshy locations, it is best to leave its gentle touch.
Until its ripening is complete, as we have said, because if you press it before that, the flow of pus will be prolonged, and it will be very harmful and dirty, and sometimes its lips and depths will harden. Some tumors may be pressed across the body when necessary or according to what the member needs.
And it is appropriate to use a single gentle pressure on small tumors and a wide gentle pressure or many incisions on large tumors, according to the size of the tumor. Sometimes, however, the skin should be cored and cut if it has become like a rag.
And it has become in a certain limit as it often happens in many duplications and hiding places, some of which are cut with a three-angle incision, and some of which have a piece cut out of them in the shape of a laurel leaf like an inguinal hernia.
And for some, the circular incision and the crescent-shaped incision, among others, are used. If it does not have a head like the smooth, flat tumors, then only a simple gentle pressure should be used. If the tumor is large and has accumulated for a long time and you press it, you should not rush to discharge all the pus at that time.
But only some of it should be discharged, then the tumor should be tightened for another day, and then some more of the pus should be discharged, doing this repeatedly until all of it is discharged.
Especially if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, a young child, or an old man, as the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus in one go, and the patient may die without your knowing it, so be very careful about this.
And after you have opened these tumors, you should wipe the wound and see if it is a small wound or a simple slit, use linen thread or old cotton. But if the tumor is large and there are many splits in the opening, use new linen thread.
You should then insert a thread into each slit, so that they reach each other. If some of the tumor has been cut off from the skin or hollowed out, it should be stuffed with old cotton or linen threads without moisture and tied until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals. If bleeding occurs while you are working, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a linen cloth in them and hold it over the bleeding area several times.
If the bleeding persists, you should use the treatments and remedies that we have described in many places in our book, and through division. If you are in winter and the tumor site has many nerves, you should wet the dressings with a warm mixture of wine and oil.وإن كان فى زمن الصيف فينبغى أن تبلّها بالخلّ والمرهم، وإن وجدت فى موضع الورم عظماً قاطعاً فينبغى أن تخرجيه، وإن وجدته مكسوراً فلا بأس به.
And if you are in the summer, you should wet them with vinegar and ointment. And if you find a cutting bone in the tumor site, you should remove it. But if it is broken, that is not a problem.You should then put the dressings on the site. And if you are in the summer and the sites are fleshy, you should hold the dressings soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, all of them cold, until the third day as we have said, you should then loosen the tumor and wipe it.ثمّ استعمل المراهم التى ذكرناها، واملأ الشقّ الذى كان من الورم بلبان الراتنج ممسوحاً بخلّ، واعقد عليه رقيقة
Then use the ointments we have mentioned. Fill the slit that was from the tumor with mastic gum wiped with vinegar, and tie a thin membrane over it.You should treat it in the same way until it heals. This is what you need to know about treating tumors in general. As for the detailed method, I have described each tumor and how to treat it in a concise and summary form.
Chapter 41.
On incision of tumors that appear on the skin of the head.
There appear on the skin of the head small tumors which are types of cysts surrounded by membranes like a chicken's oviduct; they come in many varieties, some fatty and others containing a fluid resembling mud.
Some contain fluid resembling porridge, and others are solid and calcified; all of these pose no danger when incised and drained, unless you encounter an artery during the incision.
The procedure for incising them is to probe them first with the instrument whose image appears below, which is called a trocar, so that you may learn what they contain. If what they contain is fluid, make an incision along its length, a simple longitudinal incision, as follows: .
Begin the incision from point A to point C, and if the fluid drains out,剥 off the sac that held the fluid and cut it away completely, leaving nothing behind, for it will often return if any of it is left.
Then soak a cotton pad in the cauterizing ointment, if available, or in salt water, and fill the wound with it, leaving it for another day; this will consume what remains of the sac. Then reapply the cauterizing ointment to the wound again and again, as needed.
Until you are certain that nothing remains of the sac; then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. If the tumor contains a fatty cyst, make an incision as follows: .
A longitudinal incision, spreading the lips of the wound with a pair of forceps and peeling it away from all sides, using your utmost effort to remove the membrane that contains it. If you encounter an artery during the incision, follow the instructions already provided. The same is to be done if the tumor is calcified.
And the treatment is as I have mentioned, and the incision into the calcified tumor is easier because it has little blood and moisture, and some of these tumors in the head in some people may have absolutely no moisture; this is because when I made an incision into a tumor in the head, I found no moisture at all.
I found the tumor as hard as a stone, rough, white; it was impossible to break it even if someone threw it at another person's head, and it would split it open. This is unlike any other tumors that occur in people's heads.
At the base of the ears, make an incision all the way through, and make a slit at the bottom to allow the material to flow down; then treat it with whatever treatment suits it.
Chapter 42.
On incisions for tumors that often appear in the neck, armpits, groins, and other parts of the body; those that appear in the neck are usually single or multiple tumors, some of which may be derived from others.
Each of these tumors is contained within a serous membrane, as are those in the scrotum and brain tumors, as we have described; there are many types of these tumors, some of which are calcified, others contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Those that I have found to be in good condition on palpation, with a surface color similar to that of the skin, move freely in all directions without being attached to the nerves of the neck, or to any veins or arteries, and were not deep-seated.وأمّا الخنازير الغائرة فى العنق فإنّها تكون شديدة الالتصاق بالأعصاب والودائج والشريان، وقد يصعب خروجه مع الورم فيبقى شيئًا فى موضعه فيت As for deep-seated tumors in the neck, they adhere tightly to the nerves, veins, and arteries; it may be difficult to remove them entirely with the tumor, leaving something behind in its place. Therefore, you should make a simple incision from top to bottom along the body, from line A to line B:
And you should strip it from all sides and extend the lips of skin with a hook or two hooks or many hooks if you need to, as we said in tumors of the head, and take it out little by little, and be careful not to cut a vein or nerve, and let the knife not be very sharp.
So that your hand does not cut more than it needs, or the patient becomes distressed and you cut what you do not need to cut. If you cut a vein or artery and it hinders you from working, put in the wound camphor powder or some of the astringent substances that stop bleeding.
And tighten the wound and leave it until the inflammation subsides and the wound relaxes and begins to rot, then go back to your work until you finish. Then, check with your index finger if there are any other small tumors left, cut them out and cleanse them.وإن كان ورما متعلّقا بالعظم فافتح الجرح على قدر ما يسع المبضع ولا تمدّه حتّى لا يصير جرحا كبيرا فلا يلتئم، وإن رأيت فى الجرح خنازير بيضاء فاعلاجها بالكيّ بمباضع الكيّ المسنونة، وعلّقها على الجرح لتبقى نارية تحرق الخنازير، فإن لم تفعل ذلك فقد تمسك بخنازير كثيرة وقد تراها تنتشر فى الجرح وقد صارت مثل الأوتار فاعلاجها بال
And if it is a tumor attached to the bone, then open the wound as much as the knife allows, but do not expand it so that it does not become a large wound and does not heal. If you see in the wound white tumors, treat them with cauterization using sharp cautery knives, hang them on the wound to stay hot and burn the tumors. If you do not do that, they may hold many tumors and you may see them spreading in the wound and becoming like strings, then treat them with
And if you cut the tumor completely, you should bring the lips of the wound together and stitch it up immediately after you know that there is no residue at all. If you see that there is a residue due to the bone of the tumor, then you should not stitch it up immediately, but rather leave it for two or three days until the inflammation subsides, then you can stitch it up.وإن رأيت أنّ الجرح لا يحتمل الخياطة لكونه عظيما أو غير ذلك فضع عليه ضمادا من القطن البالى وقد غمسته فى المرهم المصرىّ
It is preferable that you intend to cut it back to its origin and foundation, and use sewing and what we have mentioned. And if there are fluids in the pigs, then close them with a simple closure where you see the site of their maturity, and make the closure from what is below as we said.
Then you use after the closure, winding with Egyptian ointment and the like, so that it eats what remains of the corruption until when you see the wound clean, then treat it with ointments that promote meat growth until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Four
On splitting the larynx for a tumor that occurs inside the throat.
The former mentioned this split in the larynx, and I have not seen anyone in our country do it; this is the sequence of their words. As for those with angina, they should avoid splitting the larynx, as they will not benefit from it.
Because all the blood vessels and lungs are diseased, and as for those with a hot tumor in the mouth, throat or tonsils, if there is no cause in the trachea, it is necessary to use splitting the larynx to escape from the damage that occurs from suffocation.وأمّا الافعال التى يستعملها الطبيب بعد الشقّ، فإنّه يضمد الجرح بخرقة نظيفة ويطبق على موضع الشقّ لئلاّ يتسرب اليه الهواء ويخيط أطرافه بخيط من الكتان أو الصوف مغطسا اياه فى زيت الورد، ويجعل مدّة الخياطة ثلاثة
As for the actions that the doctor should do after the split, he should dress the wound with a clean cloth and apply it to the site of the split so that air does not enter it, and stitch its edges with a thread of flax or wool, having dipped it in rose oil; and he should make the duration of the stitching three days. It is preferable, if we want this, to split the larynx under three circles of the rings of the trachea or four small splits horizontally between two circles, as much as the split in the peritoneum, not in the cartilage; and this place agrees with the split.وينبغى أن يقصد بالقطع لأصلها
It is preferable to cut it back to its origin because it has no meat and the blood vessels are far from it; and if the surgeon is timid, then he should extend the skin of the throat with a hook, and then cut the skin until he reaches the trachea, avoiding the blood vessels if he sees anything of them.والحنك بمنزلة القصبة فى أنّه ينبغى أن يقصد بالقطع لأصله، وقد عرّفنا ذلك فيما تقدم من الكلام، وكلّما وجد من الورم شيئا منتفخة الجلد أو ماء جمعه وعمل له فتحة.
Then the peritoneum which we have described is incised, and the incision of the trachea is recognized from the phlegm which comes out of it, together with what has been punctured and the cessation of voice; and the wound is left open for a while. When the time that was feared for asphyxia has passed, the lips of the wound are sutured with skin.
And its outline alone, without the cartilage, is then treated with remedies that promote the growth of flesh until it heals. The author of this book says that the meaning of the whole statement we have narrated is that when they see the patient's larynx obstructed by one of the tumors mentioned.
And when the patient is on the point of death and his life is in danger, they go to split the larynx so that the patient can breathe through the wound and be saved from death. They are commanded to leave the wound open until the crisis of the disease is over, and its duration is three days or so.
Then they are commanded to stitch and treat the wound until it heals. What I have myself witnessed is that a servant took a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting through part of her lung. She was then called for treatment, and I found her gasping as though she were a slaughtered animal. I exposed the wound.
I found that the blood which came out of the wound was slight, so I was certain that she had not cut an artery or a vein, and the breath was coming out of the wound. So I sutured the wound and treated it until it healed, and nothing happened to the servant except a hoarseness in her voice, nothing more.
And she returned after a few days to her best condition, so from here we say that splitting the larynx is not dangerous,.
Chapter Forty-four.
On incising the tumor that occurs in the pharynx from the outside and is called a pharyngeal polyp.
This tumor, which is called a pharyngeal polyp, is a large tumor the color of the body; it is common in women and comes in two types.The first type has no pain with it, and it moves whenever you move your head, so that when you lean forward it comes forward out of its place, and when you raise your head, it goes back into
There are two types of hernia: a natural one, which cannot be treated, and an accidental one, which comes in two forms. One is similar to fatty tumours, and the other is similar to tumours caused by the twisting of an artery, and there is danger in both. You should not treat these at all with iron, except for small ones. If you probe and examine them with a probe and find that they resemble fatty tumours and are not attached to any blood vessels, then cut them out as you would a tumour. Remove it along with the sac if it is in a sac; otherwise, remove all of it and then treat the site as appropriate.
Chapter 45.
On cutting into types of tumours.
There are many types of tumours, and I have mentioned all their types in the taxonomy. I should now mention the difference between a tumour and an abscess, which is confusing. I say that an abscess comes with heat, fever, and terrifying pains until the excess fluid has subsided. And the infection continues; then the fever and severity subside. A tumour does not come with heat, fever, or pain, and it is contained within a peritoneal sac, which is its specific container. It is the colour of the body, and it starts out the size of a pea and becomes like a blister, larger or smaller.
There are two types of tumours: fatty and moist, and the colours of moisture are numerous, as I have mentioned in the taxonomy. When treating a tumour, you should first probe and examine it using the instrument called a probe, as shown in the chapter after this one.
Examine the size of the tumour, then remove the probe and look at what comes out in its wake. If flowing moisture of any colour comes out, then cut it open simply, as mentioned in other tumours. If no moisture comes out after the probe, then know that it is fatty.
Make an incision in her in the form of a cross as I have instructed, and hang it on the pins, and gently strip off the skin all around; if possible, remove the sac along with the tumor intact.
If the sac bursts during the operation and you cannot remove it intact, this often happens; extract it piece by piece so that not a trace of it remains. For if some of it is left, the tumor will return, be it large or small.
If a small portion of it remains, gouge out the wound with sharp instruments when you have finished using some caustic agent, and tighten the wound; place over it something to soothe the hot tumor and treat it with other remedies until it heals. If the tumor is large, cut along its edges and treat it with healing remedies.
If a vein, whether pulsating or not, bleeds profusely, quickly pack the wound with powdered alum and leave it tied for two or three days until the wound putrefies and the bleeding subsides; then return to excising what remains of the tumor.
Chapter 46
On the forms of instruments.
There are three types of probes, some large, some medium-sized, and some small.
A large probe:
A medium-sized probe:
A small probe:
These are made of steel, with square tips, designed to quickly penetrate tumors. These are the forms of the probes, also called needles; they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. A large probe:
A medium-sized probe:
A small probe:
They are used to examine tumors, wounds, sinuses, and hidden places for any bones or other objects. They are made round, polished, and smooth, like a spoon, from brass, copper alloy, pure copper, iron, or silver. Of these, the best are made of brass.
Probes may also be made from black lead and used to probe the rectum, when there is a bend in its depth, to flex gently with that bend. They are also of three types, for some are long, some medium, and some short.
The size of the probe should be determined by the depth of each fistula, and its thickness should correspond to the width and narrowness of the fistula. Here is an image of a probe made of large lead:
Image of a medium-sized lead probe:
Image of a small lead probe:
Images of the probes, which come in many varieties. Some are simple, meaning they have one hook, and these come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. There are also blind probes, which also come in three sizes, as well as double-hook probes, which come in three sizes, and finally, there are the curved double-hook probes. These come in three varieties, and each is used for a specific purpose. Here is an image of a large simple probe: Image of a medium-sized simple probe: Image of a small simple probe:
Image of a large blind probe: Image of a medium-sized blind probe:
Image of a small blind probe:
Image of a large double-hook probe: Image of a medium-sized double-hook probe: Image of a small double-hook probe:
Image of a large three-hook probe:
Image of a medium-sized three-hook probe: Image of a small three-hook probe:
These are images of the knives used to incise and excise growths. They come in three varieties: large, medium, and small. Here is an image of a large knife:
Image of a medium-sized knife:
Image of a small knife:
Its blades, with which it splits, are limited and the other ends are unlimited, but they were made this way to be used in peeling the tumor when there is a fear of cutting a vein or nerve, so that the sick person feels comfort and finds some relief from the burning he feels when peeling the tumor.
And these are the images of the speculums, and they are of three types; for some of them are large, some medium-sized, and some small. The image of a large speculum is as follows:.
It is made of copper, like the rod used for eye make-up, and on one end there is something like a spoon which is double-layered, and at its head there is a scalpel blade hidden inside, resembling the tongue of a bird, which moves in and out as desired, as you see.
Images of the spatulas used to conceal beneath the fingers when cauterizing tumors, so that the patient does not feel them. These spatulas are of three types; some are large, some medium-sized, and some small. The image of a large spatula is as follows:.
Images of the hemostats used to stop bleeding. These hemostats are of three types; some are large, some medium-sized, and some small. The image of a large hemostat is as follows:.
They are made of copper or of porcelain, rounded at the end and somewhat elongated as you see, and they should be very thin. These types of hemostats, both large and small, should be available to you so that you can quickly stop bleeding when necessary, especially when you do not have any medication available.
However, they should not be used to stop bleeding in just any part of the body, but only in muscular parts such as the calf, thigh, arm, breast, abdomen, and groin, and similar muscular parts that are moist.
And from it, other small instruments may be made which resemble pistachio shells in this way:
It cuts the blood if it flows from a phlebotomy site or when cutting a vein or artery, and they may also be made into a small circle in this way:
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of men's breasts.
Some people, when they reach puberty, can have their breasts swell up until they resemble a woman's, remaining swollen and unsightly; if anyone dislikes this, he should split the breast with an incison in the shape of a crescent like this:
From line m to line n.:. Then strip all the fat away, fill the wound with healing medicine, then bring together the edges of the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals; if the breast sags down and flops over its bone as happens to women,.
it is appropriate to split its upper sides with two incisions that resemble crescents which connect to each other at their ends so that the larger line encloses the smaller one like this: From line m to line n, then peel the skin between the incisions and remove the fat and use what we have mentioned of stitches, cauterization, and whatever treatment is needed until it heals..
If you cannot cut away what you should in order to calm the patient or because of bleeding, you should stuff the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until it eats up all the remaining fat, then treat it until it heals,.
Chapter 48..
On bumps which occur under the armpit..
These bumps which occur under the armpit are of the type of hogs, hard and contained in a sac; some contain fluids. So whatever contains fluids should be split with an incision in the shape of a crescent like this:
From the line ~b~ to the line ~c~. When you have discharged all that is within the tumor, pack it with old cotton and leave it until another day, then remove the cotton.
And treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals. If the tumor is of the type of nodules of the pig, then make an incision on it as we mentioned in the incision on the pigs, and if the wound persists to extend that pus is discharged, then use cauterization as mentioned earlier.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
In incising the tumor that occurs from the artery or vein and is called aneurysm.
When an artery is cut and the skin above it heals, it often results in a tumor, and the same is true for a vein, which can result in swelling and a tumor.وينبغى أن يعلم أن الأورام التى تعلو الشريان والوريد من قبل أن يكون النفخ والورم فى الشريان والوريد، وذلك أن الشريان والوريد إذا أصيبا جرحا
And it should be known that tumors above the artery and vein are due to inflammation in the artery or vein, for when an artery or vein is injured
And that which is from the vein is round in the surface of the body, and incision into these tumors is dangerous, especially if they are in the armpit, groin, neck, and many other parts of the body, and especially if they are very large, so it should be avoided treating them with cauterization.وأما الأورام التى تكون فى الشريان فتعرف من أنّها تعلو الشريان، وإذا ضغطه المرء بأصبعه وجد له دويا كدوى النخل إذا حركته.
And that which is in the artery can be known by the fact that it lies above the artery, and if one presses it with their finger, they feel a humming like that of a palm tree when it is moved.And that which is also in the extremities or in the head should be avoided; if there is swelling at the mouth of the artery, then make an incision into the skin lengthwise, then open the incision with tweezers, then strip away the artery and free it from adhesions.وإن كان الورم من قبل وريد فشقّ عليه كما ذكرنا سواء وإذا وجدت فى الشقّ على الورم صفاقات معتمة اللون غير شفافة فإنها من الشريان، ويجب
حتى ينكشف ثم تدخل تحته إبرة وتنفذها إلى الجانب الآخر وتشدي الشريان بخيط مثنى في موضعين على ما عرفتك في سل الشريانين اللذين في الأصادغ ثم تنخس بمبضعه الموضع الذي بين الرباطين حتى يخرج الدم الذي فيه كله.
And the swelling subsides, then you should use a treatment that promotes pus formation until the ligaments are loosen, then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the swelling is due to a ruptured vein, you should hold the swelling with your hand as firmly as possible, then insert a needle under the area you are holding, passing it through to the other side with a double thread. Then tie the swelling firmly with the thread, as I have described to you in the tying of the grape stem from both sides with the ends of the thread. If you fear that the threads may slip, insert another needle with a thread under the whole swelling at the point where the first needle intersected.
Tighten your threads in four places, then cut the swelling in the middle until what is inside comes out, then cut off the redundant skin and leave what was tied, then place a pad that has been dipped in a drink and oil on it.واحتفظ بالخيط الذى ربطت به الرباطين حتّى ينفذ ما تحت الجلد كلّه، فإن احتيج الى قطع المزيد من الجلد فافعل، وإن لم يحتج الى ذلك فلا تقطع شيئا منه بل ضع عليه رفادة وقد غمستها فى شراب وزيت. Then use the treatment by twisting and ointments until it heals..وإن كان الورم من قبل انسداد عروق الدم فينبغى أن تمسك بيدك ما أمكنك من الجلد فوق الورم ثمّ تدخل إ
Chapter Fifty.حَتّىَ يَنْكَش
in the swelling that occurs from a twisted nerve.وإن كان الورم من قبل انسداد عروق الدم فينبغى أن تمسك بيدك
As the swelling occurs in an artery or a vein, so too does it occur in a nerve if there has been a blow or excessive fatigue or something similar, and this is most common in the areas of the wrists and heels.وعلاج الورم الذى يكون من التواء العصب بفتل موضع الورم على ما ذكرناه فى علاج التواء العصب، فإذا احتيج الى قطع الجلد لتفريغ الورم فاقطعه ثمّ ضع عليه رفادة وقد غمستها فى
In every location where the joints move and there is a hard swelling whose color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is in most cases painless. If pressure is applied with force, the patient senses a sort of numbness. The swelling is not concentrated in the depths of the body.
It is under the skin and it moves in all directions, neither going forward nor backward. If it is in the joints, one should not use iron on it, for it might cause paralysis. But if it is in the head or forehead,
then make an incision in the skin with a scalpel. If the swelling is small, hold it with forceps and cut it at its base; if it is large, hang it on a hook and peel it off, then stitch the wound and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 51.
On cutting away warts that appear on the abdomen.
Many people often get warts on their abdomens and other parts of their bodies; they are called fungal warts because they resemble fungi. They have thin stems and thick heads, and their lips may become thick. Some of them are small, while others can grow very large.
I once saw a man with two warts on his abdomen that looked just like fungi, with thin stems and thick heads that had become swollen; their lips were cracked and moisture was constantly flowing from them. I removed them both, and the first weighed about eighteen ounces and the second about six ounces.
The procedure for removing them is as follows: if the patient is moist and the color of the wart is white, moist and thin, cut it with a broad scalpel; have your cauterization instruments heated in the fire, because cutting them often causes a lot of bleeding.
If you are overwhelmed by the blood, cauterize it; if you see that the patient is afraid of the cutting with iron, take a strong lead thread and tie it tightly around the wart as described, and leave it for two days, then tighten the lead further.
Whenever it affects the wart until it is severed and falls off by itself without any effort, if the wart is thick at its root, then there is some fear and risk in severing it, especially if it is in the abdomen. However, it may be possible to cut off half of it or a part of it.
Then you cauterize it so that it does not return, then treat it until the wound heals. Be careful not to expose a wart that is dark in color, with little sensation and an unpleasant appearance, as it is a malignant tumor. We will come to the discussion of cancer after this.
Chapter 52
On the treatment of umbilical hernias.
Umbilical hernias can be caused by many factors, either from a rupture of the peritoneum on the abdomen, causing the omentum or intestines to protrude, as happens in other hernias, or from blood that flows from a vein or artery, as mentioned earlier, or from gas that accumulates in it.
If it is due to a rupture of the peritoneum and the protrusion of the omentum, then the color of the tumor will be similar to that of the body and will be soft without pain, and it may appear in different positions. If it is due to the protrusion of the intestines, then its appearance will be even more varied. If you press it with your fingers, it will disappear and then return, and there may be a gurgling sound with it. It can also grow significantly after using the restroom or with extreme exertion. If it is due to moisture, then it will be soft.
It does not disappear when pressed by hand, and it neither increases nor decreases in size. If it is due to blood, then the tumor will tend towards blackness with these signs. If it is due to a growth of flesh, then the tumor will be hard and firm, and will remain the same size.
If it is due to gas, then its touch will be soft. The course of action here is that you should refrain from treating it, as there is risk and danger involved, as I have already informed you in the chapter on tumors that occur due to arteries and veins.
If the hernia is caused by the intestines or the peritoneum, you should order the patient to hold himself and stand upright, then draw a circle around the umbilical region with ink. Then order the patient to lie on his back in front of you, then make an incision with a broad blade around the umbilical region at the mark you made with ink. Then push the center of the tumor upwards with a large probe, and tie the incision tightly with strong thread or silk thread.
The knot should be a loop, then open up the center of the stretched tumor above the knot and insert your index finger inside. If you find that the intestine has been caught by the knot, loosen the loop and push the intestine back into the abdomen. If you find peritoneum, extend it with a probe.
Then cut off the excess tissue. If you encounter an artery or vein, ligate it and return to your work. Take two needles and insert two strong threads through them into the incision around the tumor, then straighten out the threads and tie down the tumor in four places with the threads.
If you wish, remove the needles and leave the area until the dead tissue becomes rotten and falls off by itself, or cut it off if it softens and rots. Then treat the wound with appropriate ointments until it heals. If the hernia is a piece of flesh that has grown inside the umbilical region
or if it is caused by moisture, you should hollow out the tumor as we said before and draw out the blood or moisture that you find inside it, then treat the wound with healing ointments.
Chapter 53.
In the treatment of cancer.
We have already mentioned in the taxonomy the types of cancer and how to treat it with medications, and warned against treating it with iron so that it does not become ulcerated. We also mentioned cancer generated in the uterus and warned against treating it.
The ancients have stated that whenever cancer is in a location from which it can be completely removed, such as cancer in the breast or in the thigh and similar limbs from which it can be entirely extracted, especially if it is small and recently appeared. However, if it is old and large, it should not be approached.
I have never been able to cure anyone of it, nor have I seen anyone else before me achieve this. The treatment for this, if the cancer is in a late stage as mentioned, is to first apply black myrrh repeatedly to alleviate the patient's pain. Then, if there is evident swelling in the veins, you should then bleed them.
Then, you should make the patient stand in a position that facilitates the procedure. Next, you insert the suitable probes into the cancer and scrape it from all sides, ensuring that you remove its roots completely while allowing the blood to flow without stopping it abruptly.
Squeeze the affected area and let all the thick blood flow out by hand or with any suitable instrument you have. If, during the procedure, you encounter a heavy bleeding from a cut artery or vein, compress the wound until the bleeding stops, and then treat it with other remedies until it heals.واحترس ان لا تخدش الجلد حول السرطان فيتسرّب الى الداخل ويصير فى العروق فيفسد الدم حتّى يموت صاحبه، واعلم أنّ هذا المرض لا يزال بالعلاجات التى قدّمناها، فان لم تزل به فلا بدّ من قطع الموضع الذى فيه والتخلّص منه.
Chapter 45.
On the treatment of hydrocele.والحبن نوعان حبن أبهر وحبن
There are two types of hydrocele: hydrocele of the tunica vaginalis and hydrocele due to a fluid buildup in the abdominal cavity. The former is treated with medication, while the latter may require surgery.The type that responds to iron treatment is only the serous variety. The catarrhal and the carnous types should not be treated with iron at all.
If, after treating the serous hydrocele with medication, your patient's condition does not improve, assess their overall health. If they are severely weakened or have another underlying condition in addition to the hydrocele, such as:
If he has a cough, or diarrhea, or anything like that, do not treat him with iron, for it is risky. If you see the patient is strong and does not have any disease other than hydrocephalus, and is neither a child nor an elderly person, then you should proceed as follows: make the patient stand in front of you. And have an assistant behind him squeeze his abdomen with his hands and push the water down towards the pelvis. Then take a curved scalpel in this manner:
And examine, if the hydrocephalus is generated from the intestine.
So you should remove, by incising from the navel down three fingers' width in line with the pelvis. If the hydrocephalus is caused by a liver disease, then the incision should be to the left of the navel, three fingers' width. If it is caused by a spleen disease, then the incision should be to the right, three fingers' width.
It is also not appropriate for the incision to be on the side the patient wants to lie on, so that the fluids do not flow into that weak spot. Then pierce the skin all the way with your instrument and insert the instrument into that incision, then lift your hand.
As if you were stripping it, and the amount you strip should be about the size of a fingernail, then pierce the peritoneum so that your instrument reaches an empty space, which is where the water is located. Then take out the fluid and insert into the opening the instrument which has this shape.
It is a kind of tube made from thin brass or silver, or from a smooth spaderoom, with a small hole at the bottom and three holes around it, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And he may sharpen its tip in the shape of a pen nib:
At its upper end there is a ring; when the instrument reaches water, it will drop onto the instrument from that moment, emptying a moderate amount of water in the process, for if you empty more than is appropriate at that time, the patient may die from the dissolution of his animal spirit.
Or it may experience a convulsion that approaches death, but it will expel from its strength what the condition of the patient indicates through the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his color; then the instrument is withdrawn and the water is retained, for it is retained from that moment.
Because of the skin that holds the hole on the peritoneum, which I have told you to line in this way; then the instrument is reintroduced another day if you see the patient tolerating it.وإن أعادته ولم تجد له قوة فى نبضه وعلامة حسن لونه فأعد الآلة ثالثة، فإن لم تر له قوّة على ذلك فدعه إلى أن يتقوى ويكون آمنا من الموت، أو يعرض له غشى يق
And if you reintroduce it and do not find strength in his pulse or a sign of good color, reintroduce the instrument a third time; if you still don't see any strength, leave him until he gets stronger and is safe from death, or experiences a convulsion. You should also expel a little water, doing this for several days while being careful to avoid mistakes so that only a little water remains. If you are afraid for the patient and have left a lot of water, treat it with burial in hot sand.
And the profuse perspiration in the bath and in the sun, and be patient with thirst, and treat him with the drying remedies until he recovers; and cauterize the stomach, liver, and spleen after expelling the water as I described earlier,.وإن أبى إلّا الماء فأعطاه، وإن اشتدّت به الحمّى فاغسله بالماء البارد على ما وصفت، أو استحمه.
Chapter Fifty-Five.فى علاج الورم الحارّ والحارّ الج
In the treatment of hot tumors and hot, moist tumors.In the treatment of children who are born with their urinary outlets unpierced or with a narrow opening in an improper location.
Some boys may be born from their mother's womb with their navel unpierced, in which case you should quickly pierce it as soon as he is born..وإن كان فى موضع غيره عالجته كما تقدّم، وإن كان ضيقا استعملت فيه المراهم التى تجلو وتليّن كما ذكرناه.
With a very thin knife in this manner:
Then you put in the hole a thin lead nail and tie it, and hold it for three or four days; then, when the urine wants to come out, you move it aside and urinate, then put it back. If you do not use lead, the urine which goes through the opening can cause it to close up.
As for those whose opening is narrow, they should be treated with lead as we have said for several days until it becomes wider. Some people are born with the opening in the wrong place; sometimes it is at the end of the penis and they cannot urinate forward.
until he lifts his urethra with his hand upwards, and some are born with the semen unable to reach the uterus in a straight line, which is a very ugly condition. The treatment for this is that the patient lies on his back.
Then you stretch his penis with your left hand, stretching it firmly, and cut the opening of the urethra with a razor or a sharp knife like the point of a pen, as if you were carving something, so that the middle is concave, resembling a bow, and the opening is in the middle, as it should be.
Take care when you are doing this not to bleed; it often happens, so deal with it by stopping the blood and treating the wound until it heals.
Chapter 56.
On the blisters that occur in the foreskin and the penis, and on blackness, rottenness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the penis.
This blister often occurs in the urethra; it is a smooth, fibrous growth and may be benign or malignant. The benign one should be hung on a fine hook.
Then cut it out completely and cleanse it thoroughly; then apply a piece of cotton soaked in Greek fire, then treat it afterwards with pomegranate ointment until it heals. But if the blister is malignant, smooth in colour, you should apply cautery after cutting it out and removing its skin,.
If the abscess is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised man, and part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and part outside, then you should remove the internal abscess first until it heals; then treat the external part.
Because if you treat them both at the same time, you cannot be sure that the foreskin will not burst. Blackness and decay may also occur in the vagina and foreskin; therefore, all blackened areas that show signs of decay or have already decayed should be cut out.
Then spread honey mixed with powdered pomegranate rinds and garlic on the affected area, and treat it with other remedies until it heals. If bleeding occurs, use cauterization with a crescent-shaped iron in the following manner:
Cauterization is beneficial for both cases: bleeding and infection. If the cautery destroys the foreskin completely, a tube of lead should be inserted into the penis to allow the patient to urinate, and you should also treat the adhesion of the foreskin to the cautery iron in the following manner:.
This adhesion can occur in uncircumcised men with intact foreskin, or due to injury or swelling. In such a case, you should separate the foreskin from the cautery iron using a flat knife until the ligament is released and the cautery iron is free from all sides.وإن عرض التصاق فى مجرى الذكر من قبل ورم أو علة أخرى فأدخله فى ماء بارد حتّى ينحلّ، فإن لم ينحلّ فأدخله فى زيت سذاب حارّ، ثمّ أخرجه وابدأ فيه الكىّ على الموضع الموضع.
If it is difficult to distinguish between the foreskin and cautery iron through careful examination, you should cut a small piece from both the foreskin and cautery iron. The foreskin is thin and may burst easily due to its thinness; therefore, you should use a thin linen cloth wet with cold water to differentiate between the two.
Then it should be treated with an astringent drink until it heals.وإن عرض فيهم علة أخرى من قبل احتقان أو ورم أو نزف دم فينبغى أن يعال
Chapter LVII.
In the purification of boys and the treatment of errors that occur to them.
Circumcision is not something other than separating the union as in other surgeries, except that since it is done by our will and its use is specific to boys, it is necessary for us to outline the best method of doing it.
The easiest path to safety is that the earliest writers did not mention circumcision in their books because it was not practiced in their religions, but rather it is something we have acquired.ومنها أنّه يجرى للصبى فى اليوم السابع من ولادته، فإن لم يفعل ففى الرابع عشر، وإن فات ذلك لم يكن له حدّ، وأمّا العلامة التى يجب أن ينظر إليها فإذا أدخل إصبعه فى القلفة وأخرجها منه ورأى شيئًا يمنع الماء من الوصول إلى الجسد
And of it, that it should be done for the boy on the seventh day of his birth; and if not done, then in the fourteenth; and if this is missed, there is no limit to it. And as for the sign that must be looked at, if he inserts his finger into the foreskin and pulls it out of him and sees something preventing water from reaching the body
I have found nothing better than circumcision with scissors and ligature with thread, because circumcision with a razor often lacerates the skin, as the foreskin has two layers, so sometimes only the upper skin is cut and the lower layer remains.ومنها أنّ التطهير لا يجب أن يكون كثيرًا، بل يجب أن يقلّع قدر ما يسقط معه الموضع الذى يمنع الماء من الوصول إلى الجسد ويفسده ويؤدّى الى تعفنه ويجب أن يراعى أيضًا فى موضع القطع ألا يقرب العروق
And of it, that circumcision should not be excessive, but it must be removed as much as the place that prevents water from reaching the body and corrupts it and leads to its putrefaction, and it is also necessary to pay attention in the place of cutting not to approach the veins.
So much so that they do not need circumcision, and I have seen that, and as for circumcision with scissors and ligature with thread, experience has shown me its advantage because the blade above is like the blade below.وإذا أمسكت الشفرة بملامة للجلد كان ذلك أفضل لأنّها لا تفلته بل تأخذه مع جلدة الغلفة وأمّا إذا كان فيه عروق فلا ينبغى أن يقربها كثيرًا وإنما يقطع قبالتها.
When you squeeze your hand in accordance with the shape of the blades, you cut to a single measurement and at the same time, so that the thread becomes like a wall for the urethra from all sides, without any error at all. The method is first to deceive the boy.
Especially if he is one who understands a little, that you are only tying the thread in his urethra, and leave it until another day, then please him and make him happy in every way you can, and what he accepts with his mind. Then stop him between your hands, erect.
Do not sit down and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the boy's eye does not fall on it at all, or on any of the tools. Then put your hand into his urethra, inflate the skin and lift it up until the head of the urethra comes out.
Then clean it of the dirt that has accumulated in it, then tie the marked place with a double thread, then tie another knot below it a little, then hold tightly with your thumb and forefinger the knot at the bottom, and cut between the knots. Then quickly lift the foreskin up and pull out the head of the urethra, then let the blood flow a little, which is better and less harmful to the urethra, then wipe it with a damp cloth, then sprinkle on it the burnt ash of dried pumpkin seeds, which is the best that has been tried, or fine bran.
Then quickly lift the foreskin up and pull out the head of the urethra, then let the blood flow a little, which is better and less harmful to the urethra, then wipe it with a damp cloth, then sprinkle on it the burnt ash of dried pumpkin seeds, which is the best that has been tried, or fine bran. Then put a poultice above it with a cloth, the size of a cooked egg yolk in rose water beaten with soft rose oil, and leave it on for another day, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
This is an image of the scissors that are suitable for cleaning:المقصّ: شفرتان مدببتان مقوّمتان متساويتان فى
The scissors: two curved, straight blades that are equal in length, and the nail is watered with a screw, and the length of the blades is the same as the handles. As for the error that occurs in cleaning, perhaps you turn over the entire inner foreskin or part of it when cutting, so you should stretch it from your hour with your fingernail before the site swells.
You cut it on a level, if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, pull it out with a hook and cut it. If it has been three days and the area under the head of the foreskin is still swollen and warm, leave it until the inflammation subsides and then peel it off gently.
You cut it according to what you think, and be careful of the head of the penis, for if you cut something off the head of the penis, it will not harm, so treat it with an adhesive that heals wounds from the remedies we described in the article on remedies.
If some of the foreskin above the amount is cut and retracted above, it will not harm much, so treat it as we mentioned until it heals.
Chapter 58
In the treatment of urinary retention in the bladder.
Urinary retention in the bladder occurs due to blockage by a stone, coagulated blood, pus, or flesh growth, and so on. If you treat this with the various types of treatments described in the classification.
If the urine does not flow and you find that the retention is due to a stone damaging the bladder neck, the patient should kneel down, then a man rides on his back and stretches his abdomen towards his back, and the patient holds himself as much as he can.
This will force the bladder neck to push the stone back, allowing the urine to flow. If this does not work and the condition becomes severe, you should use a device called "cathereters", which has this appearance:..
It is made of silver and is thin, smooth, hollow, and similar to a reed pipe in thinness and about nine inches long, with a gentle funnel at its head. The way to attract urine with it is to take a folded string, tie a piece of wool or cotton to it securely, then insert the device into the urethra until it reaches the bladder.
The thread is then introduced into the lower end of the catheter and cut with a pair of scissors if there is any surplus of the membrane so that it may enter the tube and act as a plug like a button, after which the catheter is lubricated with oil or lard or egg white, and the patient sits on a chair.
His bladder and urethra are then lubricated with soft ointments or oil and tepid water, after which the catheter is introduced into the urethra gently until it reaches the base of the urethra, whereupon the urethra is bent upwards towards the navel and the catheter pushed inside it.
When the urethra is fully bent, the catheter is then pushed inside until it reaches close to the rectum; the penis is then tilted downwards while the catheter is inside it, after which it is pushed further until it reaches the bladder, at which point the patient feels that it has reached an empty space.
This method is used because the pathway through which urine flows has a bend in it; the thread with the membrane is then extended with a little force, as urine follows the membrane, after which the membrane is extracted and urine drains out; the catheter is then reinserted.وإن احتاج الى البول فليشرب شيئا يسيرا من الماء حتّى يدخل فى المثانة، ثمّ يجلس على الكرسى ويشدّ على القاثاطير براحتيه.
If he needs to urinate, he should drink a little water so that it enters the bladder; then he sits on the chair and squeezes the catheter with his hands. He keeps doing this until the bladder is emptied and he feels lighter.
Chapter 59.في إدخال القاثاطير فى الإحليل
On the insertion of catheters into the urethraHow to inject the bladder with a syringe.
The instruments suitable for this purpose are made of silver or hollow ivory, with a long tube as thin as a hair; if you wish to drip water or medication into it, you need an instrument called a syringe, and this is what it looks like:.( See ill . ) .
It is made of silver or hollowed-out ivory, with a long tube on the milled plate, which is hollowed out all over except for the tip, which is solid and has three holes, two from one side and one from the other, as you see.
The hollow cavity in which the cannonball sits is sized to fit snugly without any excess, so that when you pull on it with something moist, it pulls out, and when you push on it, it is pushed out to a distance, just as a syringe is used to spray oil in naval warfare.
If you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the tip of the syringe into the moisture and pull on the plunger, and the moisture will be pulled into the hollow of the syringe; then insert its tip into the urethra as described in the catheters, then push on the plunger and the moisture will be pushed out.
This moisture will reach the bladder, and the patient will feel it. This is also a delicate syringe that can be used to inject the bladder:.
It is made of silver or camel's bladder, with the upper part of its head resembling a small funnel and below it a notch where the ligature fits; then take a camel's bladder and put in it the moisture you want to inject into the bladder, then tie it tightly between the notches with a double thread.
And heat that moisture gently over the fire, then insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra, and hold your hand tightly on the bladder with the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If you cannot find a bladder, take a piece of membrane and make a circle out of it, and puncture it all the way around, then thread a strong thread through those holes as you would wind a spool, then gather the circle together as you would gather a napkin after putting in it whatever moisture, oils, or water you want.
Then tie it to the instrument and use it in the same way that you used your hand on the bladder, until moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter sixty.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already mentioned in the classification of types of stones and their treatment with medications, and I have mentioned the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of all this, and I have also mentioned the stone which is subjected to manual work and incision.
This is especially true of stones formed in the bladder, which become lodged in the urethra. I will describe this clearly and concisely.
I say that stones formed in the bladder are more common in boys. One of its signs is that urine is excreted from the bladder like water in its thinness.ويكون مع البول دم مستحيل إلى اللون الأحمر، وربّما كان الدم يخرج وحده ولم يكن للبول أثر فى الأكثر وإنّما يظهر أثر البول فى الرائحة واللون.
And there is blood in it, turning red, and sometimes only blood comes out, with no sign of urine, but the sign of urine appears in the smell and color. And sand appears in it, and they scratch their penis and mess with it, and often hang down and spread, and the anus protrudes with many of them. It is easy for boys to recover from this until they reach the age of fourteen, but it is difficult for the elderly. As for young men, it is somewhere in between.والحكّة التى فى الذكر لا تنقطع إلا بعد خروج الحصاة، وربّما كانت الحكّة فى المقعدة والذكر حتّى يخرج الحصاة، وإنّما يحتدّ ذلك عند خروج البول وعند
The itching in the penis does not subside until after the stone has come out, and sometimes the itching is in the anus and the penis until the stone comes out. This is because when passing urine, there may be a stone that blocks the passage of urine, and it is difficult to pass urine. Then we should inject the patient with an enema to remove all the feces from his intestines, as this can prevent us from finding the stone during examination.وإن كان زبله أكثر ممّا ينبغى حقن ثلاث مرّات، وينبغى أن يكون الحقن فى النهار وأوّل النهار أفضل من آخره ويستخبر عن أحواله وعن مكان الحصاة فإن
Then the patient is taken by his feet and shaken and rattled down to make the stone move down to the neck of the bladder, or he jumps several times from an elevated place, then you sit him upright between your hands with his hands under his thighs to make the whole bladder tilt downward, then you examine him.
And you palpate him from the outside, and if you feel the stone in the space, you should immediately operate on it with your knife. But if it does not respond to your touch at all, you should grease the index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger.
If the patient is a fully grown boy, you should insert it into his anus and look for the stone until it comes under your finger, then move it little by little to the neck of the bladder, then press on it with your finger and push it outwards towards the place where you want to make the incision.
And you order a servant to squeeze the bladder with his hand, and another servant to raise his right hand up the scrotum and lift the skin under the scrotum towards the place where the incision will be made, then you take the scalpel that looks like this:
And you make an incision between the anus and the scrotum, not in the middle but towards the left side of the hip joint, and the incision is made on top of the stone while your finger is in the anus and you press it outwards obliquely so that the incision is wide on the outside and narrow on the inside to the extent that the stone can come out.
No larger, because the finger in the anus might press on the stone when making the incision and it may come out without difficulty. Know that some stones have angles and edges, which makes their exit difficult.وإذا أخرجت الحصاة كلّها فامسح الموضع الذى شقتّه بدهن الورد ثمّ ضمّد عليه بقطن وضماد، ولا يحل أن يخرج المريض من عندك حتّى يستقيم به البول ويذهب عنى الوعثاء، وينبغى لك أن تعطيه
And from them are smooth like oak and rolled, so it is easy for them to come out, and whatever has angles and letters increases in the slit a little, if they do not come out like this, you should use cunning on them, either by grasping them with a tight gouge, the end of which is like a file.
Grasping the stone so that it does not escape, or by inserting a delicate instrument with a curved end under it. If you cannot get it, then widen the slit a little. If you are overwhelmed by something of blood, then cut it with alum.
If there is more than one, then first push the large one into the mouth of the bladder and then cut it, and then push the small one afterwards. And if there are more than two, do the same. But if it is very large, then it is ignorance to cut it with a large incision, because the patient is exposed to one of two things.
Either he dies, or he always has a dribbling of urine because the place never heals, but try to push it until it comes out, or maneuver to break it with claws so that you bring it out in pieces.
When you have finished your work, wash the wound with rosewater and vinegar and tighten it and put a piece of damp cloth over it, either with oil and drink or rosewater and cold water to soothe the hot swelling, then the patient should lie on his back and not loosen the bandage until the third day.
When it is loosened, the spot should be washed with a lot of water and oil, then treated with an almond ointment and basil ointment until it heals. But if a hot swelling increases in the wound, and something like a coagulum of blood prevents urine from being passed, and this can be seen by the passing of blood with the urine
put your finger in the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will cause the corruption and infection of the bladder. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and match each type of treatment with its like until it heals.
In all times of treatment, the thighs should be bound and brought together to hold the medications that are placed on the site. If the stone is small and has entered the urethra and become lodged there, preventing urination, treat it as I have described before it enters the perineum.
Many times this treatment has sufficed instead of incision. I have tried it and found that you should take a fork made of steel, thus:.
Triangular at the tip, sharp and pointed on a stick, then take a thread and tie it to the penis under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder, then insert the prong of the fork gently into the urethra until the fork reaches the same stone.
You turn the fork in your hand in the same stone little by little as you aim to puncture it until it passes through from the other side, then you squeeze your hand on what remains of the stone from outside the penis, because it will shatter and come out with the urine and the patient recovers.
If you cannot do this treatment due to an obstacle that prevents you, tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the penis itself between the threads, then take out the stone.
Then loosen the thread and clean up the clotted blood that has become in the wound, and it is necessary to tie the thread under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other thread above so that when the thread is loosened after the stone comes out, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.
For this reason, when you tie the upper thread, you should lift the skin up so that it returns when you finish and covers the wound as we said.
Chapter 61.
On removing stones for women.
Stones are rarely formed in women, and if any of them has a stone, it is difficult to treat for many reasons, one of which is that the woman may be a virgin, and another is that you cannot find a woman who would allow herself to be treated by a doctor.
If she is chaste or a close relative, the third reason is that you will not find a woman skilled in this craft, especially handwork; and fourth, because the site of the incision on the stone in women is far from the site of the stone, so you need an deep incision.
There is danger in this; if it is necessary, you should employ a skilled female doctor, which are rarely found. If you cannot find one, then seek a chaste and gentle male doctor, or a midwife skilled in women's matters, or a woman who can give some guidance in this craft.
So have her do everything you instruct, beginning with the examination for the stone. She should first determine if the woman is a virgin by inserting a finger into her rectum and feeling for the stone. If she finds it, she can press on it with her finger.
Then instruct her to make the incision over it. If the woman is not a virgin, instruct the midwife to insert a finger into the patient's vagina and search for the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and squeezing it firmly.
If she finds it, she should push it out of the bladder opening towards the bottom as far as she can go, until she reaches the root of the thigh. Then she should make an incision over the middle of the vagina at the root of the thigh, on either side, depending on where she feels the stone is located.
Her finger should remain on the stone, pressing it as she makes the incision, which should be small at first. Then she can insert an instrument into this small incision and if she feels the stone, she can make the incision larger according to how much she believes the stone will pass through it. You should know that there are many types of stones.
There are small and large ones, smooth and rough, long and round, some with branches. Learn their types so that you can identify what you need. If blood overflows, sprinkle powdered alum on the site and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your task.
Until the stone is discharged, and make sure you prepare yourself with the tools mentioned in extracting stones for men to help you in your work, if you are overwhelmed by bleeding and know that the pulse of blood is from an artery that has been cut, then put gold-beater's skin on the site.
And tighten it with bandages tightly and leave it, and do not repeat it, and leave the stone and do not remove it, for perhaps the patient would perish, then treat the wound, and when the sharpness of the blood subsides after a few days and the site becomes putrid, then return to your work until the stone is discharged.
Chapter 62.
On incision for hydrocele.
Hydrocele is the accumulation of moisture in the white peritoneum which lies under the skin surrounding the testis and called the scrotum, and it may be in a membrane specially prepared by nature in a direction from the testis.
Until one thinks that it is another testis, and it is between the scrotal skin and the white peritoneum which we mentioned before, and that only happens rarely, and this hydrocele is caused by weakness in the ovaries, and it may be caused by a blow to the ovaries.
This moisture can have many colors, either it is yellow, or blood red, or black-like, or white and clear, the latter being the most common, and the signs by which it is recognized are:
Where there is a accumulation of water, if it is in the white peritoneum which we mentioned before, then the tumor will be slightly round and long like an egg shape, and the testis will not be visible because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
If the moisture is in a membrane specially prepared by nature, then the tumor will be round on one side of the testis.
For this reason, a person may mistake it for another testis, and if the moisture is between the scrotal skin and the white peritoneum, then it can be felt by touch, and in order to know the color of the moisture, use the square probe whose picture has already been shown, and whatever comes out after the probe has been used, you can judge what is inside.
If we come to the treatment with iron, it is appropriate that you order the patient to bleed if he can do so and you see his body full; then let him lie on his back on something slightly raised and put beneath him many rags; then sit you on his left.
And you order a servant to sit on the patient's right, holding his penis to one side of the scrotum and towards the lower abdomen; then you take a wide blade and slit the skin of the scrotum from the middle lengthwise down to near the pubic area.
And you make the incision in line with the line that divides the scrotum into two halves, until you reach the white peritoneum that contains it; then you strip it off, being careful not to cut it, and your stripping is to be from the side that adheres to the testicle more, and you strip as much as you can.
Then you widely open the peritoneum filled with water, and drain all the water; then you separate the lips of the incision with forceps and extend the peritoneum upward, not touching the scrotal sac that contains it, and cut the peritoneum as much as possible, either as a whole or in pieces.
Especially its thin side; for if you do not cut it thoroughly, you cannot be sure that the water will not return. And if the testicle protrudes outside of its skin while you are working, when you have finished cutting the peritoneum, then pull it back in and then sew up the edges of the scrotal skin.
Then treat it as you would any other wound until it heals. But if you have hit the testicle because of another disease, then you should tie off the vessels in the cord to prevent bleeding; then cut the testicle from the cord and remove the testicle, then treat it as we have mentioned.
If the collected water is in both sides, then know that it is hydrocele on both sides; so split the other side as you did the first, and if it suits you to have the operation in one go, then do so, then wipe away the blood.
And you insert in the incisions a sponge that has been soaked in oil or rose water and outside is another sponge that has been soaked in syrup and oil, and you spread it over the testicles and abdomen, and on top of it you place a folded cloth, which is the bandage. And you tie it at the top with the six-sided belt in this way:.
Then you take two pieces of cloth and sew them, stuff them with fluffed wool on this example, and the ends that are tied are made from cotton or damp wool, and they are gathered by tightening in the belt of the underwear, and one end is taken to the buttocks to the back.
The second is taken to the groin, and the two remaining ends are on the thighs at the bottom and the two remaining ends on the groins, and all the tightening is gathered in the belt of the underwear. This scrotal support can also be made by cauterization instead of incision with iron.
That is, you take a thin scrotal spatula and slit the skin of the testis as we have described while it is heated until the white peritoneum containing water is exposed, then take another spatula in this shape:.
It resembles the Greek eye, then you cover that peritoneum with it while it is hot until all moisture is expelled, then you expand the peritoneum with forceps and strip off the membrane containing it and cut it as much as possible until you remove all of it and preserve the testis so that the fire does not touch it.
Know that this work is safer and further from bloodletting, and better than incision, if you are obstructed during the incision or cauterization by a hot tumor or bleeding or something else, then you should treat whatever obstructs you in that way by the treatment that suits it as previously mentioned.
If the patient is cowardly and does not have the patience for this work because of its severity, then he should use compression as I am describing it. If you are convinced by the signs we have presented earlier that he is healthy,.
Since the hydrocele is watery, the patient should sit on a high chair, and then incise the tumor at its base with a broad knife, making the incision along the length of the body, and making it wide enough so that all the water can flow out. Then place some cotton on the site and tie it.
Let the patient sit so that any remaining water can drip out, then treat the wound until it heals. If the flow of water does not stop when you make the incision, this is because the white membrane obstructing at the mouth of the wound prevents the water from flowing out.
At that point, you should insert into the wound a goose feather or the instrument used to extract water from pomegranates, the image of which was given earlier, or increase the size of the incision slightly.
Know that the water may return and accumulate after six months, or thereabouts. If it accumulates, then treat it as before, and the patient should take care of himself during these days.
Chapter 63.
On incising a fleshy hydrocele and treating it.
Know that incising this type of hydrocele is a risky procedure that can lead to death in most cases, so we advise against it and recommend prevention instead. I will describe the procedure and the types of tumors.
I say that many tumors can occur in the parts that are composed of the female organs, and this is due to various causes, either from hot waste flowing into the female organs, or from a blow. The color of the tumor is the same as that of the body, and it does not contain water.وأقسامه أربعة أدرة وورم ودماميل وبثرة.
There are four types: hydrocele, tumor, skin tag, and blister. The tumor is hard, and sometimes it is calcified, with a dark color and no sensation. It can be caused by complicated arteries and their swelling, as mentioned earlier, or by the swelling of veins. When it is caused by the swelling of arteries, it is recognizable by the dispersement of the tumor.
If you press it with your fingers, it should not bulge at all, and the one that is due to the swelling of the veins, nothing will go away when pressed with fingers, this type may be possible to split on it and other meats.
You cut the skin of the testis, then extend the testicle up and pull it out of the white peritoneum and free the spermatic cord from the vessels and tie the vessels and cut the spermatic cord after freeing it from all sides of the testicle , if the testicle has been attached to those growing meats.
You should remove the testicle and cut it, and if the adhesion is between something of the peritoneum or between the vessels, you should free all that adhesion and cut it in a round cut.
If the growth of meat is in the place of adhesion which is from behind, you should cut it all and remove the testicle as we said. When your work is finished, gouge the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with all other treatments until it heals.
Chapter LVI
In the treatment of hydrocele that is with a hernia.
Dalia is a twisted tumor resembling a bunch of grapes with relaxation of the two ovaries and difficulty for the patient to move, exercise and walk. In the treatment of this disease, which is close to what has already been mentioned.
But we should mention the work in it as did the former, I say that you should make the patient sit on a high chair, then push the spermatic cords down, then hold the skin of the testis with your fingers with the vessels which are close to the penis.فإن رأيت شيئاً يتحرك مع الأوعية فينبغى أن تمسكه وتحفظ عليه حتّى تفرغ منه، ثمّ تضغط على الخصيتين وتكبت عليهما بأصابعك حتّى تضعف قوتهما، فإن فرّت بيضة من بين أصابعك فامسكها، وإن فرّت من تحت أصابع يديك التى تضغط بها على الجلد فاتبعها بيدك الاُخرى وامسكها،.
A servant other than yourself should hold it tightly and stretch it out firmly, then you make an oblique incision with a sharp, wide blade, alongside the vessels until they are exposed, then you strip them from all sides as I mentioned to you in the stripping of the arteries in the armpits, then you insert into it a needle with a doubled thread.
You tie it at the beginning of where the vein appeared, and you also tie it at the end, then you make an incision in the middle, straight along the body, and you expel any accumulated dark, corrupted fluids.
Then you treat the wound as you would any other wound that requires a period of time to drop the vessels that supply one of the ovaries, and there is no harm in that. If the vein appears for all the vessels, then you should remove one of the ovaries with the vessels so that the ovary does not lack nutrition. from before cutting the vessels so that it wilts and is not useful.
Chapter LVI.
On treating hydrocele.
The occurrence of this hydrocele is from a hernia that occurs in the peritoneum that extends over the abdomen towards the groin from the navel, and the intestine protrudes from that hernia into one of the ovaries.وإذا حدثت فى الجانبين معا كان سببها أنّ الفتقين المذكورين يعرضان للجهتين جميعا فعند ذلك يجب قطع الأوعية التى تغذّيها الأنثيان معا لئلّا تتلف البيضتان، فإن
And if it occurs in both sides, the cause is that the aforementioned hernias occur on both sides, so the vessels that supply both ovaries must be cut so that the eggs are not damaged. This hernia can either be from a tear in the peritoneum or from its extension, and these types occur for many reasons: either a blow, a jump, a shout, or lifting a heavy object, etc. Its sign is that if it is from an extension of the peritoneum, it occurs little by little over a long period of time.وإذا كان من شقّ الصفاق حدث فجأة، وعلامته أن يعرض للشخص صعوبة فى أداء بوله ويجد ألمًا شديدا فى موضع الفتق ثمّ يب
It does not come on suddenly, and the tumor is flat to a depth before the peritoneum compresses the intestines, and its sign if it is from the perforation of the peritoneum that it occurs from its first great pain in a blow and the tumor is different visible under the skin nearby.
This is due to the intestines coming out of the peritoneum, and sometimes the mesentery comes out with them, so this diarrhea is called intestinal and mesenteric, and it may be with gas, and sometimes feces flow in the intestines and get stuck there, causing the death of the patient.
Because it causes severe pain and rumbling, especially if compressed, the treatment of various types of this disease is dangerous with iron, so you should be careful to avoid falling into it. The prescription for this is to order the patient to push the intestines back inside his abdomen with his hand if possible.
Then let the patient lie on his back between your hands and lift his legs, then stretch the skin that follows the groin upwards and cut through the scrotum completely along its length, then insert pins into the lips of the incision as needed to open it with them.
The incision should be as big as possible for the testicle to come out, then peel off the peritoneal folds under the scrotum skin until the solid white peritoneum is exposed on each side, then insert your index finger next to the testicle.
Between the white peritoneum under the scrotum skin and the second peritoneum, and release the adhesion behind the testicle with that, then bend the scrotum skin inward with your right hand, and while doing this, stretch the white peritoneum upward with your left hand and lift the testicle with the peritoneum toward the incision.
And you order the assistant to lift the testicle upward and release the adhesion completely behind it, and inspect with your finger in case there is something of the twisted intestine in the solid white peritoneum, if you find anything, push it back into the abdomen downward.ثمّ تمطى الى فوق الصفاق الذى تحت جلدة الخصى والجلدة معا حتّى يخرج الصفاق من الشقّ كله، ثمّ تخرجه من الشقّ وتسحب جلدة الخصى مع الصفاق من الشقّ، فاذا خرجت كلّها فأدخل أصبعك السبابة فى الشقّ وحركه الى ناحية القلب.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made from ten threads and insert it at the end of the peritoneum under the skin of the testicle nearest to the incision. Then cut the ends of the looped thread so that there are four threads. Then make them into a sort of staple and tie the peritoneum which we said was under the skin of the testicle tightly from two sides. Then also tie the ends of the threads tightly so that nothing of the vessels that supply it can reach it. So that no hot tumor occurs, and it also becomes a second ligature outside the first ligature, less than two fingers away from it. After these ligatures, leave of the peritoneum under the skin of the testicle as much as a finger's width.
So that no hot tumor occurs, and it also becomes a second ligature outside the first ligature, less than two fingers away from it. After these ligatures, leave of the peritoneum under the skin of the testicle as much as a finger's width. And cut the rest all around in a circle and remove it with the testicle, then make an incision at the bottom of the skin of the testicle as described above so that blood and semen flow out as described above, then use wool soaked in oil and place it in the wound and use the ligature described above.
And the white peritoneum which we said may be cauterized after it is cut, as a precaution against bleeding, for that often occurs. Leave the ligature until it falls off by itself. If it is slow to fall off, use hot water and apply pressure on it until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with other treatments for wounds until it heals..
Chapter 66.
In the hydrocele of phlegmonous origin This hydrocele of phlegmonous origin is one which I have not seen anyone dare to treat with iron, and the ancients mentioned that it should be treated as described for the hydrocele which occurs with varicocele, namely, that after making an incision the vessels below are tied gently.
Then make an incision in the middle and treat the tumor with what opens it until the vessels drop out, and treat the wound as mentioned until it heals..
Chapter LXVII.
In the hernia which is in the groin.
Hernia may occur in the groin, as we have said; and when this happens, the part is tender, but nothing of the intestine descends into the scrotum, or if it does descend, it is very little, and can be reduced at any time.
But if it is left for a long time, the aperture in the peritoneum increases until the intestine and the omentum descend into the scrotum; and this happens through the distension of the peritoneum which is in the groin, as we have said.وإذا احتاج إلى رتق ذلك فعل كما فعل فى غيره من الفتق. And if it needs to be stitched, it is done as in other hernias.For the peritoneum stretches and relaxes, and the part swells and becomes tender; and its treatment is by cauterization, as I have already described.وإن احتاج إلى قطع الموضع قطع من غير أن يرتدّ الصفاق، وقطع ما يمنع انحد
And if it is necessary to cut out the part, it is cut without returning the peritoneum, and you cut what prevents the descent of the intestines; and it may be treated by ironing in this way: that is, you make the patient lie on his back between your hands, and then you make a longitudinal incision in the swollen hernia about three fingers' breadth wide, and you separate the aponeuroses under the skin.ثمّ ترفع الجلد عن الصفاق برفق حتّى يظهر لك المعاء فتقط ما يمنع انحداده إلى موضعه وتسوى ما
Then you gently lift the skin from the peritoneum until the intestines are exposed, and you cut away what prevents their descent into their proper place, and smooth out the peritoneum.When the white peritoneum which lies beneath is exposed, you take a hot iron and place it on the part of the peritoneum where the incision was made, and press it down to the depth of the abdomen; then you stitch the two edges of the peritoneum which were cut by the iron together.وإن احتاج إلى قطع موضعين أو ثلاثة لرفع المعاء عن موضعه فعل وتقطع المواضع الناتية بالحديد على قدر ما يحتاج إليه وي
And if it is necessary to cut two or three places to raise the intestines from their place, it is done; and the places which are cut by the iron are treated as much as is needed, and the peritoneum is not cut at all, nor the testis, nor anything else, as I have informed you in the treatment of hydrocele.Then you let go of the end of the iron, and do not cut the peritoneum at all, nor the testis, nor anything else, as I have already informed you in
Then I cleansed the wound and bandaged it until it healed; for then the peritoneum contracts and the hernia does not enlarge.
The use of cautery is best in this case, as it is the safest method.
CHAPTER LXVI.
ON THE RELAXATION OF THE SKIN OF THE TESTICLE.
The skin of the testicle often becomes relaxed in some people, while the flesh inside remains firm, and this makes for an unattractive appearance. Therefore, if one wishes to treat this condition, one should first put the patient to sleep on his back.
Then cut away all the relaxed skin from the thick skin, and then bring the two lips together; if you prefer, first stitch up the loose skin with three or four stitches, making sure the stitches are secure, and then cut between the stitches.وينبغى أن يخيط بين اللحمة والجلد بثلاث غرز أو أربع ويستوثق من الخياطة، فإنّه لا ينقض شيئا إن شاء الله.
He should then treat it as he would any other wound until it heals, and the stitches will fall out of their own accord, if God wills it.وإذا انقطع الجلد المسترخى من اللحم أعاده الى مكانه وجبر الكسر بماء الذه
CHAPTER LXIX.ON THE RELIEF OF RECTAL PROLAPSES.قد
ON CASTRATION.وإذا أردت أن تعرف هل
If you wish to know whether castration is forbidden in our religion, then let me tell you that it is.فقد روى أبو هريرة
For I have narrated it in my book for two reasons: the first is that the physician may need to know about it if he is questioned on the subject, and the second is that we often need to castrate some animals for our own advantage.وأما كيفية الإخصاء فقد تقدمت فى باب جراحات الأنثيين.
The methods of castration are twofold: either by compression or by incision and cutting. When performed by compression, the animal is made to sit in hot water until its testicles relax, soften, and hang down.ثمّ نأتى بحجر صلب أو معدنيّ نحيف ومدبّر ونضعه على الموضع الذى بين ساقيه من أسفل الخصيتين فنشقهما به، فإنّه لا يشعر بالوجع وإنّما يغشى عليه ساعة، ويحسن أن يكون الحجر مبلّلاً بالماء لئلّا ينقطع الجلد.
Then knead it with your hand until it dissolves and is not evident to the touch. As for castration by incision and cutting, you should hold the animal and squeeze the skin of its testicles with your left hand, then tie the ligatures and make an incision over each testicle.
When the testicles emerge, cut them off after stripping them bare and do not leave anything on them except for the thin membrane that is over the vessels. This type of castration is better than the one done by kneading.
Because sometimes kneading leaves something of the testicles behind, and the animal still feels the desire for sexual intercourse; then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
On the treatment of hermaphrodites.
A hermaphrodite can be of two types: One where the opening appears in the perineum or in the skin of the scrotum between the testicles, looking like a woman's vagina with hair around it; sometimes urine flows from this type.
As for women, there is only one type, and it appears above the vagina on the pubis like a small penis, protruding outward, resembling testicles; its treatment is as follows:
The two types of men and the one type of women should have the excess flesh removed so that no trace remains; then treat it like any other wound until it heals. As for the second type of men from whom urine flows out, there is nothing to be done and it will not heal.
Chapter Seventy One.
On cutting the clitoris and the flesh protruding from women's vaginas.
The clitoris may increase in size beyond the norm, becoming unsightly and enlarged; in some women it may even spread out like men's genitals and lead to sexual intercourse.ويكون البظر فى الموضع الذى يحلّ فيه الخصى من الرجل، فإذا كان ذاك المكان قائما استعلى واسترخى وكان كالخصى فى الشكل واللون ولم يثن الى داخل، وربّما كان معه لحم زائد على قدر الب
One should hold the clitoris with one's hand or with a hook and cut it, but not too deeply, especially at its root, so that bleeding does not occur.
Then treat it with wound remedies until it heals. As for the growing flesh, it is flesh that grows in the mouth of the womb until it fills it.
And sometimes it comes out from the outside, resembling a tail. And therefore some early scholars called it "the tail disease." So one should cut it like one would cut the clitoris, and treat it until it heals,.
Chapter Seventy-Two.
On the treatment of hymen imperforate.
Hymen imperforate is when a woman's vagina is not pierced, or the opening is small; it can be either congenital or acquired. Acquired imperforate hymen is caused by an extra growth of flesh.
It can be a thin or dense membrane, located deep in the womb, on its sides, or at the top or bottom. It prevents intercourse and conception, and may also prevent menstruation. The examination by a midwife will reveal this.فإن رأت فى أعلا الرحم لحماً نابتاً منع الطمث ومنع من الجماع.
If she sees an extra growth of flesh at the top of the womb, it prevents menstruation and intercourse. If the obstruction is visible and close by, she should examine it with her fingers or a probe. If the obstruction is a thin membrane close to the labia, proceed to rupture it by pressing both thumbs against the labia.
The woman should lie on her back with her legs spread wide apart and press the labia firmly to rupture the thin membrane. Then she should apply wool soaked in oil to the area, and have intercourse every day so that the wound does not heal over again.وإن كان السدّ من لحم نابت أو صفاق كثيف وكان فى جوانب الرحم أو فى أعلاه او أسفله فنكشيه بأصابعه حتّى يلين وينفتح.
If the peritoneum is thick and dense, you should split it with a broad scalpel resembling an aspen leaf. If the obstruction is of protruded flesh, fasten it with pins and cut it, and have with you remedies that stop bleeding without burning, such as karkade, shian, and frankincense mixed with egg white.
You should then use a wide lead pipe so that the wound does not heal quickly, hold it for several days and use a thread of dry flax, then treat with other healing remedies until it heals. There may be other growths in the uterus, you should cut them off in this manner.
unless it is a cancerous tumor. A cancerous tumor that occurs in the uterus must not be touched with iron at all.
Chapter Seventy-Three.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, warts and red blisters that occur in women's private parts.
As for hemorrhoids, it is the swelling of the mouths of veins so that much blood flows from them constantly. When hemorrhoids advance, they become warts. I have mentioned in the division their types and signs, and we will mention here.
I say that hemorrhoids and warts, if they are deep in the uterus and not perceptible to touch, there is no treatment for them with iron. But if they are in the mouth of the uterus, they are perceptible to touch, then they can be treated.
So the woman should enter a cold house, then extend the warts with forceps or a rough cloth and cut them off at their roots, then sprinkle upon them when blood flows from one of the blood vessels that stops bleeding without burning.
Such as karkade, shian, frankincense and the like, then lift her legs against the wall for an hour, then immerse them in cold water. If bleeding continues, have her sit in a soup made of sumac, pomegranate peel, tannin and the like, then take barley flour, knead it with honey and vinegar.
And bind it to her back, if the bleeding stops, otherwise keep the cold compresses and bandages on the breasts without condition. Then take a piece of wool, dip it in the juice of sorrel or the juice of lamb's tongue or the juice of buckthorn twigs with tannin drink and apply it to the affected area.
When the swelling subsides, treat the affected area with ointment until it heals. As for the red blister, it looks like the heads of thistles, rough in appearance, so you should cut what appears of it according to what I mentioned in warts, alike and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 74.
On the treatment of abdominal abscesses that occur in the uterus.
Many types of tumors may occur in the uterus, such as cancer, indurated tumors, ulcers, abscesses, necrotic lesions, fistulas, hemorrhoids, fissures, warts, and hot tumors. I have mentioned all these diseases, their types, and their signs in the taxonomy.
So we should mention in this article the hot tumor that occurs in the uterus, if it is one of the tumors that accumulate for a long time, how its pus should be treated with iron. You should look into it, and if the pain of the tumor is acute at the beginning, with palpitations, inflammation, and fever,
and if you feel it is red, do not hurry to treat it and treat it with what aids in ripening until these symptoms subside. At that time, the woman should sit on a chair with two seats and lean back.
She should bring her legs together at the bottom of her abdomen, with her thighs spread apart, and put her arms under her knees and tie them with a suitable bandage.ويمكن أن تجعل امرأة أخرى معها ذراعيها تحت ذراعيها المربوطتين ويكون جسمها منحنيا الى الأمام ويكون رأسها ورقبتها الى الخلف وتكون يداها تحت كعب قدم
Another woman can put her arms under the bound arms, with her body bent forward and her head and neck tilted back, with her hands under her heels. The midwife should sit on the right side and use the instrument to open the uterus, the image of which will be shown later. When using this instrument, you should estimate the depth of the uterus with a probe so that the part inserted into the instrument is not deeper than the depth of the uterus.
Then the instrument, if it is deeper than the wound, should be placed on the edge of the neck of the uterus to prevent all the instrument from entering the depth of the uterus, and the wire that is passed through the instrument from above should become a spiral.
While you hold the instrument, the assistant turns the spiral until the neck of the uterus is dilated. If a fistula can be felt by hand and it is soft and delicate, it should be slit at its head with a wide scalpel. When all the pus has been discharged
you should place a soft tampon soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringent in the wound, and the tampon should be outside the slit in the neck of the uterus. A clean piece of wool soaked in water that has boiled with alder wood should also be placed on the uterus and the pubic area.
Then, two days later, she should be treated with an ointment suitable for this purpose until she heals.
The uterus and wound may also be washed by injecting water and honey, then water that has boiled with the root of sweet flag or long pepper. Then return to the ointment. If the fistula is deep inside the uterus
you should abstain from treating it with iron, but rather treat it as mentioned in the classification.
Chapter LXXV.
On teaching midwives how to treat live fetuses if they exit in an abnormal shape.
The midwife should first know the signs of normal childbirth. These include the woman feeling the urge to push downward and craving fresh air, while her vaginal bleeding is not too heavy.واذا وجدت قابلة ولادة تجلس فى مكان لا تنفتح فيه الفرج فهذا من علامات الولادة الطبيعيّة وربّما كانت الولادة فى الحوض أو فى الظهر بين الوركين.
If a midwife sees a woman sitting in a position where her vagina is not open, this is a sign of normal childbirth, and the birth may be in the pelvis or in the back between the hips. The quick exit of the fetus indicates that it is being born normally, with its head first and the placenta attached to its umbilical cord, or hanging from its umbilical stump. If you see these signs, you should squeeze her abdomen to speed up the delivery of the fetus.ويسرع خروجه اذا كان مستوفيا فى بطن امّه او مستطيلا او مستديرا كالتفاحة أو على شكل القمر.
If it descends upon his head, the placenta will descend with him and be cleansed of those discharge in a good way. And if this birth is not like this, it is unnatural and blamed because the fetus may come out on its legs and bring out its hands before its head and legs.
And one of his hands or one of his feet, or he brings out his head and hand, or he comes out folded up, and sometimes he turns upside down and so on with the rest of the reprehensible forms. The midwife should therefore be巧 cunning and gentle with all these things and beware of negligence and error.
I will explain each of its forms and how the trick works so that you can find out about it, when the fetus comes out on top of its head naturally, and it was difficult for the woman to do so and she found it difficult to give birth, and I saw her strength weakened. I sat her on a chair and ordered women to restrain her.
And compress her womb with fennel cooked in oil and other moist oils, then the midwife inserts a small scalpel between her fingers and splits the placenta or splits it with her fingernail until she flows out of it. The moisture is then squeezed into her belly until the fetus comes down.
If it doesn't come out, the woman should be given a suppository made of fennel and castor oil, then after the suppositories she should be ordered to strain and sneeze with the kاندis while holding her mouth and nose closed, and the fetus will come out immediately. If the fetus's hands come out first, they should be gently pushed back in.
If they don't enter, put the woman on a platform and raise her legs up, then shake the platform on the ground while the woman holds on so she doesn't fall when shaking, if the hands do not enter and the fetus dies, cut them off and pull out the rest of the fetus.وإن أتت يداه ورجلا الجنين وخرجت رجله من قبل رأسه فلتثنّى يديه إلى خلفه وتهزّه ليقع على الأرض، وإن خرج ساقه اوحدا ويديه فوقهما ويشبك أصابعه ثمّ يقف على قدميه فينبغى للقابلة أن تقبض ب
Or tie his hands with a cloth and pull them gently, for it will come out, the way a fetus comes out on its feet. If the fetus comes out on its feet, you should push them up, then turn the fetus little by little until it is straightened out, then take one of its legs and stretch it little by little.
If they come out to the thighs, tell her to strain and sneeze with a cannula, for it will come out. If it does not come out with what we have described, then turn the fetus little by little until it is in its natural shape, and it will come out smoothly at that time. If it refuses all of what we have described.
Take the saliva of a cat, and the saliva of a cow's milk, and castoreum, and gum dissolved in water, and pound them all together in a mortar, then apply it to the woman's vagina and lower abdomen, then sit her in lukewarm water until it reaches the clitoris.
If you see that her lower abdomen has softened, then make a douche for her from myrrh and salt, which she can tolerate. If the douche remains for an hour, then sit her on a chair, then sneeze her and block her mouth and nose, and gently squeeze her lower abdomen, and the fetus will come out at that moment, coming out of the fetus on its knees and hands.
If it comes out in this way, then be careful about putting your hands in a little while, then the woman lies on her back and hangs her legs down while lying on a bed and crosses her arms, then gently squeeze her abdomen a little. Then take out the pillows from under her legs so that they are upright at the bottom. If the fetus does not come out, take both of her legs and move them vigorously, then squeeze above the clitoris a little, until the fetus rises to the top, then the midwife should put her hand in and straighten out the fetus a little.
The woman is told to strain until the fetus comes out, coming out obliquely with one of his hands extended; if he cannot return his hand, then make the woman stand and walk, and if she cannot walk, then lie down on it.
Then shake her legs violently and then use the poultice that has been described from the mouthfuls; if labor pains take hold, then seat her on a chair and then work to return the hand and adjust the fetus to its normal shape, and have the woman sneeze and tell her to strain until it comes out.
The fetus comes out face down with his hands extended, and his face towards his mother's back; the midwife should hold the fetus's hand and then gently turn it little by little and adjust it gently; once it is adjusted, apply to the umbilical cord what has been described from the ointments and mouthfuls.
Then tell her to move a little bit, and if she does that, then seat her on the chair and tell her to lean to the right side, and then tell her to strain and sneeze with the speculum; this will cause the fetus to come out upright on its side.
If it comes down to the mouth of the womb in this manner with the placenta, then split the placenta with your nail until it drains of moisture; if it becomes attached to the face and neck of the fetus, then cut it off from the umbilical cord so that he does not choke and die; then push the fetus back inside until you adjust him as he should be."وإذا نزل وحده فأقم المرأة على قدميها واجعلها تمشى حتّى ينفصل المشيمة، وإن كان لا بدّ من القطع فقطعه من السرّة.
And if it comes down on its own, then make the woman stand up and walk until the placenta separates; if cutting is necessary, then cut it off from the umbilical cord." "Tell the woman to strain several times; this will cause them to come out easily, as in the case of twins or multiple fetuses." "Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four, and they may live, except that this is rare; as for five, it is something outside of nature and they do not live at all.
They are surrounded by a single placenta, and they are separated by a serous membrane which acts as a partition between them, attached to the umbilical cord of each. They may be delivered normally and easily, just like a single fetus, or they may be delivered in a difficult and abnormal manner, as we have described.
If the delivery of one or more of them is difficult, and they exhibit the shapes we have described as abnormal, then treat them as we have instructed. The midwife should be gentle and act with care and caution, employing whatever maneuvers she can to ensure the safety of both mother and child.
I have heard of cases where multiple fetuses were conceived in the womb and delivered, including instances of one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten. I have personally heard of a woman who delivered seven fetuses, and another who delivered fifteen.
It is important for midwives to be aware of such occurrences, as they may encounter similar cases one day, and they should know how to handle them appropriately.
Chapter 76:
On the removal of a stillborn fetus.
If you have treated the stillborn fetus as described in the section on treatment, but it has not been expelled and you are forced to intervene manually, then you should examine the woman's condition. If she is generally healthy and there are no concerning symptoms that suggest a risk of injury or complications, she should lie down on her back on a bed.
Her head should be tilted slightly downward, and her legs elevated, with an assistant supporting her on both sides or securing her to the bed so that her body does not strain when the fetus is extended.
Then, moisten the opening of the uterus with moist oils, along with saliva from the plant "al-khatmi," fenugreek, and flaxseed. The midwife should then moisturize her hands with these oils and saliva, and gently insert them into the uterus to locate the appropriate positions for inserting the instruments,
See if the fetus is ready to come out head first, then insert the forceps into his eyes or the back of his head or his mouth or palate or under his beard or Adam's apple or near the ribs or below the collarbones.
If the fetus is coming out feet first, then insert the forceps in the groin and the middle ribs. The operator should hold the forceps in his right hand, make its curve between the fingers of his left hand, and gently insert his hand and embed a forceps in some of the places we have mentioned.
Until it reaches something hollow, then insert another forceps or a third one opposite to it, so that the pull is even and does not lean to one side. Then extend it in a straight line, but also move it to every direction.
To facilitate its exit, as is done with a tooth when it is extracted. In the meantime, the extension should be released. If it is blocked on one side, the midwife should grease some fingers with oil and insert them from that side to rotate the obstructed part. Once part of the fetus has come out, the forceps should be transferred to other places.
She should slightly raise it, doing this until the fetus comes out completely. If a hand emerges before anything else and cannot be pushed back due to compression, a cloth should be wound around it and then pulled until it comes out completely. Then cut it off.وينبغى للقابلة أن تكون ممارسة للصناعة عارفة بالأمور التى يصحّ بها الخروج والأمور التى لا يصحّ بها الخروج حتّى تعرف من ذلك موضع التدبير وموضع اليأس، فاذا وجدت الأحوال كلّها صحيحة وكان الخروج شديدا وعرفت أنّه لا يفوتها شيئا فلا تنب
The midwife should be experienced in the craft, knowing the matters through which delivery is permissible and those through which it is not, so that she knows from this the appropriate course of action and when to give up. If she finds all the conditions correct and delivery intense, and knows that nothing will be missed, she should not delay, whether in the hand joint or the elbow, and likewise she should do with the other hand and the legs. If the fetus's head is large and it encounters pressure while exiting, or if there is a collection of water in its head, she should insert a scalpel between the fingers.
And it is split with it the head, and the water comes out, or split it with the instrument called the chisel, which is the image of its image with the images of other instruments in the door after this.
So you should do if the fetus is great head by nature, should split the skull or hammer it with the chisel as we said, then pull out the bones with hooks. If the head comes out and is pressed at the collarbone, he should be split until the moisture in the chest flows out.
Because the chest is then closed. If the chest does not close and can not be delivered, cut it as much as you can. If the lower abdomen is swollen or has a hernia, it should be opened until moisture flows from it.
If the fetus is on its feet, then pulling it and straightening it to the mouth of the uterus is easy. If it is pressed in the abdomen or chest, you should pull it with a cloth that you have wrapped your hand around it and split the abdomen or chest until what is inside flows out.
If all the members are removed and the head is retained, the midwife should insert her left hand, if the mouth of the uterus is open, insert your hand in the neck of the uterus and look for the head and pull it with your fingers to the mouth of the uterus, then insert a hook or two hooks and pull it by them.
If the mouth of the uterus is closed due to a hot swelling that has occurred, you should not be harsh on it, but at that time you should use the pouring of moist fatty things and use poultices and sit in waters that soften and moisten.
However, if the fetus is on its side and it is possible to straighten it, you should use what we mentioned in treating a live fetus. If this is not possible, then cut it into pieces and remove it. You should not leave any part of the placenta inside at all. When you have finished your treatment, use the treatment that we mentioned for hot tumors that occur in the uterus.
If a wound is bleeding, let it be bathed in an astringent solution and the usual remedies employed. I have seen a woman who was pregnant, lost her fetus, and then became pregnant again.
Then the other fetus also died, and after a long time she developed a tumor in her abdomen which swelled until it opened and began to discharge pus. She was brought to me for treatment, and I treated her for a long time but the wound would not heal, so I applied some strong ointments to draw out the pus.
Then a bone came out of the wound, and after a few days another one did too. I was amazed by this, as the abdomen is not a place for bones, so I thought they were the bones of the dead fetus. So, I inspected the wound and removed many bones from the head of the fetus.
I continued to do this until I removed many bones from her, and the woman was in good health apart from that. She lived like that for a while, with a little pus still discharging from the wound. I have come here to narrate this extraordinary case.
Because it contains knowledge and help for what the doctor tries to do with his hands in treatment.
Chapter 77.
In this chapter are pictures of the instruments needed to remove a fetus.
A picture of a probe used to dilate the mouth of the uterus:.\n\n  .
This binding, which makes books smooth, has two probes at the ends of the wooden pieces. However, this probe should be finer than the binding and made either from ebony or boxwood. The width of each piece of wood should be the thickness of two fingers.And when you wish to dilate the uterus you must place this instrument in the vagina so that it lies across the uterus and then turn the handles, one towards the other, until the uterus is dilated sufficiently for you to insert your fingers inside and feel for the fetus.
The length of the two pieces is about a span, and in the middle of the wooden pieces are two rods of the same type of wood that have been secured to them. The length of these rods is about half a span or a little more, and their width is about two fingers or a little more. These rods.
They are the two which enter into the mouth of the womb to open it when you turn the tweezers, a figure of another instrument for that purpose softer and lighter.
It is made of ebony or box-wood in the form of a crook, except that at its end there are two prongs, as you see, each prong being about a span long and two fingers wide. If you want to open the womb with it
Sit the woman on a bed, her legs hanging down and her thighs spread apart, then insert these two prongs tightly into the mouth of the womb while you hold the end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with tweezers, to the extent that you want to open the womb. until the midwife does what she wants. A figure of another spiral mentioned by the former:
The figure of the cannon that propels the fetus:
The figure of the punch that punches the head of the fetus:
It is like scissors, with teeth at the end as you see. It can be made rectangular like tweezers as you see, with teeth like a saw, to cut and crush:
Also a figure of a cannon:
Figure of a fishing rod:
This fishing rod is slightly thick so as not to break when pulling the fetus, a figure of a fishing rod with two prongs:
Figure of two wide knives to cut the fetus:
All these tools, the more types you have and the more they are prepared by the manufacturer, the faster they work and the higher they are regarded by the people for your ability. So do not despise any tool that you have ready, as you will surely need it.
Chapter LXXVIII.
On removing the placenta.
If the placenta is retained after childbirth, you should instruct the midwife to hold herself and sneeze with snuff and grip your hand on her mouth and nostrils. If it comes out this way, or take a pinch.
Make a hole in the lid, and place in it herbs that open the mouth of the uterus, such as fennel, silphium, caraway, camomile, thyme, sage, and centaury; then pour water over them and put the pot on the fire. Place one end of a silver tube in the hole of the lid, and the other end in the mouth of the uterus.
She should hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the uterus, then she should sneeze as we have said; the placenta will come out quickly. If, after this treatment, it has not come out, the midwife should dip her left hand in deer tallow or honey, and insert it into the uterus.
She should then search for the placenta with her fingers, and when she feels it, she should grip it gently and pull it out little by little. If it is attached deeply in the uterus, she should insert her hand as described above until she finds the placenta; then she should pull it out little by little, being careful not to injure the uterus.
She should transfer it gently to the sides, right and left, then increase the amount of pulling; it will respond and release its hold, if the mouth of the uterus is closed, we have described the treatment by sneezing, the pot, and herbs.
If it does not come out with all the treatments we have described, do not use force on her; instead, tie what has come out to her thigh and then apply the quadruple ointment, which will rot after a few days.
It dissolves and comes out; however, when it rots, it emits a bad smell to the stomach and head, which disturbs the patient, so she should use suitable incense.وإذا تعفّنت المشيمة واشتدّت رائحتها ورأيت العليلة تتضرّر بها فاعمل لها شرابا مرطبا، وذلك بأن تأخذ فستقا وقصب سكر وزعفرانا وسمسم وبلّوري وموصطا وعسل نحل وحلبة مرويّة.
Therefore, some of the early physicians tried smoke from pitch and dried figs, a device by which a woman is smoked when she has stopped menstruating and there is a retained placenta, and so on.
It is made of lead resembling a funnel, or from copper, the thin end of which is inserted into the vagina and the wide end is placed on the fire, with incense on the embers, held until that incense has gone, and replaced by more.
Chapter Seventy-Nine.
On the treatment of an unperforated anus.
Many boys are born with their anus unopened, the peritoneum closing it with a thin membrane. The midwife should pierce that membrane with her finger; if not, she should do so with a sharp trocar, taking care not to touch the muscle.
She should then apply a wool pad soaked in wine and oil, and treat it with ointments until it heals. If she fears that it might close up again, she should insert a lead tube into the opening for several days, removing it when the child needs to defecate.
The anus may also become blocked by a scar or swelling; the wound should be split and treated as mentioned above with ointments and trocars,.
Chapter Eighty.
On the treatment of fissures which occur at the bottom.
Fissures that occur at the bottom are a complex thickening that occurs near the anus from the outside, or in the space, on one side or another; there may be one or more fissures.
If this thickening becomes chronic, it opens and discharges a white watery fluid or thin pus; these fissures may be perforated into the rectum, and into the intestine, or they may not be. The perforated ones may be recognized by what comes out of them when the patient uses the toilet.
Worms may also come out of them; if they are in the space, they may be perforated into the bladder and into the urethra, or they may be perforated into the hip joint and the coccyx. The perforated fissures into the anus can also be distinguished from those that are not perforated.
Insert your index finger into the anus and insert a thin probe of copper or iron into the fistula. If there is no deviation in the fistula, then insert into it a thin lead probe or a horsehair.
Until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger, and if you don't feel it at all and nothing comes out of the opening like feces, wind, or worms as we said, then know that it is not perforated, so hurry to treat it.
And if the fistula is perforated to the bladder or to the urethra, its evidence is that urine comes out of it and it prevents the place from healing with medications. And if it is perforated to the hip joint or to the tailbone, its sign is that the probe reaches there.
If there is no deviation towards the bone and there is pain in that direction, and pus comes out of it constantly, and treatment does not work on it and it does not heal with ointment, then all these perforated fistulas will never heal.
And its treatment is futile toil for those ignorant doctors who deal with it. However, the non-perforated and non-chronic fistula can be healed with iron as I am describing and as I have experienced, which is that you make the patient lie on his back.
And you raise his legs up and his thighs slanted towards his abdomen, then insert the copper or lead probe if there is a deviation in the fistula so that you know where the probe ends. And if the patient feels it towards the anus, then you should insert your index finger into the anus.
And if you feel in your finger that the probe has passed through itself exposed without feeling between your finger and it with a serosa or meat, then know for sure that it is perforated, so don't exhaust yourself over it as there will be no healing as we said.
They have said that it heals in some people, although rarely, and from the treatment that is expected to be beneficial, is to heat a thin iron according to the size of the fistula as mentioned earlier, and insert it into the fistula while hot until it reaches near the anus, then remove it twice or thrice.
until you know that all the excess flesh, which is congealed and resembles a bird's feather tube, has been burnt, then treat it with a damp twisted cloth in tallow until the burnt flesh comes out, then treat it with healing ointments. If it heals.
If not, it will never heal without other treatment; and if you insert the probe and it does not penetrate to your finger in the anus, and there is a thick membrane of flesh or peritoneum between them, and you see the fistula towards the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula. And as you pass the probe through the fistula, let it pass until the end of the probe reaches where the probe ends and is released, then clean those congealed flesh that resembles a bird's feather tube and leave nothing of it.
Then treat it with healing ointments until it heals; if blood impedes you and prevents you from cutting off that flesh, the best thing to do is to burn it with fire or a sharp drug, because burning with fire has two good properties: burning those excess flesh.
And stopping the blood flow and evaporating moisture, then treat it with a damp twisted cloth in tallow or powdered sulfur in oil until the area suppurates and those burnt flesh comes out in the pus, then at that time treat the wound with healing ointments that promote tough meat growth.
These are the drugs that have constriction and drying properties; when it is closed, it has healed, and do not worry about recurrence. If the fistula has reached deep into the anus and is distant from the surface of the body, insert your finger in the anus and feel around with it.
If you feel the probe and between you and it is a membrane of peritoneum or meat, and it is close to نفوذ, then work on it is only through greed and hope. This is because you use one of three faces in it, either that you cauterize it as we said.
Or you split it until you reach its depth to be able to insert the thread and treat it closely, do not extend the split so as not to cut the muscle surrounding the anus, causing the patient to pass waste involuntarily. Then treat it as we mentioned. Sometimes it heals as we said.
Or you penetrate that membrane and pierce it after splitting it close to the anus as we said, either with a probe or with another sharp-tipped tool. Then clean all the clotted meats in the split completely as far as you can reach thoroughly.
Then close the wound all over with the split and the upper mouth so that it heals and the fistula remains open inside the anus, which is lighter for the patient. The fistula may perforate in this manner.
This is when you insert the probe into the fistula and it is on one side of the anus towards the surface of the body with the skin and circumference of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated tip like a shoemaker's awl in this way:..
Then insert a twisted thread of five threads or so in it, then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its depth. If it is perforated at the edge of the anus from the inside near.
Pull out the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the anus and pulling out the end of the thread, then gather both ends together and tighten them and leave it for a day or two. As the thread cuts through the meat between the threads, tighten it tightly until those meats fall off, then treat the wound until it heals and recovers.
If the fistula's opening is not clear, then open it as best you can, unless it is very deep; in that case, do not do so because of the muscle, lest you cut it. Then treat it as we have mentioned until it heals.
The spinal needle with which you split fistulas should have a very sharp tip and the other end not so sharp, so that it does not cut what is not needed, as you will see.
Chapter 81.
On piercing the hemorrhoids from which blood flows, and stopping it, and the treatment of fissures.
There are two kinds of hemorrhoids; some are inside the anus, like red blisters or like grapes, and they can be small or large, and blood flows from them constantly.
There may be one or many of them, and they may be outside the anus, at its edges; but those which are outside the anus are generally drier, with a little yellow water or a little blood flowing from them constantly, and they are the color of the skin.
The treatment for those that are inside the anus is to order the patient to defecate and strain until the anus protrudes, so that you can see the hemorrhoids; then grasp them with forceps or hold them with your fingernail, and cut them off at their base. If they do not hold fast in the forceps because of their moistness and flaccidity,
then trim them with a rough cloth or a piece of a hard sponge, or squeeze them with your fingers and then cut them; then after cutting, sprinkle some sharp powder on them so that they act like cautery, or treat them as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery.
Then treat it with other remedies until it heals; if the anus does not protrude easily, then inject the patient with a syringe containing a little pepper-water to wash out what is in the anus and encourage it to protrude quickly when the patient strains. As for the hemorrhoids that protrude from outside the anus, their treatment is simple and straightforward.
You can take it with your fingernail or suspend it on a hook and cut it, then treat it as we have mentioned until it heals. And for those who dislike cutting with iron, you should use its piercing in this way: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle.
Then pull the wart up, and pierce it with the needle at its base from the other side, and wrap the two ends of the thread underneath the needle, which is lying across, and tighten the wart tightly, then tie the thread and remove the needle. Do this to all the warts, but leave one that you do not pierce.
Let the blood flow from it, then place a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate on the anus and order the patient to stay still, then leave him until they fall off. Once they have fallen off, treat them with ointments and other remedies until they heal.
And as for the treatment of fissures, they often occur due to dryness and constipation, and if they persist and no remedy works, you should strip them with a scalpel or your fingernail until they become moist and the top layer that prevents them from healing is removed.
Then treat it until it heals as it should. If it does not heal, repeat the scraping more aggressively than before until it bleeds and the top layer is stripped off, then treat it and it will heal.
Chapter 82
The treatment of ingrown and non-ingrown toenails, dry warts, and moles.
A toenail is a round nodule that resembles the head of a nail, and it can occur anywhere in the body, but especially on the soles of the feet and toes. It often causes pain when walking.
So you should cut around the toenail and grip it with tweezers or a hook, then pull it out from its root. Then treat it, and if you wish, brand it as mentioned earlier in its chapter. As for dry warts, each one is a small, rough, knob-like growth that is rounded on top and raised above the surface of the skin.
And it often appears in the hands of boys, and its treatment is to stretch the wart and cut or pierce it with a silk thread or hair until it falls off. Or, if you like, you can burn it with fire or a sharp medicine as mentioned earlier.
And the warts, both inverted and non-inverted, can be removed with the instrument that I mentioned in the treatment of moles. As for moles, they are also small, thick bumps on the surface of the body, very deep, and when they are exposed to cold, one feels a stinging sensation similar to that of ants.
And it can occur all over the body, but most often on the hands. Its treatment is to take a tube made from a strong goose or eagle feather and place this tube on the mole so that the circle of the tube surrounds the mole from all sides. Then turn your hand with the tube so as to split what is around the mole.
And you make it go deep into the flesh, and the mole comes out from its root. If you like, you can do this with a copper or iron tube in the same way:..
The upper part of the tube, which is towards the handle, should be solid and twisted to facilitate its grip and twisting with the fingers. If you like, you can burn the mole as mentioned in the section on burning warts,.
Chapter Eighty-Three
On the forms of instruments used for enemas to treat disorders of the rectum, diarrhoea and colic.
The syringe can be made of silver, porcelain, brass or copper alloy. These instruments should be made small or large according to their users..وأما الفصوص التى تسدّ بها فوهة المحقن فمنها ما هو من عقيق احمر او ازرق او اسود او اخضر او من زجاج ابيض او اخضر، ويجعلونها على شكل النصل ليسهل ادخالها فى الاذي And as for the plugs that close the nozzle of the syringe, some are made of red, blue, black or green agate, or white or green glass. They shape them like a blade so that it can be easily inserted into the anus. Those used to treat small children or those with narrow or painful rectums should be very delicate. The figure of a large syringe:..
Its upper funnel, where the syringe is attached, is wide in this manner; it has a partition where the syringe is attached as you see, and its lower end, which enters the rectum, is very smooth and solid, with two holes on one side and one hole on the other.
The capacity of the aperture should be as thick as the wand or thicker by a little, and the syringe in which you put the medications is made from the bladder of an animal or from lamb's membrane, it is made like a small spatula whose diameter is about a palm.
And it is pierced with many holes as it goes around, and the distance between each hole should be the thickness of a finger, then you insert into those holes a strong thread made from spun yarn twisted from ten strands or so, and you gather the syringe like a spatula. When the medication is put in, it is tightly tied at the head of the syringe between the two stones, then you inject with it. This is an illustration of the circular syringe and aperture: .
The procedure for enema with it is to fill the membrane or bladder with the medication while it is warm to the level that the patient can tolerate, be careful not to make it too hot or too cold, then the patient lies on his back and raises his legs up.
And a sheet or a towel is placed under him, then the tip of the syringe is lubricated with oil or egg white or lard or the like, then it is gently inserted into the rectum, then the attendant of the syringe takes his hands together and squeezes the syringe with force until everything in the syringe is discharged into the intestine.
Then the syringe is removed and the patient raises his legs against the wall, if the medication prompts him to exit, let him hold on as much as he can, and if he sleeps with it all night, it will be more beneficial. If enema is used in cases of diarrhea and the attendant wants it to come out quickly, then the enema should be repeated until the patient recovers.
If there are painful hemorrhoids or tumors in the buttocks, let the syringe be very smooth and smooth of the kind with which boys are injected. This is a picture of a smooth syringe with its skin stretched over it:
CHAPTER LXXXIV.
OF THE TREATMENT OF WOUNDS.
I have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and I shall mention here the treatment of them by hand and by remedies to perfection. I say that wounds differ according to the thing with which the wound is made, and according to the place where the wound falls.
The things with which wounds are made are numerous, such as a stone blow, or cutting of a sword or knife, or piercing with a spear, or stake, or arrow, and many other things.وأما المواضع التى تقع عليها الجراحات فهي: الجسد ووجهه واليد والرجل والبطن والظهر والمقعدة والفرج والسرة واللسان والشفة والأنف والعين والأذن والحلق والشفّة واللّثة والقضيب
And as for the wounds according to the places of the body, they are like a wound that occurs on the head or neck, chest or abdomen, liver and other similar organs.وإنّ لكلّ موضع جراحة ما يخصّه من علاجها وسنذكر إن شاء اللّه تعالى فى هذا الفصل أجناسًا منها ونذكر فى كلّ فصل موضعًا
And I will describe the treatment of some wounds to be used as a measure and rule for other wounds. And I shall begin with simple head wounds, especially because compound wounds will be mentioned in the first chapter of the third book of this work.فأقول جراحات الرأس البسيطة هى التى تحدث من صكّة او طعنة او شقّ او حرق او جرح يبتر منه أجزاء من الدماغ ومن مواضع أخرى من الرأس وأمّا المركّبة فهى التى تجمع بين بسيط ومركب ومنها ما يقع على العين والأنف والأذن والحلق والفم
I say that simple head wounds are those which occur from a blow, or piercing, or splitting, or burning, or cutting off parts of the brain and other parts of the head. But compound wounds are those which combine simple and compound, and among them are those which occur on the eye, nose, ear, throat, and mouth.Now, if a simple wound occurs in the head, and there is no fracture of bone, you should look at it. If it is from a stone blow or the like, and it only splits the skin and the wound is large, and you fear that the patient will develop a hot tumor, then proceed and phlebotomize the vertex on the spot.وإن كان الجرح من طعنة رمح او سهم او عود Do not delay it, and let him bleed as much as his strength allows, especially if there is no obstacle to bleeding, especially if the blood flowing from the wound is slight, and let the bleeding be on the opposite side of the wounded part.
Warn the patient against fullness, drinks and heavy foods. If there is an obstacle to bleeding, let him reduce his food intake and avoid meat and alcoholic beverages. Apply a poultice of cotton soaked in rose oil alone or with the drink that causes contraction on the wound if it becomes inflamed.
If you are not afraid of the hot tumor, apply the blood of the wound if it is soft and has not been changed by the air. But if the air has changed it, apply some ointments.
Until the pus is discharged, then treat it until it heals. If the wound is large and was caused by a sword or something similar, and its lips have not come together with bandages, bring them together with sutures as I am describing in the suturing of abdominal wounds.
If the skin has exposed bone and is hanging, and its attachment is only in a small ligament, then cut it off and treat the wound with remedies that promote hard and solid flesh in place of the skin. And order the patient to nourish himself with foods that provide strength, such as meat dishes and porridge.
If mold occurs on the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, cut off the mold and treat it. If there is an artery or vein bleeding from this wound and the bleeding does not stop with remedies, then locate the artery.
If you find it, do not cut it off with a scalpel and tie it up; if necessary, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. If these wounds are small and flat, it is easy to deal with them by simply sprinkling this powder on them while they are still bleeding.
Before it is changed by the air, the recipe for powder is: take one part of frankincense, two parts of myrrh, and three parts of slaked lime or unslacked lime; grind them all up, sift them, and pack the wound with it, binding it tightly so that it sticks well.
Let it coagulate with the blood, then bind it above with bandages and leave it, not removing it as long as there is no swelling; for the medicine will not detach from it until the wound heals. The lime alone can do this if you do not have frankincense or myrrh.
This action can also be achieved by using a poultice in many large wounds if it is applied skillfully, and the wounds are soft with their blood as long as the air has not changed them; but if they have been changed somewhat by the air, especially in summer time, then it will be more effective.
There is no need to apply this powder; instead, treat it as we have mentioned by placing some ointment on it, or a poultice made of barley flour cooked in water and honey until the pus flows, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
However, if the wound also involves a fracture of the bone, and it is slight, then pull it together with a splint; I have mentioned the treatment of head fractures in the neck region, which will be discussed later in neck surgery. If the wound is on the neck, there is no difference in its treatment compared to a wound on the head if it is simple.
However, if it has cut a nerve or an artery in the neck; if it is a nerve, there is no remedy except to avoid treating it with anything that causes strong contraction, such as alunite and vitriol, because they harm the nerve and cause spasms.
Do not put anything cold on the wound at all, because the nature of the nerve is cold, and its connection to the brain, which is the most honorable organ; so whatever remedy you use should be mild, such as washed alum mixed with fresh water several times, anointed with olive oil or rose oil and vitriol.
If you also wash with fresh water and all other metallic stones in this way, and with moist poultices; but if the wound is large, use sutures or bring its lips together with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
If a wound is sunken and has a pocket at the bottom in which pus has accumulated, probe it in its lowest point; if an artery has been severed in the wound and its blood is flowing out, ligate or cauterize it, or do whatever is necessary.
If the wound has cut some of the vocal cords, or all of them, and the windpipe is intact, bring together the edges of the skin by suturing around the windpipe; do not touch the windpipe itself but smooth it out and return it to its normal shape, then tie it firmly and leave it for several days.
Then treat it with poultices that cause contraction and drying until it heals; if the wound has affected the bone, probe it: if there are any bone splinters in it, remove them all, or as many as possible; if you cannot remove them all, leave them and let the wound fester and heal, so that it will be easy to extract them.
If the wound is fresh, spread on it the powder which has been described; if there is suppuration in the wound and it becomes a fistula, treat it as will be described in its proper place, in the chapter on surgery of the chest and the space between the shoulders.
If it is a stab wound from a spear or a dagger, and you see that it has sunk, then examine it: if you find that air escapes through it when the patient breathes, know that it is a lethal wound; but if there is no sinking and the wound is fresh with blood, do not put the powder in it at first, nor tie it tightly, so that blood does not become trapped inside it.
So that it does not go back to the heart and kill the patient; but put some attracting poultice in it, and change it twice a day; if you do not have any poultice, put some old cotton wool in the wound to absorb the moisture that comes out of it, and let the patient sleep on his wound.وإيّاك أن تضع المرهم فى الجرح او تفعل شيئا من هذا حتّى تعاين الدم قد توقّف وذهب الغور، فإن كان للجرح غور وأثر وآلة الطعن موجودة فيه ولم يتوقّف الدم بل جفوها على الجرح بالرباط والمراهم التى تجب حتى يتعافى
If pus has accumulated in the wound, and three days or more have passed since the injury with no sign of convulsions, severe palpitations, or difficulty breathing, and if the patient's other vital signs are stable, then you may assume that the wound is healing. Treat it by removing any dead tissue and applying the appropriate remedies until it heals completely.
If the wound fails to heal and pus continues to discharge, you should treat it as a fistula, using the appropriate methods described earlier. If the wound is in the chest or back, treat it by suturing as previously described.
If the wound is large, or a small one on the face, and it has affected the bone, causing bone fragments, then examine the wound and remove those fragments if they are dislodged. If they are not dislodged, leave them in place for now.
Allow the wound to become infected, as this will make it easier to remove the bone fragments. The treatment for other types of wounds in different parts of the body follows the same principles that have already been described.
Chapter 85.
On abdominal surgery, the protrusion of intestines, and their suturing.
Wounds to the abdomen can be large, small, or medium-sized. With larger wounds, one or more intestines may prolapse, making their reinsertion and suturing more challenging and difficult.
Even smaller wounds can be challenging due to other factors. If the intestines are not promptly reinserted, they may become swollen and thickened, making their reinsertion difficult. Therefore, medium-sized wounds are generally considered the most manageable, as they present less of a challenge in reinserting the intestines compared to larger or smaller wounds.
Know that there are four types of sutures used for abdominal wounds: two general sutures that can be used for any type of wound, and two specialized sutures specifically for abdominal wounds.
And I will describe them to you one by one, explaining and making clear, so I say that if the wound is small and something of the intestines has come out and it is difficult to put back, this is due to one of two reasons: either because of the smallness of the opening as we have said, or because the intestines have been affected by a swelling caused by cold air.
If it is like this, you should warm it by dipping a sponge or wet cloth in lukewarm water, or water in which savory, thyme and mallow have been cooked, and use it to apply the ointment to the intestines until the swelling subsides.
This can also be achieved with astringent drinks, which are better than plain water in reducing inflammation. When you see that the swelling has subsided, moisten the intestines with water in which camomile or fennel has been cooked, as this will make it easier for them to enter more smoothly.وإن عسر ردّه فلتسحب المعاء الى فوق وتتتبّع موضع النفخ فتقبض عليه وتجذبه برفق حتّى ينحلّ النفخ ويدخل، فان لم يكن ذلك فليقطّع النفاخ عند الموضع الذى فيه النفخ ويقطّع الجرح أيضاً ويشدّ الخ
If it is still difficult to put back, pull the intestines up and locate the swollen area, then gently grip and pull it until the swelling subsides and it can be inserted. If this does not work, cut into the swollen area with an instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids; the first treatment, if possible, is better than making an incision, but one must resort to incision when there is no other option or the situation becomes desperate. This is the shape of the instrument:.
One side of the instrument is curved and limited, while the other side is not limited, and the thin end should not be as thin as a scalpel but slightly concave. It should resemble a small spoon, as you can see. If the wound has expanded and the intestines have entered, they should be returned to their natural shape.وإن كان الجرح واسعاً جداً فليفرغ من الدم والقيح ويجبر بما ذكرناه ويشدّ بخرقة على موضع الخرق ويضمد عليه، وإن عاوده النفخ فليردّ الى فوق وليتتبّع موضع النفخ وليقبض عليه وليشدّ وليجذب برفق حتّى ينحلّ النفخ ويرجع المعاء الى موضعه
And its own place if you can do that, it is better. And if the hole was wide and in the lower abdomen should be the patient on his back and make his legs higher than his head, and if it was in the upper abdomen makes his head and chest higher than its bottom.
And so if the hole in one of the two sides of the abdomen, you should always make your intention and purpose the side that is higher than surgery on the other side, and so it should be used in great surgeries and intermediate surgeries.
And in minor surgeries, you put it according to what you can do, then attend between your hands a gentle servant who holds the hole with his hands and gathers his lips, then reveals something after something for the person in charge of sewing.
And this is the general description of a single stitch, which is that you take a needle or several needles according to the width of the wound, then leave from the edge of the hole as thick as the thumb, and pierce one needle without inserting it in the thread into the edges of the skin. With the edges of the peritoneum under the skin from inside until it passes through that side, and gathered the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum and became four holes, then tighten a doubled thread around the needle several times on both sides until the edges of the wound come together firmly.
Then leave as thick as the finger and pierce another needle, then intertwine it with the thread as you did with the first needle, so keep doing that with all the needles you need until you finish sewing all the wound, and let the needles be medium between thickness and thinness.وينبغى أن يفرز الخيط فى الجرح قبل أن يخاط حتّى يتبيّن موضع الخيط ويكون أسهل عليه، فإذا فرغ من ذلك خياطة واحدة جعل بينه وبين الإبرة الأخرى قدر قذّة إصبع.
It is preferable that the thread is inserted into the wound before it is sewn so that the position of the thread becomes clear and it is easier for him to do so, and when he finishes sewing one stitch, he should be between him and the next needle as much as a finger tip. because very thin needles cut the flesh quickly and thick ones are difficult to enter the skin, so they should be medium in thickness and thinness, and the needle should not be pierced in the edge of the skin too close, yes.
That the flesh may not part asunder rapidly and the wound open before it has healed, nor should you draw the sutures too tight lest the wound be prevented from healing. Then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient when he sleeps, and make him a bandage of linen cloth on all sides to keep the ends of the needles in place.
And you should leave it until you know that the wound has healed. This type of stitching with needles is most suitable for minor wounds, as they may only require one or two or a few needles.
As for the method of stitching in the second type of common wounds, it is to gather together the four edges - that is, the edges of the skin and the peritoneum - in one go with a needle with a moderate thread that is thin and sturdy. Then, when you have passed the needle through all four edges, you bring the needle back out from the side from which you started.
So that the thread is tied at the top of the wound, making the stitching like the stitching of sacks with which goods are bound. There should be a distance between each stitch of the thickness of the little finger; this stitching is known to all people.
With this stitching, a man who had been stabbed in the abdomen was treated; the wound was over an inch long, and two inches of small intestine had protruded from it. The wound was in the middle of the abdomen.
I put it back inside after keeping his intestines outside the wound for 24 hours, and the wound healed in about 15 days. I treated him until he recovered and lived for many more years, carrying out all his activities as usual, while doctors had judged that he would not survive.
What is more surprising is that I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where there were no medicines at all, so I just put old cotton on the wound twice a day and took care to wash it with honey water until it healed.
One of the two types of special sutures, I mention it in the text of Galen's words, is to start sewing from the skin and insert the needle from the outside to the inside, so that when the needle pierces the skin and the muscle going straight along the length of the abdomen.
Leaving the edge of the peritoneum on the side where you inserted the needle, and piercing the other edge of the peritoneum from the inside out on the other edge of the abdomen, so that when you pierce it, pierce it again in this same edge of the abdomen from the outside in.
Let the edge of the peritoneum on this side, and pierce the other edge of the peritoneum from inside to outside, and as you pierce it, pierce the edge of the abdomen opposite it, so that you can pierce all of it,.
Then start again from the same side and sew along the edge of the peritoneum on the other side, and bring the needle out of the skin next to it, then bring it back into that skin and sew along the edge of the peritoneum on the other side with this edge of the abdomen.
And bring it out of the skin on his side, and do that again and again until you sew up the entire surgery in this way, and the total description of this stitch is that it sews like a fur stitch for furs.وأما النوع الآخر من هذه الخياطة فإنّى أذكره أيضا على نصّ كلام جالينوس وهو أن تبتدئ بالخياطة من الجلد وتدخل الإبرة من خارج الى داخل وترفع الإبرة من الجلد الى أعلى البدن مع العضلة الذاهبة فى الاستقامة.
And the other type of stitch, I also mention it in the text of Galen's words, is to start sewing from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside and lift the needle from the skin up to the top of the body with the muscle going straight along the length.by sewing the peritoneum once from one side with the edge of the skin, and leaving it once from the other side until you are finished., And the second type of special stitch which Galen also mentioned is his words in full text.
The way to do this is to stitch it in the same way as some of the healers stitch it, by bringing each part together with its counterpart, which is naturally similar to it, so that they join the edge of the peritoneum to its other edge, and the edge of the abdominal wall to its other edge. This is done as I have described to you.
You should insert the needle into the edge of the abdominal wall nearest to you from the outside and pass it through to the inside, leaving both edges of the peritoneum, then bring the needle back and pass it from the outside to the inside in both edges of the peritoneum, and then bring it back again.
You pass it from the inside to the outside in the other edge of the abdominal wall on the opposite side, and this type of stitching is better than the common easy stitching which is the stitching that was mentioned earlier. This is the exact words of Galen, and some people have said that the stomach can be stitched with two needles. You put one thread through both of them, and you start by inserting the needle from your side and pass it to the other side, and you insert the other needle from the opposite side and pass it to your side, just like the stitching of shoes.
Know that a hole in the middle of the abdomen is more difficult to stitch than other parts of the abdomen, and as for treating the wound, its treatment is the same as for other wounds; that is, if you caught the wound fresh with its blood before it was changed by the air, and returned the intestines and stitched it up tightly and firmly, then apply the healing ointment.
If the wound has been changed by the air, then apply some ointments that you have until it suppurates and the stitches drop out and the peritoneum and abdominal wall heal, then treat it as you would treat any other wound until it heals.
If you do not have any medication available, then apply old cotton when it starts to suppurate, and change it twice a day as I have informed you until it heals; in most cases, you will not need any other treatment if the wounds are simple. If you fear that the wound may affect the vital organs in pain,
It is advisable to soak a soft sponge in lukewarm oil or rose fat and place it around the areas between the armpit and the groin. If he feels pain or discomfort in his intestines, this often indicates the presence of putrefaction; in such a case, administer a mild black astringent drink.
If the putrefaction has reached the intestines and created a piercing wound in the abdomen, know that if it is from the thick intestines it will heal more easily, but if it is from the thin intestines it will be more difficult to heal.
As for the small intestine, also known as the jejunum, it does not heal from surgery at all due to the abundance of blood vessels and their size, as well as its thinness, proximity to the nerve tissue, and delicate nature. However, if the peritonitis is discovered early and treated promptly, it can be managed successfully.
If some time has passed and the peritonitis has turned green or black, you should tie it off with a suture above the affected area to prevent bleeding. This is because there are blood vessels and arteries within the peritoneum, and you should cut below that ligature.
You should leave the ends of the suture dangling below the incision, exiting the abdomen, to facilitate its removal when the peritonitis falls off and the wound heals. That is the description of a wound that occurs in the intestines. Now, if a perforation occurs in the intestines and it is small,
it may heal in some people, as I have seen a man who was stabbed in the abdomen with a spear, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach. The wound chronicled and became a fistula through which feces and gas were discharged. Despite my treatment, I did not expect it to heal.فقلت فى نفسى أن هذا لا بدّ من أن يبرأ، فاتفق رأيى ورأى أطبائه على أن نطعم فى جوفه لحم الحبارى ونحسن عنده الأكل والشراب حتى تمكننا أن نجلس عليه لعلّة القسط. I continued to treat him gently until the wound healed and the tissue joined together. When I saw that the wound had healed, I was afraid that something unpleasant might happen inside the patient. But nothing bad happened to him at all and he remained in the best condition. He was able to eat, drink, have intercourse, take a bath and exercise as usual. Some experienced people say that if there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be stitched in this way.
The method is to take large ants with big heads, then bring the lips of the wound together and place an ant on them with its mouth open. When it bites and tightens its mouth, its head is cut off and it sticks and does not come loose. Then another ant is placed next to the first one.
You should keep doing this with as many ants as the size of the wound, then return it and stitch the wound. Those heads will remain attached in the intestine until the intestine becomes granulated and heals, and the patient will not suffer any harm. The intestine can also be stitched with thin thread.
The thread that comes out of the animal's intestine, which is attached to it after passing through a needle, is that a piece of this thread should be taken from the intestine and tied to a thin, twisted flaxen thread at its end, then that thread is passed through the needle. The intestine is then stitched with it and returned to the abdomen. This type of stitching with ants and intestines is done in the hope that it will work.
However, if the hole is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy or healing for it.
Chapter LXVI.
In the treatment of catarrh and fistula.
Know that any wound or swelling that becomes chronic, lasting a long time and becoming a ulcer without healing, and always discharging pus without stopping, is generally called a fistula in any part of the body. We call it catarrh.
It is in reality a complex, compact, white, solid tumor without pain. It has a hollow like that of a bird's feather.
Therefore, some people call it a feather. It can be moist and constantly discharge pus; sometimes the moisture stops, and then returns again, varying in quantity, thickness, and thinness.
I have already mentioned in the classification of wounds, that any ulcer that does not heal and does not grow new flesh, is due to one of nine causes: either because there is a lack of blood in the body, or because the blood is poor quality, or because there is hard tissue inside the ulcer, on its lips, which prevents the growth of good flesh. Or because the ulcer is filled with dirt and wound exudate, or because the ulcer itself is gangrenous and the material it discharges is of poor quality, or because the treatment used is unsuitable for it, or due to some local corruption in the town, or due to a specific condition in that town.
Or because the ulcer is filled with dirt and wound exudate, or because the ulcer itself is gangrenous and the material it discharges is of poor quality, or because the treatment used is unsuitable for it, or due to some local corruption in the town, or due to a specific condition in that town. As I have explained in the classification of diseases, that it is difficult for diseases to mature and tumors to heal in the town of Zaragoza due to its natural characteristics; or because there is one bone, or several bones, involved. I have detailed all these causes, their signs, and their treatments using medications in the classification.
Here, I should explain to you the treatment of pilonidal sinus and nasal polyps resulting from manual intervention. Know that pilonidal sinuses may occur in all parts of the body; some end in large veins or arteries, or in a nerve.
Or they may end in the peritoneum, intestine, bladder, a rib, or one of the vertebrae of the spine, or a complex joint such as the hand or foot, or near an important organ.
If the pilonidal sinus does not reach these structures that I have mentioned, and you hope to cure it, then you should not interfere with it, for interference will only bring difficulty and ignorance.
Take a probe made of copper or iron to find out if the fistula passes straight through; examine it with this, and if there is a bend in the fistula, examine it with a thin lead probe, because lead is柔软.
When it enters, it bends towards the bend; if the fistula has many mouths that you cannot find with the probe, inject one of its mouths with fluid, because the moisture you inject will flow towards the other mouths and leak out.
Then thoroughly investigate in any way you can to find out if there is bone or nerve, whether the bottom of the fistula is far or near, or whether it is one fistula with many mouths; pay attention to all this as much as you can by examining the patient's pain when you press your hand on the area.
This is how you should proceed to treat the patient, after determining all this with certainty: look and if it is
apparent and close to a healthy spot, far from a joint or nerve, artery or vein, or any of the places I have mentioned to you; then cut into the fistula as described earlier and remove any congestion, rotten flesh, or excess flesh.
and treat any flesh or warts that grow at its mouth, and treat it until it heals; if the fistula is deep and straight, you should cut it deeply as far as possible and then clean out all the rotten flesh.وإن كان على تعريج وخشيت إن شققته أن يصعب عليك إصلاحه فينبغى أن تشقّه فى الظاهر قدر ما بلغت إليه يدك وتصلحه ثمّ تترك الباقى إلى وقت آخر، فإن أمكنك إصلاحه دفعة واحدة فعالج ذلك دفعة.
If it is bent and you are afraid that if you cut it, it will be difficult to repair, you should cut it superficially as far as your hand can reach and then repair it, leaving the rest for another time; if you can repair it all at once, then treat it all at once.Then use the frayed threads soaked in potent medicines and push them into the bottom of the fistula as far as you can reach with the iron tool; do this several times until the potent medicine eats away all the corruption at the bottom of the fistula.وإذا فرغت من ذلك فاستعمل الحجامة على الموضع الذى شققته به واعصره عصرا شديدا حتى يخرج الدم والقيح
Then force it with ointments that promote the growth of healthy flesh until it heals. If it does not heal, cut it open as previously described. If the cause of the fistula is bone and this is evident to you, explore and split it as I have informed you, unless something prevents you from doing so.
If you discover a vein, tendon or major organ as we have said, and the bone is exposed and there is some decay and darkness, remove it so that its decay is eliminated, then treat it with what heals it until it recovers. If it does not recover and the pus continues to flow as before.
Know that you have not reached the complete removal of decay, then expose all of it again and maximize your efforts to strip and cleanse it, then force it, if it recovers, otherwise, know that this decay is in a deep cavity of decay, then expose all of it again.
Maximize your efforts to strip and cleanse it, if the decaying bone is a small bone and you can pull it out with fine forceps suitable for this purpose.
If there are many bones, then maximize your efforts to pull them all out and leave nothing of it behind as much as you can. If something blocks your way and it is not dangerous to cut it, then cut those ligaments and meats if they exist there and free the bones.
If you are not able to pull out the bones in one sitting, then place something on the wound that promotes decay and leave it for a few days until the meats and ligaments around those bones decay, and keep the wound from closing where you made the incision during your operation.
Instead, put on cotton immersed in powdered sulfur with oil or cotton immersed in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments, for when these ligaments decay and the bones soften, it will be easy to pull them out.
If it is a large single bone like the shin or thigh bone and only its face has decayed, then remove it completely with a thorough stripping until that darkness and decay are gone, then force the wound. If a large portion of it has decayed and the decay has reached the marrow of the bone, it must be sawn open.
And cut it all the way to where the rot ends, then treat it until it heals. I will tell you about a man who had gangrene in his leg as an example and help for your treatment. This man was young.
A pain in his leg, about thirty years old, due to movement inside the body until the materials reached the leg and swelled and became a great tumor, and there was no cause from the outside. Then time went on with the mistake of the doctors until the tumor opened.
A lot of materials flowed from it, and he was badly treated until the leg became gangrenous and had many mouths, all flowing pus and bodily fluids. He was treated by a group of doctors for nearly two years, but none of them were experienced in surgery.
Until he came to me, and I saw his leg and the materials flowing from those mouths greatly, and the man's body had become thin and his color yellow. Then I inserted a probe into one of those mouths, and the probe reached the bone. Then I explored all the mouths.
I found that they connected to each other on all sides of the leg, so I probed one of those mouths until I exposed some bone, and I found it rotten, blackened, and decomposed, with holes through which I could see into the brain. I then revealed what was exposed to me.
I accessed the rotten bone, and I thought that there was no more rot in the bone than what I had cut and spread, and that I had completely removed it. Then I made the wound heal for a longer period, but it didn't heal. So I probed the bone again over the first probe.
I found the rot connected to the bone, so I spread what appeared to me from that rot as well, then I tried to heal it, but it didn't heal or close. Then I probed it again and cut the bone into parts, trying to heal it, but to no avail. until I had cut about a foot from the bone.
I removed it with its brain, then healed it with medicine and it quickly healed and recovered. The repetition of this procedure was necessary due to the patient's weakness, his inability to endure, and my fear that he would die because of the bad fainting spells that occurred at all times due to excessive vomiting. He made a complete recovery.
And in the place of the bone, a hard meat grew, and his condition improved in his body, but his strength decreased and he was affected by his condition while walking, and no harm will come to him at all. If there is a broken bone protruding from any part of the body,
It should be spread in this way, that is, you should take a ligament and tie it to the end of the protruding bone, and order someone to pull it upwards, and make another ligament of thicker wool than the first one.
Then you tie it to the meat under the bone and pull its end so that the meat is pulled down, while you expose the meat at the place where you want to spread it, so that the saw does not harm the meat, and you place a piece of wood or a board under the bone from below tightly.
Because if you do that, the saw will not be prevented from cutting the rotten bone. The spread should be a little above the place of corruption so that there is no corruption in the cavity of the bone, which will not appear on its surface by touch, forcing you to spread it again.
If the bone is rotten but not protruding, but rather connected to each other, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then you should expose the meat from all its sides, then place the board from below, then spread it from the first side where the corruption is.
When you finish spreading it, spread it from the other side as well, and let the spread be a little distance from the corruption as we said before. If the corruption is in a joint, cut the rotten joint itself and spread the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the corruption is in the articulation of two joints, there is no remedy but amputation. If the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, its treatment is very difficult; but you should remove the corruption however it appears to you and strip off and cleanse it as best you can.
By any technique that is successful for you, if no tendon or nerve is encountered, and know that the saws and chisels for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, their erection and inclination, thickness and thinness, size and smallness, hardness and porosity. Therefore, you should prepare for each type of work a tool that matches that work.
Know that the work itself can guide you to the type of tool you need, if you have long experience and knowledge in the techniques of this craft, for whoever is skilled in the craft and has seen many types of diseases. may devise for himself similar tools for each disease, and I have illustrated for you at the end of this chapter a variety of tools.
make them examples to be followed and measurements to be used for others, God willing: Image of a saw: .
Image of another saw: .
Image of a small saw: .
Image of a large saw: .
The head of this chisel is shaped like a nailhead and its edge is shaped like the edge of a scalpel. It is suitable for rubbing on joint heads when they are corrupted, or on a large, wide bone. Image of another small chisel: .
Image of a broad chisel: .
Its upper bow and blade are made of iron, and its handle is made of a hard wood with a tapered grip. Image of a chisel with a hollow:  .
Image of another delicate chisel:  .
Figure 13: An instrument for cutting the nail in case it is adherent to the finger.
Figure 14: A small, probe-like instrument.
Figure 15: Another small, sectioned instrument.
Figure 17: An instrument for scraping bone, with a curved end that is useful for many procedures. Figure 18: A probe-like instrument with a curved end that is also suitable for bone scraping.
Figure 19: A triangular-shaped instrument with sharp edges, made from Indian iron. All the previously mentioned chisels and cutters should be made in this way. Figure 20: A probe-like instrument.
Chapter LXXVIII.في تركيبة الادوية المعدنية التى تركب
On the preparation of metallic medicines to be used in cutting off limbs and chipping away at bones.
If the corruption of the limb is due to an external cause or an internal one, and you have treated it with remedies but the treatment was ineffective, and you see the corruption progressing in the limb without anything to stop it,
then you should cut off that limb to where the corruption has reached, so that the patient can be saved from death or a great calamity which is greater than the loss of the limb. The sign that this is what one should do is that the limb turns black, so much so that you would think it had been burnt by fire.وإذا عاينت النتن والفساد قد أكل العضو فاعلم أنّ الداء قد صار إلى العظام، ولا ينتهى الفساد حتّى يقطع العضو، وذلك لا يبقى إلاّ مدّة يسيرة، فاعلاج ذلك بقطع العضو من حيث بلغ الف
If you see the putrefaction and corruption eating away at the limb, then know that the disease has reached the bone; the corruption will not stop until the limb is cut off. This cannot be sustained for more than a short time. The treatment for this is to cut off the limb where the corruption has reached, or if the cause of the corruption was from the sting of some insect such as the sea scorpion, adder, centipede, or similar.وإن كان السبب من لسع الصداع وعروق الدم الفاسدة فى العضو، وكان ذلك الّذى يفسد العضو داءً دافناً، ولم يكن صاحبه يمشى ويتحرك و
If the corruption or sting is at the end of the finger, cut off the finger and do not allow the corruption to spread to the hand. Likewise, if it is in the hand, cut it off from the base of the wrist and do not let the corruption spread until it reaches the elbow.
If it affects the arm, cut off the arm at the elbow joint itself. If the corruption passes and you see it moving towards the shoulder, do not cut off the shoulder at all, for that would result in the patient's death. Instead, employ other treatments to the best of your ability.
You should similarly act with the leg if corruption affects the toe; cut off the toe at one of the phalanges. If it affects the instep, cut off the entire leg. If it rises to the knee, cut off the leg at the knee joint.
If the corruption has reached above the knee, there is no remedy but to leave it and accept the patient's death. The method for cutting off a limb or incising it is as follows: tie a band at the bottom of the area you want to cut off, and another band above that area.
One assistant should stretch the band below while another stretches the upper band above, and you should strip the flesh between the bands with a broad scalpel until all the flesh is exposed, then cut or slice it. You should also place pieces of linen on all sides.
So that the saw does not touch the correct spot and cause excessive pain and a hot swelling for the patient, if bleeding occurs during your work, quickly plug up the wound or apply some blood-stopping powder and then return to your treatment until you are finished.
Then bind up the wounded limb with something suitable and treat it until it heals. I will give you an example of a man who had this exact symptom in his leg. He had blackness accompanied by a burning sensation like fire.
And this corruption was the first thing that happened to his finger, until the man took it all. So the man appeared from himself when he saw the corruption spreading in the limb with great pain and burning, so he cut it off at the joint and healed.
When a long time had passed, that same corruption appeared in his index finger again, so he came to me, and I tried to stop that advantage by applying remedies to his hand after cleaning his body, but the advantage did not stop, and it began to spread to the other finger.
Until the corruption took over his hand, he asked me to cut off his hand, but I refused him in the hope of stopping that advantage and because I was also afraid that he would die when cutting off his hand, as the man's strength was almost gone. When he lost hope in me, he returned to his country.
I heard about him that he cut off his whole hand and healed. I told this story to be a help in similar cases of this disease, and as an example to follow.
Chapter 88.
On the treatment of hidradenitis suppurativa and how to inject it with remedies.
If a tumor occurs in some fleshy organs, and the duration of the tumor lasts long until it becomes chronic, then bursts and all its contents are discharged, leaving the site empty as if it were a container.
The skin on it is like a cloth, and it has not yet reached the stage of corruption that affects bone, nerve or ligament. This is why it deserves to be called a hidradenitis suppurativa, but it is only called a nabs when its duration becomes chronic and the corruption affects one of these organs."والذى يدلّ على أنّه مخبأ لا ناصور أنّه إن قطع ورم مخبأ وجد الموضع سليما وقد فرغ من مادة الورم.
The proof that it is a hidradenitis suppurativa and not a nabs is that when a hidradenitis suppurativa tumor is cut, the site is found intact and free of tumor tissue."It should then be called a nabs or a boil, and its treatment is to cut away all that skin as it rotates, especially if it has thinned out and become like a cloth, and you are sure that it will not adhere to the site due to its corruption.
If you see that the skin has not yet rotted away and there is a thick layer of flesh, then treat it with a syringe. This is done by examining the abscess; if it is large and the pus coming out of it has an unpleasant odor, then inject it with Egyptian medicine.
[The Egyptian medicine is made of vinegar, oil, honey, and alum in equal parts, mixed in a container and cooked over fire until the medication becomes as thick as honey. Then take what you need, dilute it with water and honey, inject it into the abscess, tighten its opening, and leave the medicine in for two hours.]
Afterwards, you remove it by pressing; do this for several days until the abscess is clean and the unpleasant odor goes away. If you don't have the Egyptian medicine available, you can use ash water instead. Take ash from grapevine wood or oak wood and pour water on it.
Strain it and inject it until you are sure that the abscess has been cleaned out; if not, then inject it with a mixture of water and honey in which some ground alum has been mixed.
Or you can inject it with honey and wine mixed together, as honey will clean and wash out the abscess while wine will cause the abscess to stick together, especially if the wine has a bit of astringency to it. Once you have done this several times and are sure that the abscess is no longer infected, then inject it with something that promotes flesh growth.
For example, take some rose oil and dissolve it in wine vinegar or inject some other medication and ointments that we have described in the chapter on ointments. If the opening of the abscess is narrow and cannot accommodate the syringe,
widen it slightly with an iron instrument or insert a cotton swab coated in the Egyptian ointment or siriacon ointment until it is wide enough for the syringe to fit through; if the opening is also wide, sew it up with thread so that only the syringe can fit through without any extra space.
And if the mouth from which pus is flowing is elevated, then cut it in the lowest place so that the pus may flow downward. For when pus accumulates in the depths of a wound, it prevents flesh from growing there.
If it is not possible for you to cut the wound towards its lower part as you want, then erect the limb so that the pus may flow easily from it according to what is possible for you and so that no pus at all remains in it.
As for the adhesive remedies which are placed on the wound from the outside and how they are applied, it is that you take one of the adhesive ointments appropriate to what you want and spread it on a linen cloth; let the cloth be as large as the entire wound can be covered by it. Then you cut an opening in front of the wound with scissors, making it slightly wider than the mouth of the wound. Then you spread one of the soft ointments on another cloth to the size of the opening and place it so that it is a little distance from the mouth of the wound so that the pus may easily flow out. You do not remove the large cloth except after some time.
You remove the one on the mouth of the wound at any time so that you may know what flows from it, whether much or little, ripe or unripe pus.
Also, you should examine the site of the wound itself: does its owner feel pain in it or not? Is there swelling or no swelling? When your treatment has continued thus and you see that the material coming out at the mouth of the wound is small,
then know that the wound has adhered or is close to adhesion. At that time, open it on the next day, or the third day. Whenever you open the wound, change the cloth and renew the ointment. If thin pus flows from the wound after a long period of time, do not despair of its healing.
He will soon recover, because there are people in whom the growth of flesh is slow in healing, and others for whom it is the opposite. If, after many days, unripe pus comes out of the wound, know that the wound has not healed, and if the healing of the wound is delayed.
And if his condition is prolonged, increase the drying medicines, and let them be medicines that are moist in their consistency and dry in their power, such as the palm ointment when it has been increased by an excess of rosin, and one of the most effective treatments is to take the palm ointment.
And it is treated with rose oil, and old moderate wine is sprinkled on it, then you knead it with honey and use it, and if the palm ointment is not available, honey can be used if you cook it until it thickens and use it, or you can take myrrh, alum, and mastic, crush them all, and sprinkle them on honey while it is on the fire. Then spread it on a cloth and tie it to the wound, or cover it with the thickened honey you cooked and sprinkle the medicines on top of it, then put on the cloth and tie it.
And it is also used in this way: long marjoram, iris root, asafeteida, and centaury, used alone or in combination, are crushed, sifted, and sprinkled on the honey that was described and used. If the wound does not heal after a long time with this treatment, know that there is corruption at its depth.
And if it has affected the bones or other hard nerves or ligaments, treat it as you would a fistula, as mentioned earlier..
Chapter 89
In the treatment of warts, ingrown toenails, cutting off excess fingers and splitting fused fingers.
A wart is a lot of flesh that grows under the nail of the thumb or toe, and it can also grow on other fingers. If it is left untreated for a long time, it will become swollen and hot.والداحس من أسماء الناصور وموضعه فى الإبهام أكثر من سائر الأصابع ولذلك سمّى الداحس، ومن الناس من يسمّيه الناصور، وهو لحم ينبت تحت الظفر وينشعب منه شعبتان أو أكثر يصير إلى
Or the nail has rotted so much that it eats into the root of the nail, and perhaps it rots completely, and sometimes the rot reaches the bone to the point that it gives off a foul odor and the tip of the finger becomes swollen, its color becomes blue; if you treat it with what we have mentioned in the section on division and your treatment does not work.
You should cut away all the excess growth from the nail with iron, then cauterize the wound afterwards; cautery is very effective in this case. But if the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy
and the angle of the nail is pushing the flesh inwards and making it sore, you should place a thin spatula under the angle of the nail that is pushing the flesh and gently lift it up and cut away the flesh carefully.
You should apply burning and corrosive medications to the remaining flesh until it is all gone, then treat it with ointments until it heals. But if the rot has affected the bone, you should cut away that bone, for as long as there is rotten bone, it will never heal.
If you see the rot and decay spreading through the finger, cut it at one of the joints as mentioned earlier and treat it until it heals. But if the nail is struck or crushed and experiences severe pain, you should first bleed the patient.
Then split the nail with a sharp blade diagonally from top to bottom, being careful not to split into the flesh under the nail, for you will cause the patient great pain and it will be the cause of excess flesh growth in that spot; then treat the area with something that relieves pain.
As for the extra finger that sometimes grows on people's hands, it may be all flesh, or it may contain some bones, and sometimes a nail as well; sometimes it grows from the base of one of the finger joints.
Or it may be that the growth is in some of the phalanges of the finger, and that some of these phalanges do not move, while others which grow at the joint of the finger can move; then cut off whatever part is purely fleshy with a broad razor.
As for those growths which are at the base of the joint, their treatment is difficult, so avoid cutting them off. But as for those which grow on the finger at one of the phalanges, you should first cut away the flesh around it in a circular manner to the bone, and then saw through the bone with one of those appropriate saws.
Then treat it until it heals. As for the webbing which sometimes occurs between fingers, this is often a congenital condition, or it may result from the healing of an injury such as a cut or burn; in any case, you should split that webbing open.
until the fingers return to their natural state, and then place a bandage or a piece of cloth saturated in rose oil between them, so that they do not adhere quickly; or you may place a thin sheet of lead between them until the wound heals as it should.
Similarly, if webbing occurs between some of the fingers and the palm, split that webbing open according to what is possible and suitable for the shape of the limb.
Chapter 90
On cutting varicose veins.
Varicose veins are thick, twisted vessels full of dark, viscous humours which occur in many parts of the body, but most often in the legs, especially in the legs of soldiers, farmers, and porters. First of all, the body should be cupped several times with black cupping glasses.
Then, the patient should be phlebotomized with a basilic vein; as for treating them with iron, there are two methods: one is to split it and draw out the black blood; the other is to open the vein and draw out all the blood. As for splitting it, this is how it is done: first, the leg is sprinkled with warm water.
Until the thick blood is dissolved, then the patient's leg should be wrapped tightly with a bandage from just above the thigh down to the calf. Then an incision should be made in one, two or three places, and the incision should be wide.
Then you should squeeze out the black blood from the bottom of the leg to the top, and from the top to the bottom, until you have extracted as much as you consider sufficient or as the patient's strength allows. Then you should bandage it and advise him to avoid foods that generate black bile, and then repeat the process of vomiting and phlebotomy.
When the veins are full and this damages the patient, then it should be emptied in this way. Shave the leg of the patient if there is a lot of hair on it, then put him in a hot bath and rub his leg with hot water until it turns red and the sweat comes out, or he exercises vigorously.
If he does not have access to a bath to warm the limb, then you should split the skin over the vein lengthwise, either at the end near the knee or at the bottom near the ankle. Then open the skin with tweezers and peel away the vein from all sides until it is exposed to the sense of touch.
When it appears, you will see it as a dark red color. When you pull it out of the skin, you will see that it also looks like a tendon. Then insert a rod under it, and when it rises and comes out of the skin, hang it on a blunt, smooth hook. Then make another incision near that incision, about three fingers in length.
Then peel away the skin from over the vein until it is exposed, then lift it up with the rod as you did before and hang it on another hook as you did first. Then make another incision or many incisions as needed.
Then squeeze it out and cut it at the end of the incision near the ankle, then pull it and squeeze it until it comes out of the second incision, then pull it towards the third incision above it and do this until you have pulled it all out.
If it does not respond to attraction and pulling, insert a strong, doubled-up thread with a needle, tie it, pull it, and insert the probe underneath it. Twist your hand in every direction until it comes out. Be careful that the thread doesn't break, for if it does, it will be very difficult to pull out the probe.
And it is harmful to the patient, so if you pull it all out, place on the wound wool soaked in wine and oil, or rose oil, and treat it until it heals. If the probe is twisted with curves and turns to different sides.
And it is not straight as we have said, you should cut into it at every curve and twist, then attach it to the clamps until you pull it all out. Be careful when cutting into it not to cut the vein or injure it, for it will be difficult to pull out if you do.
Figure of the probe you use to cut the probe:.
Figure of the blind clamp:.
It should not have a curve like other clamps, nor should it be sharp-tipped so as not to injure the vein. It should be thickly curved and smooth, for if it is thin it will cut the vein, as we have said.
Chapter 191.
On pulling out a civil vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot countries like Hejaz, and other Arab countries, and also in dry, infertile countries. It can also be generated in other parts of the body besides the legs. Its cause is the occurrence of putrefaction under the skin.It is white or red, thin, long, and twisted like a rope. When you cut into it, it oozes blood mixed with yellow pus. It is painful to touch, and when you pull it, it comes out whole.
It is similar to the occurrence of living maggots and tapeworms in humans, and also the botfly larvae that live between the skin and the flesh. The beginning of this vein's occurrence is a severe inflammation in the leg, then blisters form at the site, and then the vein begins to emerge from that blister.And sometimes it occurs in other parts of the body besides the legs, like in the arms or trunk, but most often in the legs. It is white or red, thin, long, and twisted like a rope. When you cut into it, blood mixed with yellow pus flows out. And when you pull it, it comes out whole.
Like a plant or animal root, if one of its ends appears, it should be wrapped around a small piece of lead, the weight of which ranges from a dirham to two dirhams, and then tied tightly, leaving the lead suspended from the leg.
Whenever something protrudes from it to the outside, wrap it around the lead and tie it tightly. If it becomes too long, cut off a portion and wrap the remaining part, but do not cut it from its root before everything has come out. Because if you cut it, it will shrink back into the flesh, causing swelling, putrefaction, and a bad ulcer in that spot.
Therefore, it should be treated and pulled out little by little until it is completely removed, and there remains no part of it in the body. In some people, this vein can be as long as five or ten cubits.
I have also heard that a man once had one of these veins that was twenty cubits long. If it ruptures while you are treating it, insert an iron rod into its hole and push it along the body until everything inside it is expelled. Then try to cause putrefaction in the wound with medicine for several days.
Then treat it as you would a tumor. This vein may have many branches, especially if it appears in a joint or the leg itself, causing multiple openings. Treat it as we have described in the section on tumors and as previously mentioned."وإن ظهر فى موضع لا يمكن الوصول اليه فأخرجه بالنار وقد تقدّم ذكر ذلك فى موضعه، وإن ظهر فى الذراع وأمكنك الوصول اليه فافعل فيه ما فعلت فى الرجل وقد تقدّم.
Chapter 92."فى علاج العروق المفسدة والعرق المسمّ
On the treatment of destructive veins and the snake vein."وصفة الفصولياء النيئ: فصولياء نيئة، قشور بصل، عسل. يطحن الفصولياء والبصل معا ويجعل على كل
This disease is called in some countries cattle disease because it often affects cattle. It is a small single worm that develops between the skin and meat, moving up and down throughout the body."وأعظم ما يكون ذلك فى الرأس والأذنين والعينين والوجه وكلّما كان معها احتقان ورمد وورم كان أسرع إليها. وأمر هذه الدودة شديد جدّا وهى تخرج حية من العرق الذى يظهر لها، وربّما خرجت ميتة فهلكت الرجل وقد تقدّم ذكر
It is perceived by the senses when it flows from one part to another until it pierces where it pierces in the skin, and exits, and is formed from the putrefaction of some humors as happens to worms and snakes and the scabies of the abdomen.
It is expected that it will hurt when it flows into the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, where it can sometimes open and exit, causing blindness. This often happens a lot. If you want to treat it and remove it, it is only when it flows and appears to the senses.
It should be tied with a tight bandage above and below, then cut it out. If it has sunk into the flesh and you don't find it, burn the site with fire until you burn it out. The most expected damage to the eye is as we said.
If you see it in the head near the eye, tie tightly under the forehead and cut it out. The patient should clean his body with laxatives for putrid and poor humors and abstain from foods that produce putrefaction,.
Chapter 92
On cutting into the disease known as "the pusher".
This disease, which is called in our country "the pusher", is a pain that occurs in some parts and then moves from one part to another, and I have seen it as I describe it to you.
I was called to a sick woman in some of the suburbs, and I examined her arm and she showed me a slight swelling on the biceps vein. When I waited for a while, I saw that swelling crawling with the radius as a worm crawls upwards to the shoulder as fast as it can, like mercury.
If it moved from one place to another, the pain went away from that place and settled in the shoulder, then I sat for a while, and it flowed throughout her body until it reached the other arm, and then she scratched for me that it rolled all over her body as I watched.
I marvelled at the rapidity with which it shifted from one member to another, for I had not before seen this disease in such a form with my own eyes, except that I have heard of a number of people suffering from pain shifting from one member to another, but I had never seen it with my own eyes as I saw it in this woman.
And I did not consider this to be a consequence of anything except that the woman was from the Bedouin, with a dry body, exposed veins. So it appeared to the senses as the moving wind, and it was necessary that it should not appear in the same way in people of comfort, with moist bodies, hidden veins.
If you want to treat it and its owner feels the pain, if it appears to you as we mentioned above, then tighten him with a girdle and compress him until that confined wind comes out, and dress the spot.وإذا لم يظهر للعيان وكان من تحسسه كما ذكرناه فاخلع العقد والشدّة عن أعضاء بدنه وأبقها على عروقه واكو المكان فإن أزال الوجع فقد أصبت وبطلت الحبسة وإن بقي كما كان فاعلم أنّه من أجل امتلاء الأعضاء الر
And if you don't see it with your eyes, but feel as mentioned above, then loosen the knots and tightness around his body members and leave them on his veins, dress the spot. If the pain goes away, then you have succeeded and the blockage has been removed. But if it remains as it was, know that it is due to the fullness of the
Chapter 94.في الحكة والأوجاع التي تكون تحت الجلد وفي الأ
On itching and pains which are under the skin and on removing arrows.
Arrows may differ according to their types and according to the parts of the body where they fall. And as for their difference according to their types, there are large and small ones, hollow glass and solid glass, and some have three angles and four angles.ومنها ما يكون ناحلا ومنها ما يكون عظيما وكلّ ذلك يؤثر فى الأعضاء التى تقع فيها.
And some have tongues, and some have shards. And as for those that depend on the members in which they fall, they are of two types: either the members are principal hollow organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and the like. Or they are members that are solid and closed, such as the muscles, bones, tendons, skin, and other similar organs.And it is not necessary that the arrow should be in one of these two kinds of organs only, but rather it can be in both at the same time, because the arrow may pierce a hollow organ and then pass into a solid organ, or it may pierce a solid organ and then pass into a hollow organ When an arrow has pierced one of these organs, and you see the signs of death that I have described to you, then you should avoid extracting that arrow from it; for in most cases death will overtake its possessor. When these bad signs do not appear, and the arrow has not pierced deeply into the organ, extract it and treat the wound. One of the signs of a brain injury is if an arrow pierces the bone and wounds the peritoneum surrounding the brain, causing severe headache, dizziness, and vertigo.
When these bad signs do not appear, and the arrow has not pierced deeply into the organ, extract it and treat the wound. One of the signs of a brain injury is if an arrow pierces the bone and wounds the peritoneum surrounding the brain, causing severe headache, dizziness, and vertigo. This is accompanied by redness of the eyes and tongue, convulsions, mental confusion, and sometimes the discharge of mucus from the nose or ears, and sometimes the loss of speech and voice. From the wound, a white fluid that resembles porridge flows out, and water similar to meat juice runs from it."وأول الكيّ ما بين الكاهل والظهر من الجانب الأيمن على مخرج السهم.
The first step in cauterization is between the scapulae on the right side at the exit point of the arrow. If these signs appear, refrain from treating the patient and extracting the arrow if it has not come out. As for the signs of an arrow that has pierced the heart and is close to the left breast, one feels as if it has lodged in a solid object rather than in a hollow one.
The arrow may have a pulse-like movement, and black blood flows from the wound, followed by coldness of the limbs and cold sweat, indicating that death is certain. The sign of an arrow wounding the lung is the discharge of frothy blood from the wound."وإنّما يكون السهم انغرز فى الرئة إذا ظهر معه نفس أسود وربّما عطس أو سعل وانقطع النفس، فإن لم يخرج السهم فأخرجه من الجانب الأيسر إن أمكن وأن كان لم ينكشف موضعه فاعلم أنّه لم يغادر موضعه الا فى ثلاثة مواضع: فى الجوف وفى الحلق وفى الص
The arrow is said to have pierced the lung if black breath comes out with it, and the patient may sneeze or cough and breathing stops. If the arrow has not come out, extract it from the left side if possible. If its location is not revealed, know that it has not left its place except in three places: in the chest cavity, in the throat, and in the
And he sighed and all the members of the shoulders moved, and if the arrow hit the liver, it was followed by severe pain and blood came out of the wound resembling the color of the liver, and if the arrow hit the stomach, something undigested might come out of the wound.
And its cause is apparent, and if the arrow hit the abdomen and lodged in it and something of feces came out of the wound or the peritoneum or the intestines were perforated, there is no hope for treatment or for removing the arrow. And if the arrow hit the bladder and urine came out.
And if something protruded to the outside and the pain increased in the patient, then know that he is doomed. As for the other organs such as the face, eye, neck, shoulder, arm, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, thigh, leg, and similar body parts, they are most likely to recover.
As long as the arrow did not hit an artery or a nerve, and it was not poisoned, I will tell you about some of what I have witnessed with these arrows so that you can use this to inform your treatment. Once there was an arrow that struck a man in the root of his nose at the inner corner of his eye.
I extracted that arrow from the other side below the ear lobe, and he recovered without any harm to his eye. I also removed another arrow for a Jew who had been hit in the lower eyelid at the inner corner of his eye. The arrow was hidden, and I only managed to grasp its small tip attached to the wooden shaft.
It was a large arrow from a composite bow, with a square iron head that was smooth and did not have any barbs. The Jew recovered without any harm to his eye. I also removed another arrow from the throat of a Christian; it was an Arab arrow.
It was the one with two barbs, and I split it open between his collarbones. It had pierced deep into his throat, so I gently extracted it, and the Christian recovered and was healed. I also removed another arrow from a man's abdomen; we estimated that he would die from it.
When he had remained in this state for about thirty days, with no change for the better, I made an incision over the arrow and manipulated it until I extracted it, and he recovered without any untoward incident. I then saw a man who had been shot in the back by an arrow, and the wound had healed over it.
After seven years the arrow came out at the base of her thigh, and I saw a woman who had been shot in the abdomen by an arrow, and the wound had healed over it and she was left unharmed and did not experience any inconvenience in her natural functions.
I also saw another man who had been shot in the face by an arrow, and the wound had healed over it and he did not experience much pain from it; there are many examples like this. I once extracted an arrow from one of the Sultan's commanders, which had entered his nose and tilted to the right.
The whole arrow had disappeared, so I was called to treat him after the arrow had entered him for three days; I found that the arrow wound was very narrow, so I probed it with a thin probe and he did not feel it, but he felt a pricking pain under his right ear.
I hoped that the pain was caused by the tip of the arrow, so I applied a poultice with some astringent medication in the hope that the area would become swollen and reveal the location of the arrow, but nothing happened to indicate that the arrow had reached that spot.
I continued to apply the poultice for many days, but nothing happened, so the patient lost hope of extracting the arrow; then one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me about it, so I applied a strong, caustic medication on the wound for several days.
Until it opened up and I probed it, feeling the thin tip of the arrow that is attached to the wood; then I continued to enlarge the wound with this strong medication until the tip of the arrow became visible to us, and it took me about four months to extract it completely.
Then, when the wound was enlarged and I was able to insert the clamps into it, I pulled and moved it, but it did not respond by coming out. So I continued to gently manipulate it with various tools until one day I managed to grasp it firmly with a clamp, as will be shown in the illustration at the end of this chapter.
The physicians had judged that the cartilage of his nose would not heal, but I was able to heal it and the wound closed up completely, with no pain or discomfort. And I will tell you about the extraction of some arrows so that you may use this as a gauge and guide for similar cases which I have not mentioned.
Because the details and intricacies of this craft cannot be fully described or contained in a single book. The skilled practitioner measures the few things he knows against the many things he doesn't, and innovates new techniques and tools when faced with unusual cases.
If I were to give advice on this craft, I would say that arrows are removed from the body in two ways: either by pulling them out from the point of entry, or by pushing them through from the opposite direction. Those which are removed from where they entered.
If the arrow is protruding from a fleshy part, it can be pulled out, but if it doesn't come out right away, you should leave it for several days until the surrounding flesh becomes gangrenous and easier to pull out. The same is true if the arrow has pierced bone.
If it still doesn't come out after a few days, you should drill around the arrow through the bone with a thin drill until there is enough space for the arrow to pass through, and then pull it out.
If the arrow is lodged in the skull and has pierced into one of the brain' s membranes, causing some of the symptoms I mentioned earlier, then refrain from pulling out the arrow right away. Instead, wait a few days and let the patient recover before attempting to extract the arrow.فإن أبى واستمرّ به علاجا طويلا حتّى سكنت تلك الأعراض فعامل السهم بعد أيّام بما كنت عاملا قبله فإنّك تجده قد خرج من موضعه فاحذره، وعليك أن تجعله فى كلّ مرّة أدنى إلى الخروج من وق
Examine the arrow and remove it; if it is firmly lodged, and does not respond to your attempts at extraction, then employ a trepan around the arrow as I have described, and then treat the wound until it heals. If however the arrow has penetrated deeply into some part of the body, and the patient has lost consciousness, examine him with a probe; if you feel the arrow, extract it with suitable instruments. If however you cannot extract it because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of its penetration, and there is no bone or tendon or artery in the way,
make an incision to widen the wound so that you can reach the arrow and pull it out; if there are two prongs, free the flesh caught between them on all sides by any means possible, and if you cannot free the flesh without breaking the prongs, twist and break them until you are clear.
When you attempt to extract the arrow from any wound, use your hand and tweezers to gently work it free from all sides, taking care not to break the arrow, which would make extraction more difficult; if after some time you cannot extract it,
leave it for several days until the surrounding flesh putrifies, and then try again; it will then come away more easily. If you encounter bleeding, employ the treatments I have described earlier in this work, and be very careful not to cut an artery, tendon or ligament; use your skill and cunning to avoid doing so.
Use every means possible to extract the arrow gently and slowly, as I have described; it is advisable to keep the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for this will be more comfortable for him.
If you are unable to do this, use what you can of the shapes. And as for the arrow that comes out from the opposite side, either something has protruded outside or you will feel the tip of the arrow with your hand close to the skin and see it protruding.
Make an incision over it that is large enough to fit the claws, then pull it out; if it sticks in a bone, twist your hand around in a circle until the arrow affects the bone and opens up for itself, then pull it out.
If it doesn't come out after a few days, try again later until it comes out; if the arrowhead is still in there, push on it with the hollow instrument so that its hollow end goes into the tip of the arrow and then push it out with that.
If the arrow is hollow, push on it with an instrument that goes into that hollow; the arrow will come out more easily that way. If the arrow is poisonous, you should hollow out all the meat that has become poisoned as much as possible and then treat it with what is appropriate for that.
If the arrow is in the chest, abdomen, bladder or flank and you can feel it with your finger and can make an incision on it, then do so, being careful not to cut a vein or tendon; then take it out.
Then stitch up the wound if it needs stitching, and then treat it until it heals. Figure of the claws with which you can pull out arrows:
Its tips are like the beak of a bird; when you grip an arrow or something else, it doesn't let go. They can be made in various sizes, large, small and medium, depending on the size of the arrow and wound.
Figure of the hollow instrument:
Figure of the solid instrument:
This is a solid-tipped instrument that makes it easy to enter a hollow arrow and push it out.
Chapter 95.
On venesection.
There are thirty veins in the body that are commonly phlebotomized, including sixteen in the head: the two pulsating veins behind the ears, known as the temporal arteries, the two veins in the temples, and the two veins in the eye sockets, known as the ophthalmic veins.
The upright vein in the middle of the forehead, the vein at the tip of the nose, the jugular veins in the neck, the two veins in the upper lip of the mouth, the two veins in the lower lip, these veins are known as the mentalis veins, and the two veins under the tongue.
As for the veins that are phlebotomized in the arm and hand, there are five: one is the basilic vein, located on the lateral side; the general public call it the head vein. The second is the cephalic vein, which is the middle vein; it is composed of a branch of the basilic vein and a branch from the cephalic vein, and the general public call it the body vein.
The basilic vein is located on the medial side and is also called the axillary vein; the general public call it the stomach vein. The basilic vein is located on the ulnar side, and it is the one that adheres to the bone; it is the one that appears above the thumb, very obviously, and the antecubital vein.
There are three veins in the leg and foot: one is below the patella on the lateral side, the second is the posterior tibial vein, located at the ankle on the medial side; and the third is the sciatic nerve, located at the heel on the lateral side.
In the other leg there are three veins like them: as for the two veins behind the ears, the benefit of phlebotomizing them is for chronic catarrh, migraine, scabies, and poor chronic head wounds; their phlebotomy is described as follows:
And it is that you shave the head of the patient and rub his back in the area of the armpits with a rough cloth, rubbing well; then the patient's neck is strangled with a turban until the armpits appear and their location behind the ears in the two low places of the head, so you explore them with your finger, and where you feel their pulse under your finger, there you mark with ink.
Then you take a scalpel, which is known as nashal, and then you insert it under the armpit in the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone, then you lift your hand with the armpit and the skin upwards, and cut the armpit with the skin, cutting it off completely, and the length of the cut is equal to two clenched fingers.
Or its equivalent, and send from the blood as much as you want, then tie them with ligatures and leave them until they heal, and the two arteries in the temples, The benefit of their fashing is for chronic migraine, difficult headache and chronic eye discharge.
And the way to cut them is as I describe to you: the patient tightens his neck with a turban until the armpits appear to the senses, and their pulse becomes apparent under your finger; then mark it with ink, then lift the skin above the armpit with your index finger.
And you insert the nashal scalpel from below and lift the armpit upwards, and cut it as you did in the other two armpits, and send from the blood as much as you need, then loosen the patient's strangulation, and put your finger on the armpit for an hour.
Then put a cotton pad and ligature on it, and tighten it tightly from above and leave it until it heals; their description and cutting and release have already been mentioned at the beginning of the book. And as for fashing the artery in the forehead, its benefit is after fashing the scalp for chronic disorders of the face such as scurvy, sores, and erysipelas.
And how to apply it, as I describe to you, is to strangle the sick person's neck with a bandage until the sweat appears. Then take the instrument called "axe", and this is its image:
You place the curved hook at the head of the axe on the same vein and strike it from above with a comb or something else in that direction, and let the blood flow as much as you want. Then you release the sick person's stranglehold and pull him until he recovers.
And it can be opened with a wide scalpel, but the scalpel should not have a sharp tip like other scalpels, but rather a slightly wide tip. You should also make an incision at an angle, because the bone is close by, and if the scalpel is thin, it may break the bone.
As for the two veins in the eye socket, they are beneficial for eye conditions such as scabies, redness, and prolapse, and facial diseases. As for how to incise them, the sick person should tighten his neck with a bandage, then you should incise them while standing above him, and the incision should be slightly angled towards the length with a small, slightly wide scalpel.
Since there is no flesh in the area, if the scalpel tip is thin, it may break. Then you let the desired amount of blood flow, and place a cotton ball on them and tie them for one night, then untie them. As for cutting the nose vein, it is beneficial for acute fever.
It is also beneficial for severe headaches and facial diseases such as the red splotches that appear on the nose, especially if they are chronic. To incise it, have the sick person tighten his neck, then hold his nose with your left hand and take a thin, long scalpel in your right hand.
You insert it into the middle of the columella, right between the two ridges of the nose, because that's where the vein can't be felt by touch, and when you strike it, the blood will flow immediately. You should push the scalpel in a little deeper and let the desired amount of blood flow, then tie it for one night, as it will clot quickly.
As for the lymph nodes, their ligation is beneficial in cases of shortness of breath, the onset of leprosy and melanotic diseases that appear on the surface of the skin, such as black vitiligo, pustules, and ulcerations. The procedure is performed by having the patient tighten a ligature under the nodes around his neck while standing upright, and the surgeon stands above the patient's head.
The patient sits on a chair, and the lymphatic vessels are then incised slightly to a moderate depth, and a reasonable amount of blood is extracted, depending on the need. This is then repeated with the other lymphatic vessel, after which the ligature is removed.
The jugular veins are then tightly ligated to avoid choking the patient, and the wound is left to heal overnight. Ligation of the jugulars is particularly effective in treating issues such as mouth ulcers, gum disease, cold sores, cracked lips, and ulcerations.
The benefits of ligation are also seen in conditions affecting the nose and surrounding areas. To perform this, have the patient sit facing you, tighten his neck with a headband, and turn his lips so that you can see the dark vessels on either side of his mouth.
This is because there are also fine, dark vessels around them that should be cut and removed. If it is difficult to identify them, focus on cutting the larger and more prominent vessels in the lower lip.
Ligation of the vessels under the tongue, after ligation of the head veins, is beneficial for treating swollen adenoids and other issues affecting the back of the throat and mouth. To do this, have the patient sit facing the sun, lift his tongue, and look under it to see the dark vessels running along each side.
Ligate these vessels, but be careful not to cut too deeply as there are large arteries beneath them that could cause severe bleeding. As for the three vessels typically ligated in the elbow, they are the ones generally used for phlebotomy and can be ligated in two ways.
Either stitch it with a broad, rosemary-shaped or olive-shaped lance, or cut it with a scalpel, which is the lancinet [and this is its image], image of the broad, rosemary-shaped lance: .
It is as broad as you see, to suit the opening of hollow veins, full, prominent, apparent, thick ones that contain thick and turbid blood, and this is the image of the olive-shaped lance:  .
This lance is narrower and its tip is finer, suitable for phlebotomy on thin veins that contain thin, bilious blood, and this is the image of the lancinet:   .
This lancinet is suitable for cutting, and it comes in broad and narrow types according to the width of the veins as well as their tightness or looseness. This makes it easy to determine the type needed, and it is well-known among artisans.
The use of phlebotomy on the basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, is that it attracts blood from disorders under the jaw and neck, close to the chest and abdomen. When performing phlebotomy, the practitioner must be cautious and avoid the area around the neck because there is an artery underneath. If he makes a mistake and goes too deep with the lance, he may cut that artery.
This will cause blood to flow, so it is better to perform phlebotomy on the basilic vein with a scalpel rather than a piercing lance. If the basilic vein is not clearly visible, one should avoid it and opt for another vein or look for one of its branches.
Or you can phlebotomize the brachial vein, which is clearly visible, and use a scalpel to cut it as mentioned before. If you want to phlebotomize it directly, you should first loosen the arm, feel for the pulse, and mark it with ink.
Then loosen the arm, and cut the vein斜 with a lancinet as mentioned before, making sure to avoid the artery. When you tighten the bandage, if you see swelling in the area you marked with ink, that is the swelling of the artery, so avoid it.
If you see the blood when phlebotomized springing forth like a boy's urine, and if it is thin and red, know that it comes from an arterial vein; then, be quick to put your finger upon it for a long time, then remove your finger; and should the blood cease to flow, it will often do so. Then tighten the arm.
Leave it, and warn the patient against neglecting it; let him keep it on his neck and not move it for several days until it heals. But if the blood does not stop flowing and you are overcome by it and no remedy is available to you in time, then cut off the artery if it appears before you, for its two ends will contract and the blood will stop flowing.
Or take a pistachio shell, split it in half, and tie the single half tightly to the site of the bleeding with a bandage for another day; if the blood stops, well and good, but if not, then treat it as already mentioned by using hemostatic agents. Stopping the flow of blood is not usually difficult in most cases.
Because the wound is small and the bandage fits tightly on the arm, you should inform him of this. As for the akhel vein, the benefit of phlebotomizing it is that it attracts blood from the top of the head and the lower part of the body because it is composed of a branch of basilic and a branch of the cephalic as we have said,.
The phlebotomist should be careful not to hit the nerve under the vein, for if he increases the pressure of the scalpel and hits the nerve, a numbness will occur that is difficult to cure and may never heal at all; this nerve can often be felt by touch.
If it is faint in some people and thin so that it cannot be discerned, you should make your phlebotomy cut slantwise with a scalpel and avoid the nerve as much as you can; if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise. As for the cephalic vein, the benefit of phlebotomizing it is that it attracts blood from the head.
And it is beneficial for diseases of the eyes and, in this vein especially, if you want to incise it, you should do so with a olive-shaped scalpel or a broad basil scalpel, because it is the safest of all veins, since there is no artery or nerve underneath it.
However, when phlebotomizing, you should avoid the head of the muscle with the scalpel and aim for the soft spot. It is not harmful if it is not hit on the first strike to repeat the phlebotomy several times, except that it may swell in some people if it is not hit on the first strike.
However, that swelling will not harm him in any way. Now, as for the technique of phlebotomy and its considerations, and what should be done to improve it, first of all, you should know that phlebotomy can either be used for maintaining health only.
Or it can be used for diseases; the one used for maintaining health and sustaining it, and preventing the occurrence of diseases, is phlebotomy in one of the three veins at the elbow, namely the cephalic, the basilic, or the median cephalic vein, and phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring when signs of fullness appear.
Phlebotomy performed for maintaining health should be on a Sunday or Tuesday, after three hours of daylight have passed. However, phlebotomy performed for diseases does not have a limited time; it can be done at any time of the day or night when the need arises.وينبغى للفصد فى مرض العيون أن يكون بعد غروب الشمس، لأنّ البصر ضعيف بعد ذلك، وينبغى له أن يكون من الجانب الأيمن.
Phlebotomy for eye diseases should be performed after sunset, as vision is weakened after that time; it should be performed on the right side. In every hour and at all times, children under the age of fourteen and elderly men over sixty years of age should not be phlebotomized. If anyone intends to phlebotomize for any reason,
It is advisable to cleanse his intestines before phlebotomy with a soft syringe if there is much accumulated feces, so that when phlebotomy is performed on the veins, no putrid matter from the intestines is drawn into them, which would harm the vital organs. Nor should a pregnant woman or a drunkard or someone who is intoxicated be bled until these conditions have subsided in them.
Bleedings should also be avoided immediately after vomiting, diarrhea, excessive sexual intercourse, exertion, exercise, insomnia, fasting, and anything else that weakens the body or the soul. Before bleeding, examine whether the blood is thick; if so, thin out the humors first.
If possible, let him eat and drink and take medicines to thin the blood; then go to the bathhouse if nothing prevents him, or else exercise a little to get his blood flowing; as we have said, he should perform phlebotomy during the first part of the day, and he should free himself that day of all unwelcome passions of the soul.
Such as worries, anger, fear, and all bodily passions such as excessive exertion, sexual intercourse, etc.; and let him bring to his gathering the things that people are accustomed to using for entertainment, such as various types of perfume, flowers, and other amusements, each person according to what he can afford.
Then the phlebotomist should sit on a pillow higher than the pillow that the person being bled is sitting on. Then he should bring out his arm and the phlebotomist should rub it with his hand two or three times, then tighten the band of the tourniquet and twist it two or three times, making sure the tightness is moderate.
This is because when the tightness is either too much or too little, it will prevent the flow of blood; therefore, after tightening, the person being bled should rub his hands together.
Until the veins become swollen and apparent to the touch, then the phlebotomist should wipe the razor with a little old oil especially, then place his left hand's index finger on the same vein under the site where he intends to perform the phlebotomy, a little below the spot, so that the vein does not shift away from the strike. Because some of the veins are like a string that retreats when it is pricked, and others are filled with air. So when you place the scalpel on them, they sink under the scalpel and deceive the phlebotomist, who does not manage to open the vein, even if he does, his incision will be narrow.
Therefore, the phlebotomist should be careful and cautious in all of these matters, then he should press down with the scalpel. If the vein opens on the first attempt, well and good; if not, he should try again a little below or above that spot, as long as the area is not swollen.
If the patient becomes swollen or distressed, he should leave it for a day or two and not tighten the bandage, because this might cause a hot swelling, and he should not enter the bath. Then he can try phlebotomy again if he wishes, provided that the incision was small and the blood flowed slowly.
I am afraid that you may not get out of the blood what you want, so put the scalpel back in the same incision and press down with more force, and make the incision slightly larger. Do this quickly before the area swells, for it often happens that the area swells when the incision is small.
If you see that it has swelled, do not return to it at all, because it will not help you; put on it some astringent of oil, for it eases the flow of blood, and is better in this respect than plain oil or any other fat.
Use astringent of oil in all your phlebotomy procedures when the blood flow is difficult. The antidote of "farouk" and "skezania" also works if applied to the site, for it thins and dilutes the blood if it is thick.
If a large swelling occurs at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, especially if the person has not been bled before or if the incision was small, act quickly by placing a sponge soaked in warm water and salt on the swelling and binding it there for an hour, and it will subside.
You should do this after the blood has come out of the vein itself or from another vein; if it remains in the spot for days, something of a blackness or verdigris, that does not hurt; if you like, put on it something of myrrh and aloes dissolved.
Or something of the juice of fennel and the like, and often happens swelling and nodule when phlebotomy basilic so put on your hand for if you found it to hum if you press on him that is a bad nodule so beware that you do not make it anything of what we mentioned.
It is likely to bleed from the artery but bandage it with what includes constriction to harden the spot then treated with other treatment until healed, and should be removed for each person of blood on the amount of his strength and what appears to the predominant color of blood.
If the blood is black, let it out until it turns red and so if you see it thick, let it go until it becomes thinner, and if it was sharp until his edge goes away, and it should be for those who were full and strong and needed to remove the blood at once.
That expand vein incision and should be the blade wide and was weak in contrast to that and it should be removed in times and the hole is narrow, and the best thing to use in phlebotomy vein that be notched curved slit not a stitch,.
This type of phlebotomy is safe from bleeding and cutting a nerve, and it is better and safer than phlebotomy horizontally and vertically, and who used to get dizzy on phlebotomy should eat something bread soaked in pomegranate water or saffron before phlebotomy.
If it is hot and got out of the blood in three or four times, if it was cold-tempered to take before phlebotomy bread soaked in myrrh wine or honey wine scented with saffron or in wine thơmatic.
If the fainting occurs due to phlebotomy and is caused by excessive blood loss, one should drink meat water and light aromatic drinks, and use the incense for relaxation and chest opening. One should also use all the methods mentioned in the section on fainting in the chapter on incisions.
For those who want to rejuvenate their arm and reactivate their blood circulation, those whose phlebotomy was for excessive blood loss and have weak strength, should release a small amount of blood gradually according to their strength over several days.
For those who want to move blood from one part of the body to another, if their body is strong, they should do it within seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy. For those who want to attract blood to the opposite side that has tilted towards, should do so on the second or third day.
For those whose blood is excessive, hot and intense, causing fever, one should release a large amount of blood in one go, widening the incision until fainting occurs, after checking all the conditions for phlebotomy have been met. You should place your hand on the pulse point while the blood is flowing to avoid death due to fainting, which often occurs when the phlebotomist is ignorant or careless. This should not be done if you want to loosen the arm and reactivate the blood flow again.
If the vein is closed and blood flow is difficult, instead of pressing it hard or twisting it forcefully which is very detrimental, you should either leave it until you perform phlebotomy again or gently move the blade of the knife to break up the clotted blood in the vein opening.
Or, you can apply something salty dissolved in water or something from the Teryak فاروق or Schozania and gently press it until the blood flows. If the vein is swollen, leave it alone.
You must not touch it until the swelling goes down; if blood-letting is absolutely necessary, do it either in that area or in the other arm or in another vein.
As for phlebotomy in the arm vein, it is performed instead of the ankle or basilic vein when they are not available or are difficult to find, as it is composed of both. The procedure is to have the patient immerse his hand in hot water until the wrist turns red and the vein becomes clearly visible, then a bandage is tightly applied above it.
Then phlebotomy is performed on the vein at a slight angle, neither horizontally nor vertically, and the incision should be wide. It should be performed just above the wrist joint; if blood does not come out, immerse the hand again in hot water and let the blood flow in the water.
You can do this in the summer days without immersing the hand again in hot water; it is especially useful in winter days to let the blood flow in hot water. Phlebotomy of this vein is safer than any other vein. Phlebotomy of the basilic vein in the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases; the procedure is to apply a bandage on the wrist or hold it with your hand after immersing it in hot water until the vein swells.
Phlebotomy of the basilic vein in the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases; the procedure is to apply a bandage on the wrist or hold it with your hand after immersing it in hot water until the vein swells. It becomes very clear to the touch; then phlebotomy is performed at a slight angle, and if you cut it all the way through, it will not harm him. Be careful not to overdo it with the scalpel, as there are nerves under the vein, and the area is exposed of flesh; then immerse the hand again in hot water.
Let the blood flow; if you do not immerse it again in hot water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein and stop flowing. When you have taken out the required amount of blood, put grease and salt on the vein so that it does not heal quickly.وإذا أمسك الدم فى الذراع فأمضه الى فوق وحرّك الكوع وحرّك اليد وأدرها حتّى ينفتح العرق ويجرى الدم، فإن لم يجر شيئا فافصده مرّة أو مرّتين وكلّما تحرّكت اليد والذراع كان الدم أجود، وإذا جمد الدم ف
And so you should do with each narrow branch. As for the benefit of bandaging it from the left hand, it is beneficial for spleen complaints; and so you should do in bandaging it as you did in the second, the same. As for bandaging the popliteal vein, its benefit is for diseases at the lower part of the body, such as uterine complaints.
And retention of menses and kidney diseases, and chronic sores in the thighs and legs and similar diseases, and how to bandage it is that he should put his leg in hot water and carry the massage on until the veins appear, then tighten above the ankle joint with the ligature, and the vein is located at the heel, on the outside towards the thumb.
And it branches out in the face of the leg many branches, so bandage it in the widest branch from it or at the ankle joint at the meeting point, which is better and safer. If you bandage it on the face of the leg, be careful about the nerves underneath the face of the leg.
And make your bandage by twisting as if you want to amputate, and the knife should be a blade; if the blood does not come out easily, return his leg to hot water and let the blood flow until it is finished; If the phlebotomist misses the vein in the first attempt.
Then go back to bandage a little higher, because the place is safe and there is no need to worry about it if you are careful about the nerve as we said; and so you should do with the popliteal vein of the other leg; but as for sciatica, its location is as we said at the heel on the lateral side.
And the benefit of bandaging it is for hip pain if this is due to hot blood; and how to bandage it is that the patient should go to the bathhouse, hurry up, and tighten his leg from below the hip to above the ankle with a long, thin bandage, for it will not appear unless that is done.
If it becomes visible, then cauterize it in any state that it is found, either by bending it which is better, or by amputating it, or by cutting it open; for its location is sound and in most people it is very delicate. If you do not find it,
if it does not become apparent to the sense at all, then cauterize some of its branches, which are those that appear on the back of the foot towards the little toe and the ring finger, and be cautious of the nerves, and let blood in the amount that you desire.
Then loosen the ligature, and apply a pad to the site of cauterization, and tie the spot firmly; for it will heal quickly.
Chapter 96
On cupping and how to use it.
Cupping vessels may be made of horns, wood, bronze, or glass. Cupping is of two types: cupping with incisions to draw blood, and cupping without incisions.فأمّا الحجامة بالشرط فهيئة أحد وجهى المكواة من أطرافها مدببة وأحد الوجهين مفلطح وأوسع من الآخر، فإذا أردت أن تحجم إنسانا فخذه وأنت متى شئت
This cupping, which is without incisions, is of two types.فإن كانت لتسكين الألم فاجعل المكواة على موضع الألم
The other is the cupping of the temples, the cupping on either side of the chin, the cupping under the chin, and the cupping in the nape of the neck - which we have already mentioned - the cupping on the shoulders, the cupping on the armpits, and the cupping on both sides of the neck, the cupping on the jaw, which is below the lower jaw below the mouth, the cupping on the shoulders, the cupping on the tailbone, and the cupping on the wrists - which are in the middle of the arms - and the cupping on the legs and ankles.والمحاجم التى فى أصول الأصابع وهيئة المحاجم التى على أصابع الرجل كهيئة المح
Cupping is an operation in which blood is attracted from the fine vessels which are diffused through the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken like phlebotomy, and cupping should not be used with fire or without fire in any of the diseases that result from fullness until the whole body has been completely purged.
If it is necessary to use cupping due to illness or as a routine procedure, we should use it at any time during the month: in its first ten days, in its middle ten days, and in its last ten days.
This is because some people, when their blood becomes excessive and needs to be extracted by cupping, experience a heavy feeling and headache, while others experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck, while others experience itching in their face and sides, darkness and puffiness in their eyes.
Some people laugh excessively, while others taste blood in their mouths and their gums swell and they spit out blood; some people sleep a lot, and still, others see in their dreams blood, redness, wounds, and similar things. Whenever we observe any of these symptoms,
especially if it occurs in the middle third of the month, we command that cupping be performed after two or three hours have passed during the day. As for the benefit of cupping on the nape, it is beneficial for heaviness in the head and water flowing into the eyes.
However, it should only be used after the whole body has been completely purged. This cupping can be an alternative to phlebotomy in the scalp, but it should be avoided by those with a cold brain or a cold, as it will severely harm them.
For this reason, the elderly and those with cold brain diseases should not use it, as well as those who frequently use it, as it can cause memory loss."وأمّا حجامة الأعضاء فهى تنفع من أدواء كثيرة وتضرّ أيضاً إذا استعملت فى غير موضعها، ومنافعها ومضارها
And therefore one should instruct the barber to move his cupping instrument slightly downward out of fear of causing a hernia. As for cupping on the shoulder, it is an alternative to phlebotomy at the inner ankle and phlebotomy on the basilic vein.
And therefore it benefits from asthma, shortness of breath, rupture of the respiratory apparatus, cough and fullness. It is appropriate to slightly raise the cupping on the shoulder because if it is placed downward it will cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
And as for cupping on the cheekbones, it benefits from pains that occur in the head, eye strain, migraines, sore throat and pain at the roots of the teeth, and is an alternative to phlebotomy on the basilic vein. You should instruct the barber not to go too deep with the incision so as not to cut an artery and cause bleeding.
And as for cupping under the chin, it benefits from mouth ulcers, gum disease and other diseases in the mouth, and can take the place of phlebotomy at the external carotid artery in the lips. As for cupping on the shoulders, it benefits from palpitations caused by fullness and heat.
And as for cupping on the insides of the elbows, it benefits from phlebotomy at the three deep veins: the basilic vein, the anterior temporal artery and the superficial temporal artery, because it attracts blood from all those thin veins in the flesh and draws those thin veins from other thicker veins until the attraction reaches the three thick veins.
You should instruct the barber not to go too deep with the incision because the area is bare of flesh and underneath are nerves and arteries. As for cupping with a single cup on the coccyx, it benefits from hemorrhoids and sores in the lower abdomen.
You should instruct the barber to use a large cup made of copper because that area requires strong suction and the glass cup may break if it is not thick enough, and it should be punctured many times. As for leg cupping, it significantly reduces edema.
Because it attracts blood from all over the body and benefits chronic pains in the kidneys, womb, and bladder, as well as induces menstruation and benefits boils and blisters, and takes the place of cupping on the calves and ankles, except that it weakens the body a lot and causes fainting in most people. The benefit of cupping on the ankles is close to that of cupping on the legs.
How to place the cups: first, the cup is placed empty and sucked gently, without keeping the cups in place for long, but you place them quickly and remove them quickly to draw the humors to the site evenly, and keep repeating this and persisting until you see that the site has turned red and opened.
When the blood appears, then you cut and return to gently suck little by little, and then look at the condition of the body. If someone is thin-fleshed with porous skin pores, one cup should be used so that the site does not become inflamed.
And you order the cupping therapist to expand the incision and deepen it slightly, moderating the suction gently and with gentle movement. If the blood is thick, he should cut twice. In the first time, he should open a path for the thin blood and its water, and in the second, to completely remove the thick blood.
If the blood is very cloudy, he should cut a third time to reach the goal. Generally speaking, if we want to remove a little blood, one incision is enough; If we want to remove a lot of blood, we need more incisions. If we estimate that the blood is thick,
We should make an incision deep enough, and the moderate limit of the incision is the depth of the skin only. No oils or waters should be used when placing the cups, and the patient should avoid what the cupping therapist must avoid. If a person's skin is thick, hard, dry, and his pores are narrow,
One should grease the sites of incisions with opening, softening, and dissolving greases; in summer, for example, with rose-water grease or violet grease or sweet almond grease or squash seed grease.
If the winter is cold, one should use narcissus grease or lily-of-the-valley grease, chamomile grease, or similar; if the discharge is thick and cold, then marjoram grease, aniseed grease, fennel grease, or the like.
If the person being bled has wide pores and tender flesh, they should not use grease; these people should wash their cups after cupping with rose water or cold water, or with wolfberry water, pumpkin water, purslane water, or similar. As for those whose blood is very moist,
they should wash their cups with vinegar or with water of rosebay, sumac, and similar; as for those whose discharges are thick, they should wash their cups with old wine, marjoram water, fennel soup, chamomile water, and the like. It is important to be careful about cupping in the bath and right after the bath.
Rather, it is better to be used after leaving the bath by an hour or two; one should not sleep after cupping. Here are some instructions for those being bled and those bleeding themselves, before and after cupping.
First, you must examine the person being bled; if they are a phlegmatic and their blood is predominantly sharp and irritated, they should take cooling foods such as pomegranates, dandelions, lettuce, camomile, and similar, with vinegar; their meals should include fried chicken and lamb, and sweetmeats.
As for someone with a cold temperament, they should drink honeyed wine and mibah or camomile seed wine; they should also eat medium-aged perfumed wine that sits between old and new, and they are instructed to eat less, making their meals fried chicken, quails, and pigeons, with young doves as the best option. On the day of cupping or phlebotomy, their drink should be greater than their food.وينبغى أن يأكل الحلوى قبل الحجامة او الفصد بساعة او نحوها وينبغى أن يشتدّ فى ذلك فيتناول ما شاء من السكر والزبيب والجوز ونحوه، وإن كان مزاجه حارّا فينبغى أن يقلل من الحلاوات.
It may be appropriate at certain times to give some people a dose of the antidote فاروق, or musk medicine, or shiltha before or after cupping and bloodletting, in order to strengthen the vital organs and thin the blood. It should not be given by those who are hot-tempered.
As for cupping that is unconditional, it is performed on the liver, spleen, breasts, abdomen, navel, kidney region and hip, because these organs cannot withstand the application of fire. The purpose of this kind of cupping is either to attract blood from one organ to another.
For example, when we place the cupping glass on the breasts for nosebleed, or when we use it to relieve cold wind that has settled in an organ, as in the case of placing the cupping glass on the abdomen and navel, it penetrates the organ, warms it and relieves pain by dissolving that wind.
It can also be placed on the kidneys if there is a blockage or stones, as the strong吸引力of the cupping glass may open the blockage or dislodge the stones from their place. It is also effective when placed on the liver and spleen for wind that causes turbulence in these organs. These unconditional cupping glasses can be used empty by suction only.
They can be used with fire, or filled with lukewarm water for certain conditions of the back. To do this, fill the cupping glass, which should be large, with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Then it is placed full on the affected area, held in place, removed and reapplied as needed. This is how the cupping glass is used with fire:
The mouth of the cupping glass should be two open fingers wide, as shown in the illustration, and its depth should be half a span. There should be a small hole on one side, about halfway down, large enough for a needle to pass through. It should be made of Chinese or yellow brass with a thick rim.
The surface must be smooth and polished so as not to hurt the part when it is placed upon it, and there should be a small protuberance in the middle made of copper or iron where the candle is placed with its flame. These specula may be made large, larger than that described, or small, depending on the diseases.
And as for the way to use this speculum, the specula for boys and for those who are thin are different from those for men and for those with muscular bodies. As for the way to place this speculum on the part by fire, take a flax wick soaked in oil or a small tallow candle, and place it in the middle of the stem which is in the middle of the speculum.
So that the fire goes upward toward the bottom of the speculum so that the patient's body is not burned, then it is placed on the part and the finger is placed over the hole which we mentioned, so that when we hold the speculum, we do not need to remove the finger.
And the smoke comes out that hole, and the speculum is released from its place, then the wick is lit again as needed. As for the speculum that is used for hydrocele, it does not have a stem or a hole.
And it is used only by filling it with water and placing it on the part. This is its picture: [image of a speculum for hydrocele].
This speculum, the larger it is to hold more water, the better.
Chapter 97.
On hanging leeches.
Leeches are used in most cases in parts where specula cannot be placed, either because they are small, such as the lip, gum, and the like, or because the part is naked of flesh, such as the finger, nose, and the like.
And the way to use them is to get leeches that are in pure fresh water free from pollution, then leave them for a day and night in fresh water until they are hungry and there is nothing left in their stomachs. Then the body is first purged by phlebotomy or cupping, and then the affected part is wiped.
until it turns red, and then put it on; when it is full, it will fall off. If it is possible to suck the spot with a cupping glass, it will be more beneficial; otherwise, wash the area with vinegar, then with plenty of water, and massage and squeeze it. If it persists, blood will flow after the leech has fallen off, and this will be a seroma. Soak a linen cloth in cold water.
and put it on top until the seroma stops. If the blood is profuse, sprinkle powdered alum, sumac or similar astringent on it until the bleeding stops, or place peeled garlic cloves on the spot.
and let it stay until the garlic clove sticks to the spot; the bleeding will stop. If another leech is needed, do not use the same leech if possible; otherwise, wipe the area with fresh blood.
Or, insert a needle into the spot to draw out some blood; then place it, and it will stick as soon as it feels the blood. If you want to remove it, sprinkle it with some myrrh, salt or ash, and it will fall off immediately.
Chapter 3.
On setting bones.
This chapter is also about the tricks and techniques needed in the medical profession, namely setting broken and dislocated bones.
Know, my sons, that this chapter may be claimed by ignorant physicians, quacks and those who have never read a book or a letter written by the ancient doctors.
And for this reason, this scientific art has become extinct in our country, and I have never seen a skilled practitioner of it. I have, however, gained knowledge of it from my extensive reading of the books of the ancients and my eagerness to understand them, so that I have been able to draw out the science from them; and also through constant experimentation and practice throughout my life.
And I have described to you in this chapter all that my knowledge encompasses. And my experience has guided me in this, after I have drawn it close to you and liberated it from the branches of prolixity, and abbreviated it to the utmost of abbreviation, and made it clear to the highest degree of clarity, and portrayed for you many pictures of the instruments which are employed in it.
For the sake of brevity I have omitted, as I did with the two previous chapters; and may God bestow His aid and support!
CHAPTER 1.
In it we shall assemble and condense what concerns the treatment of fractures, dislocations, etc., before we proceed to a description of the individual members one by one; wherefore at the head of this chapter let us assemble some general rules on the subject. If you, or any other aspiring student of this noble art, wish to understand and master its principles,
I say that when a man has suffered a fracture, dislocation, blow, or fall, you should first apply a constrictive bandage, or an emetic, or both.وإذا كان المريض ممتلئا وعطشانا فلا بأس أن تسقه شيئا يسيرا من شراب مرّ أو حامض، فإن ذلك يوافقه ولا يزيده إلا قوّة واستفراغا، وأمّا الشراب الحار في But if the patient is full and thirsty, there is no harm in giving him a little of some bitter or sour drink; for that suits his condition, and will do him nothing but good, increasing his evacuation and strengthening him; but hot drinks must not be given if there is any obstacle such as weakness of constitution, or if he who suffers from the fracture, dislocation, blow, or fall, is a boy or an old man, or if the weather is excessively hot or cold.وإن كان المريض معتدلّ الحال فى
And if the patient's condition is moderate, he must content himself with cold pulses and fowls' flesh, and abstain from wine, fat meat, full meals, and every kind of food that fills the veins with blood; thus when you have secured against swelling, and there is no fear of effusion into the part,
Let the patient then return to his former regimen, and if the broken bone is still unhealed, he should be given food that is nourishing, much, thick, strong, with a certain stickiness like porridge, rice, meat, legs, and entrails of cattle. And eggs, soft fish, thick drink and the like; for by this regimen the bone will heal more quickly and better. Know that broken bones in strong men and old people can never join and fuse as they were before.
Their bones are dry and hard, and although they may join and fuse, it will not be as it was before; it will be like the bones of small children, but nature will produce on all sides around the broken bone something that resembles glue, which will bind and hold it together.
Until it comes to be as strong and secure as it was before, so that nothing hinders him in his activities.
For this reason, the patient's food should be that which is strong, viscous and thick, as we have said. Know that broken bones vary according to the different parts of the body; a broken leg bone is not like a broken head bone, and a broken chest bone is not like a broken back bone.
Likewise, all the other parts of the body are different from each other; we will mention every type of bone fracture separately in its own place, and a bone fracture may also vary in itself.وإنّما نذكر هنا الكلّ على الجملة، لأنّ نوع الغذاء واحد للكلّ، وقد ذكرنا أنّه يجب فى الكسور أكل الأغذية الغليظة اللزجة، ويختلف الكسر أيضا باختلاف صغر السنّ أو كبره، فإنّ العظام التى تكون مع
For in their youth they are small and thin, and as people grow older their bones become larger and harder; thus a broken bone may be a simple fracture without any splintering, or it may be a lengthwise fracture with splintering. A broken bone may also have splintered pieces protruding out of the skin, or some may be buried inside; there may also be a break in the skin and in the bone itself, and sometimes there may just be a hairline fracture.ويكون الكسر أيضا فى موضع منفتح على الجوف أو موضع مغلق، وهذا الكسر إن كان فى موضع منفتح فهو أسهل إن شاء الله تعالى لأنّه لا يمنع الأكل والش
And each type has a specific trick to fix it, as will be mentioned in detail in its place, and among the things by which one recognizes a bone fracture are its crookedness, protuberance, sensitivity to touch, and crunching when you press on it with your hand.
When there is no obvious crookedness, or crunching, or sensitivity to touch in the area, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture; it may be a bruise, a minor fracture, or a slight crack. You should not move it by stretching or pressing at all.
Instead, apply the medications that will be mentioned later what suits the site, then gently tighten it. Know that if a bone is fractured and shattered by two without causing any fragments, except that each part has separated from its partner.
You should immediately straighten and smooth it before a hot swelling occurs; if a hot swelling does occur, leave it for a few days until the hot swelling subsides, then smooth it in any way you can with gentleness and skill.وإن كانت به شظايا وظهرت فيدخل في موضعه أطرافها فتشبث وتلتصق وربّما ذهبت فيعسر تسويته، فهذا إن كان في الكعب أو العانة أو اليدين أو القدمين وأشباه ذلك من الأعضاء التى لا يمكن أن يتسع فيها موضع الشظايا فتبادر الى خلعها ثمّ تجبر الكسر.
And if there are fragments, and their tips appear and attach and adhere in the spot, it is difficult to smooth; this occurs when it's in the heel or pelvis, or the hands or feet, and similar parts, where the space for the fragments cannot be expanded, so you must dislodge them first, then fix the fracture. Know that fixing and smoothing it is easier than a bone with fragments inside. Then it is bound as mentioned later. If there are fragments inside the bone, then you must stretch the fractured part from both sides, whether it's a hand or leg.وإن كان فى الرأس او الصدر او البطن وامثال ذلك من المو
If it is in the head or chest or abdomen, and similar parts, you can use your hands if the member is small, or two cords, or a cord with your hand; place the member on a flat surface in its natural shape so that when the fractured pieces of bone extend, then smooth these protrusions into their places by whatever means you can with skill and gentleness.وإن لم يمكنك تسوية الموضع الذى فيه الكسر حتّى يلتئم فاعلم أنّك لا بدّ أن تجبره على ما هو عليه، فإن لم تفعل ذلك ذهب الكسر وذهب العضو.
Strive as much as you can to avoid causing the patient pain or discomfort, and try to bring the two bone fragments together in the best possible position. At that point, you should touch and feel them with your hand; if you notice anything out of place, correct it as much as you can.
Beware of excessive stretching and strong compression, as many ignorants do, claiming that they cause hot swelling or a time-bound swelling in the affected limb, as I have witnessed their actions many times.
Then, after the adjustment, perfection and tension, make sure that the limb remains still and quiet, and caution the patient to avoid moving it during his waking hours and sleep, when changing positions or disturbed, and during defecation and all his movements as much as he can; also, he should be careful that the limb's position is one that ensures comfort.
This is because, whenever he feels pain or discomfort in the limb while it's in a certain position, he should move it to another position where he doesn't feel any pain and he should also make sure that this new position is straight and level.وإن كانا عظمين صغيرين كعظمى الكفّ أو القدم أو منكب أو مرفق وكانا غير متقاربين أو متداخلين فاشدهما برفق إلى أن تلتصق مفرقتهما وتلتئم فإن لم يمكنك في ذلك اليوم حتى ينفصلا فعوّد العضو على الشدّ والإمالة لئلا يع
If they are two small bones, such as the bones of the hand, foot, shoulder or elbow, and they are not close together or overlapping, then pull them gently together until their ends meet and heal. If you can't do that on the same day until they separate, then accustom the limb to stretching and tilting so that no crookedness occurs when it heals; as for how to stretch a broken limb, it is as I am about to describe to you: know that broken bones differ in size, whether small or large.
So, the bandages used for wrapping should be soft and gentle for small bones, but they should be wide and sturdy for large bones like the thigh, back or chest; this is because a wide bandage holds a large bone firmly in place and tightens it evenly on all sides without causing any gaps.وإن كان المكسور طولا فى عظمين أو أكثر فعُدّلهما وافطرهما حتى تلتئم مفرقهما ثمّ لفّهما سواء، وإن كانت الكسرة عرضا فى عظمين بحيث يكون أحدهما فوق الآخر فقدّمهما إليك وضمّ أحد العظمين على صاحبه.
Then, after you have finished smoothing it, begin to apply the paint that matches it. You then apply a gentle massage to the area around the fracture and begin to wrap the bandage around the site of the fracture itself, three or four turns according to what the limb deserves. You then tighten your grip on the bandage slightly and take it up to the top of the site of the fracture.
You then wrap it more tightly than you did the first time, then move the bandage away from the fracture a little and loosen the tension slightly until you have taken up some good material from the correct site. You then take another bandage and wrap it also around the fractured site.
You wrap it around several times, then take the bandage down to the lower end of the fracture, and in tightening and loosening the bandage you should do as we said before with regard to the upper first one. You then place between the layers of bandages a gentle massage or soft cloth so that the fracture is straightened out.
If there is any crookedness, then you should put something in between the bandages, otherwise do not, and then wrap another bandage around it. Then adjust the splints tightly over these bandages if there is no swelling or hot inflammation in the limb.وإن كان فى العضو نفخٌ او ورمٌ حارٌّ، فلا تبالغ فى شدّ الجبائر بل تجعلها أرخى قليلا من العادة على حسب ما يحتمل العضو، وتضع تحت الجبير كوسادتين أو ثلاثٍ لئلّا ينضغط الموضع الم
If there is swelling or hot inflammation in the limb, then do not tighten the splints too much but make them a little looser than usual according to what the limb can bear. You should put under the splint two or three cushions so that the site of the fracture is not compressed. If there is swelling or hot inflammation, then carry out something which will soothe the inflammation and reduce the swelling, and leave it for a few days, then tighten the splints. The splints should be made from half-reeds carved with wisdom or they should be made from wood.واحذر أن تجعل الجبير رقيقا فإنّه لا يُمسك الكسر، وإن أمسكه يوما أو يومين فهو ضعيف إن لم يكن من خشب الغرابيل وليكن عرض الج
that are made of pine or palm leaves or juniper or rush and the like, whatever is available; and let each splint be of this form and shape.
However, the splint that is placed on the fracture itself should be thicker and slightly wider than the other splints. The length of the splint should be made according to the size of the broken bone, whether large or small. The shape of the splint:
Then, it is tightened on the splints with another bandage in the same way as before. Then tie it tightly above according to what we have mentioned about tightening, that is, that your tightening be more on the site of the fracture. The further away from the fracture, the less the tightness should be.
The threads should be of intermediate thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and they should especially be made from dampened linen, for the threads that unskilled people use are often too thick, like twisted strips of linen, which is a great mistake.
Because then the tightness will be excessive, and thin threads are also unsuitable because you cannot achieve the desired level of tightness with them. There should be no less than a finger's width between each splint.
If the patient feels pain at the ends of the splints after they have been tightened in the correct places, then place some soft padding or fluffy wool underneath so that nothing hurts him there. If the fracture is accompanied by a wound and there is a breach in the skin, we will discuss this separately.
Know that not every broken bone should be splinted on the first day, because if it is a large bone, then splints should not be applied until five, seven, or more days later, depending on your confidence in avoiding hot swelling.
This is a description of the bandages that were used by previous generations to treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains. This is a general description of a simple bandage that can treat fractures and is suitable for most people, especially children and women, because it does not have excessive heat or coldness.
You should take the dust from the mill, which is the fine flour that clings to the walls of the mill when it is moving, knead it as it is without straining it with egg white, and make your kneading neither thick nor thin, then cover it.
A recipe for another poultice that sets broken bones, dislocations and bruises: take ten dirhams each of hemp, linseed, chickpeas, and caraway, five dirhams each of myrrh and gilo, twenty dirhams each of Armenian or Roman clay, and thirty dirhams of frankincense. Grind everything and mix it with water from aroar or egg white, if the patient is overheated; then use this poultice, for it is good for joining bones quickly, and suits most people because of its moderate nature.
Another poultice that also benefits broken bones and bruises: take ten dirhams each of myrrh, hemp, and white poplar, five dirhams each of myrrh and gilo, six dirhams of chickpeas, and twenty dirhams of Armenian clay. Grind everything finely, strain it, and knead it with water or egg white; then use it.
A poultice for joints and bones that have slipped out of place, to alleviate the pain that arises from it, as well as for skull fractures and broken bones: take wool that has been made coarse with fulling, soak it in boiled vinegar and oil, and apply it to the affected area. This poultice does not have the strength to set bones.
But it is excellent for reducing inflammation and alleviating pain, especially hot inflammation. Another poultice that sets broken bones: take fig leaves and wild poppies, grind them both, and apply the poultice while they are still moist. A brief recipe for another poultice to be used when a bone has set.
If you want to reduce the remaining swelling, take equal parts of white poplar, chamomile, violet flowers, and ground cornel, grind them all and knead them with plaster if the member is not overheated; but if it is, knead them with coriander water or plain water and use it.
Description of another stronger poultice than the former, to be used when a hard swelling occurs on the healing of the bone: take equal parts of camphor, flaxseed, carline thistle, king's crown, marjoram, violet and chamomile.
All are ground and made into a paste with rosewater, fresh water or plaster, depending on the temperature of the member and its heat subsiding. However, in his book, Hippocrates does not mention that it should be applied to the broken member when setting the bone.
Except for cerate made from wax and oil, nothing else; and he describes it to be of medium thickness, neither thick nor thin. However, Galen believed that when setting the bone, something with drying properties should be applied to the broken member, such as myrrh, gum arabic, frankincense and similar substances we mentioned earlier.
Poultice recipe for weakness and pain: take equal parts of mastic, roasted wheat, human hair, bird feathers, camphor and salt, grind and sieve them, then make a paste and apply it. As for how long the bandage should stay on.
Then, if there is no pain, itching or movement of the broken bone in its place, do not remove it for several days; but if there is severe itching, pain or swelling in that spot.
Act quickly and remove it immediately, then take a soft cloth or sea sponge soaked in lukewarm water and wash the spot until the itching and pain subside, then leave the member to rest for an hour.ثمّ تأخذ خرقة ليّنة مبلولة فى الخلّ أو فى الماء الفاتر وتضعها على الموضع، ثمّ تلبس فوقها قميصا او خرقة شمعيّة ورباطا عريضا.
Then take a soft, damp cloth in vinegar or lukewarm water and place it on the spot, then wear a linen shirt or waxed cloth and a wide bandage over it. Then apply carded wool soaked in vinegar, oil or rose water and tie it around it for the night so as to prevent hot swelling, soothe the inflammation of the member, relieve its pain, and then return it to gentle compression and light bandaging; do not compress it as tightly as before.
And be gentle with it until it heals. If you see that the swelling, redness, pain, inflammation, and all the symptoms have gone away, and you only need to bandage and tighten it, then treat it as you did at first. But if nothing of what we mentioned happens to the limb,
do not remove it except after three, four, five, or seven days, and sometimes as long as twenty days, depending on the condition of the limb as we have said, until the bone is set and the flesh begins to heal around it.
Also, at that time, increase the tightness more than your first tightening, and also increase the thickness of the patient's food as mentioned earlier. If you see that the place of the fracture has dried up and become thinner than it should, then know that the food is being prevented from reaching it.
Soak it in lukewarm water each time you remove the bandage, and do this every three days, and also loosen the tightness a little. For by doing this, food will reach the limb and it will heal quickly. But as for what ignorant people do, when they reset the bone,
If the bone does not set correctly in the first place, but sets crookedly, then it is a mistake on their part and a great risk. If it were correct, the earlier generations would have mentioned it in their books and practiced it, but I have not seen any trace of this at all. The correct thing to do is not to work on it,.
Chapter Two.
On fractures that occur in the head.
The types of fractures that occur in the head are numerous, their forms varied, and their causes diverse. Sometimes a fracture occurs due to a blow from a sword, and it may either pierce through the entire bone until it reaches the peritoneum under the bone. Just as an axe does to wood.وأحيانا يكون الكسر من ضربة عصا أو حجر او س
This type of fracture is called a "closed" fracture, while the second type, where the sword has cut through part of the bone and exposed its surface but has not completely severed it, is known as an "open" fracture. The wound from these two types of fractures can be either large or small.
There is also a type of fracture called "comminuted" or "crushed," caused by a blow from a stone or falling on a stone, for example. This type of fracture can either penetrate close to the membrane beneath the bone, or it can be limited to the surface of the bone.
The wound from these two types of fractures can also be either large or small. There is also a type of fracture that is hidden within the bone, just under the scalp hairline; it is a minor crack known as a  "fissure.
This type of fracture is therefore called  "subcutaneous," and there are fractures that occur as a result of a fall or a blow from a stone, for example, that penetrate the outer layer of the bone and create a凹 into the bone, similar to the indent left on a copper vessel by a blow.
This is most commonly seen in the head of children with soft, green bones; all types of fractures can have dislocated or non-dislocated fragments, and we will discuss their treatment in detail later. We identify these different types of fractures through examination.
The examination involves probing with probes and removing any rotten flesh, and for the subcutaneous type, you examine the bone and smear it with ink; the fracture will appear black. As for the treatment of fractures, you must first look at the patient's symptoms.
If you observe symptoms that clearly indicate danger, such as vomiting bile, extension of the body, loss of consciousness, hoarseness, fainting, high fever, bulging and redness of the eyes, and other similar symptoms, then do not attempt to treat the patient, for death is certain in most cases with these symptoms.
And if you see symptoms that are not terrifying and you hope for his safety, then at that time take up his treatment, because if the wounded comes to you in the first instance of his wound and that is in the days of winter.
It is appropriate that you strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day in any case, and if it is in the summer days, it is appropriate to hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day before the membrane under the bone rots, so that those symptoms we have described are not exposed.
If the bone fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain and was crushed and bruised, you should cut off the crushed and bruised part as I am describing to you. This is done by shaving the head of the wounded patient.
And you reveal the bone in any way you can, and according to the shape of the wound and what is easier for the patient. If you see upon revealing the bone a bleeding or hot swelling, then deal with that as it should be.
This is done by packing the area with pieces of cloth soaked in a mixture of rose water and olive oil, and cleaning the wound until the swelling subsides and bleeding stops. Then you proceed to hollow out and remove the bone, and this can be done in one of two ways.وأحدهما أن تجعل أسفل موضع الجرح وعاءً مملوءا بماءٍ بارد لئلاّ يتعدّى الورم إلى ما تحت العظم فيفسد ما هناك، فإذا فعلت ذلك فانظر إلى الموضع المنهشم المرضوض فأمرجه بالحديد واقطعه على قدر
One of them is to place a container filled with cold water under the wound site so that the swelling does not spread to below the bone and rot what is there. If you do this, then look at the crushed and bruised area, smooth it out with iron and cut it according to: .وإن
Then you use another cutter after that one, a little wider. This is its picture:.ثمّ تقطع ما تحت ذلك من العظم على قدر الحاجة إلى أن تيسر لك انتزاعه وإن رأيت أنّ الجرح يت
Then you also use another cutter that is wider than the second one. You should have a variety of cutters, some wider and some narrower, with very sharp edges. They should be made of good Indian iron or steel.وإن رأيت أنّ الجرح ينزف دما وافرا فامسحه بخرقة مغموسة فى شراب ورد أو دهن ورد، وإن كان ينزف دما عبيطا فأمسك الموضع بخرقة مبلولة فى ماء بارد حتّى يسكن النزف ثمّ أرنّقه.
And use gentleness in striking the section so as not to jar the head and harm it; for if the bone is strong and hard, you should drill around it before using the tongs with drills that they call non-penetrating drills, and they are called non-penetrating drills.
Because they do not go beyond the limit of the skull bone to what is behind it, because the drill has a round edge below its sharp head, like a ring or small circle, which prevents it from going deep and beyond the thickness of the bone.
You should make a lot of these drills, each of which is suitable for the thickness of that bone, so that for every skull there is a drill whose sharp tip matches its length and width to the thickness of that skull; this is the image of three types. of drills large, medium and small:
And as for the method of drilling around the broken bone, you should place the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the drill to another place and make the distance between each hole equal to the thickness of the probe or something like it.
Then cut with the tongs between each pair of holes, and do this as gently as you can, as we have said, until you pull out the bone either by hand or by something else, one of the tools that you have prepared for that purpose.
Like the brain and small hooks; you should be very careful not to let the drill or the clip touch anything of the membrane, for if you hollow out the bone and free it from the membrane if it is attached to it, then you should strip off the membrane.وإن لم يبرح الصفاق موضعه فافعل به فعل التقطيع، ثمّ إن قيل ان القحف لا يتسع بل يضيق فلا تنزع العظم عنه بل اجبره على التوسّط الى ما فوقه من العظام وإن كان ينبغى أن يكون تحت الذقن وقد كسرت عظام الوجه أو بعضها فإن
And if the skull does not expand but narrows, do not remove the bone from it, but force it to be intermediate above it among the other bones; and if the bones of the face or some of them have been broken, and the roughness remaining in the bone is smoothed with another tool similar to the clip, except that it should be thinner and finer than the rest of the clips.And if any small bones or splinters remain, remove them gently with the tools you have.
Then the wound is treated with bandages and ointments, as will be mentioned. As for the other side of the operation, it is very simple and free from risk, as Galen mentioned and praised highly. He said: You should first expose the bone at the site where the fracture is more and more prominent, so that when you expose this part, you place under it the tip of this lenticular section, and this is its picture:
The lenticular portion is smooth and does not cut anything, while the sharp portion is in its sides going in length as you see, so that the lenticular portion rests on the peritoneum and the sharp face of the section in the bone. Then you strike the section from one side.
With a small hammer, until you cut all the bone gently as it turns, and you are safe from the membrane, and nothing fearful will happen to it, even if the operator is the most ignorant and most cowardly person, yes, even if he is sleepy.
If something from the membrane remains attached to the bone in some places on the bone, scrape it off with the tip of the lenticular section itself and gently get rid of it, for it will be gotten rid of without harm or fear.
However, if the fracture of the bone did not penetrate the membrane and the face of the broken bone remained rough with fine splinters, then it is necessary to strip off that roughness and remove those splinters with delicate chisels, which have been made in a variety of sizes so that you can use them in each place where they are most appropriate and suitable according to the demands of the operation.
And the nature and shape of the broken bone, and you should use in stripping off the bone first, the widest chisel, then use one narrower afterwards, and continue to do so in that order until you finish using the narrowest and thinnest of them all.وأمّا إن كان الكسر قد نفذ الى الغشاء وكان فى العظم شظايا لطاف منفصلة متباعدة عن موضع الكسر، وظهرت تلك الشظايا تحت الغشاء وقد سيطرت عليها، فانبغى أن تنزعها بأدقّ المجارد حتّى لا تخالفك فيعود الكسر الى مكانه، بل يجب أن تسير ف
And as for other small incisions and fractures, one should treat each one according to what leads to its healing, which is something that is not hidden from anyone with even the slightest experience in this craft, and who has read and understood what we have written about large fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed when you remove the bone, you should take a linen cloth the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil and place it over the mouth of the wound. Then take another folded or triple-folded cloth. And soak it in syrup and rose oil, then place it over the first cloth. Do this as gently as you can so as not to weigh down the peritoneum. Then apply a wide bandage above that, but do not tighten it except to the extent that it holds the wound closed.وإن كان الكسر فى عظم العانة وكان الذراع متدليا من تحتها فهناك يجب أن تجعل المريض مستلقيا على ظهره وتضع وسادة بين ساقيه لتستريح ركبتاه عليها ويجب أن لا تحرّك الفخذ أو تلويها إلى أحد الجانبين بل تميلها إلى الخلف قدر ما أمكنك لئلّ
If the fracture is in the pubic bone and the arm is hanging below it, you should have the patient lie on his back and place a pillow between his legs so that his knees are supported by it. You must not move or twist the thigh to either side, but tilt it backward as far as possible. Then leave the patient with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the hot swelling, then release it and afterwards use remedies that have a drying effect, such as the roots of iris, rice flour, ground myrrh, and the like. You should make these into a powder.وإن كان الكسر فى عظم العانة وكان الذراع متدليا من تحتها فهناك يجب أن تجعل المريض مستلقيا على ظهره وتضع وسادة
If the fracture is in the pubic bone and the arm is hanging below it, you should have the patient lie on his back and place a pillow between his legs so that his knees are supported by it. You must not move or twist the thigh to either side, but tilt it backward as far as possible. Then, using a powder made from these remedies, sprinkle it on the wound as it is, dry. In general, you should use a remedy that cleans without irritating, and in treating the wound, take care that the oil does not become soiled or dirty, and do not allow pus to accumulate in it at all.وإن كان الكسر فى عظم العانة وكان الذراع متدليا من تحتها فهناك يجب أن تجعل المريض مستلقيا على
Because pus, when it gathers on the membrane of the brain, corrupts and putrifies it, and this causes great misery for the patient, and it may occur in the lining of the scalp when the bone is exposed, especially if treatment is neglected.
If you see blackness on its surface, and the patient experiences the symptoms we have mentioned, then know that he is undoubtedly doomed. But if the blackness was caused by a medicine applied to it, and the strength of that medicine was such that it could cause the blackness,
you should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, mix them together thoroughly, and use it to soak a cloth which you then apply to the lining. Then treat him with all the appropriate remedies until he recovers.
Chapter 3
On setting broken noses.
Know that only the upper part of the nose can break, or one of its sides, because they are bone, whereas the lower part is cartilage and cannot break; what it may suffer instead is displacement, crookedness, or a bump.
If one of its sides is broken, you should insert your little finger into the nostril and reduce that fracture from within with your small finger while your thumb and index finger push from outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape; be gentle so as not to cause the patient pain.
If the fracture is at the top of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, it should be reduced with a rod that has a slight thickness; if both sides are broken, do the same. The fracture must be set on the first day.
If possible, do this on the first day; if not, wait until the seventh or tenth day after the swelling has subsided, then insert a cotton thread into the nostril - one thread for a single fracture and two threads for a double fracture.
Let the threads be as thick as to fill up the hole in the nose, and some of the early healers mentioned that the threads should be greased with tallow and changed every day. I do not think that is necessary, however, but rather that they should be wetted with egg white mixed with flour powder.
Then the threads are left until the bone is set and the cartilage hardens. Goose feathers can also be inserted into the nose, wrapped in soft cloth, after the removal of the threads, to make the breaking of the nose more complete and so that the patient cannot refuse to breathe.
This is not a necessary thing, if you want to do it, you can do it with threads, and if there is a hot swelling in the nose during your work, dress the nose with cerate or with cotton wool dipped in vinegar and rose oil, or something of Diachylon ointment.
If there is no hot swelling, then you should dress the outside of the nose with fine semolina and myrrh, both ground together with egg white, and place a soft bandage on it, but do not tie the nose at all. If the nasal bones are broken into small pieces,
then you should split it and take them out with the instrument that suits them, then sew up the cut and treat it with ointments that promote healing. If there is an injury inside the nose, you should treat it with threads and use lead pipes. until it heals.
Chapter 4.
On the treatment of a broken mandible.
If the lower jaw is broken and there is no wound, then it is easy to know. If it is only broken on one side and not in two places, and is concave towards the inside, then its treatment is straightforward.وإن كان قد وقع الى داخل وبدا من خارج وجرح مع الكسر لم يزل عن موضعه، فإنّه لا يزال ينبغى أن يوقف حتى يبرأ الجرح ويندمل ثمّ يعالج بالآلة الت
If the fracture is on the right side, you should insert the index finger of your left hand into the patient's mouth; if it is on the left side, you should insert the index finger of your right hand and gently lift the fracture prominence from the inside out.
With your other hand on the outside of the bone, you should adjust and align it. If the jaw fracture is split into two pieces, you should use traction from both sides to realign it, especially if there is a displacement of the teeth.
Or if they are separated, you should pull them together with a gold or silver wire, or a ligature, then apply the periotomy on the broken jaw, and then put a bandage over it, and finally a large splint, or a piece of leather, equal in length to the jaw. Then you should bind it tightly with a bandage in the best way you can, so that it remains in place and does not move. You should also instruct the patient to rest and have soft food only. If you think that something has changed in the shape of the jaw, then act promptly on the third day to correct it.
Then you should bind it tightly with a bandage in the best way you can, so that it remains in place and does not move. You should also instruct the patient to rest and have soft food only. If you think that something has changed in the shape of the jaw, then act promptly on the third day to correct it. Then you should dress the wound with flour mixed with egg white, or with semolina, after removing the periotomy, and put a soft bandage over it. As long as the dressing sticks to the wound and there is no change in the condition of the bone, then leave it alone.
Do not loosen the bandage until the fracture heals and becomes strong, as this type of fracture often takes three weeks to heal. If during that time you notice a hot swelling, then use the remedies mentioned several times to alleviate it until the swelling goes down.
If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, and there is a shard of bone that has broken away, you should gently remove it with whatever instrument works best for you. If the mouth of the wound is narrow, then widen it using a scalpel as needed.
Then if those splinters are extracted and nothing remains, stitch the wound if it is wide; otherwise apply one of the ointments suitable for this purpose. And the wound is sutured until it heals.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of a broken collar bone.
The collar bone most commonly breaks from the front, at the end of the shoulder joint, and its fracture occurs in one of three ways: either it breaks into two pieces without any splintering, which is the easiest to set; or
it shatters into multiple pieces, which is more difficult to set; or the fracture occurs with an open wound. If there is no open wound, you should have two assistants: one to hold the arm nearest the broken collar bone, and the other to stretch the neck towards the other side. وإذا كان الكسر من جرح فليكشف عن موضع الجرح ويجبر الكسر على ما ذكرناه ويخيط الجرح.
If the fracture is from a wound, then you should expose the wound site and set the fracture as we have already described, then stitch the wound. Then smooth out the fracture with your fingers so that it assumes its proper shape, with no bumps or irregularities; if more stretch is needed, you should place a ball made of cloth or felt under the patient's armpit. وأمّا الجبر فمن وجهين إما أن يصير الكسر على خطّ واحد وهو الأسهل، وإمّا أن يكون نتوّاً الى فوق وينبغى أن تصير الترقوة المكسورة هكذا [في الرسم] وترتدّ
There are two methods of setting the fracture: either the break is in a single line, which is the easier method; or there is a bump pointing upwards, in which case the broken collar bone should look like this [in the diagram], with its end turned inwards. Then you should pull and lift the collar bone, and compress the ball with your hand until the fracture is set as it should be. If you cannot pull the end of the collar bone outwards because it has moved too deeply inwards, then the patient should lie on his back.
A pillow should be placed under the patient's shoulder, and the assistant should press down on the shoulder to push the deep end of the collar bone up and out; at this point you should set the fracture and smooth it with your fingers.
If you feel that a splinter of the clavicle has broken and is moving, you should make an incision over it and gently remove the splinter. If the splinter is trapped in the bone, use one of the cutting instruments prepared for this purpose to cut it out. After placing the patient under the clavicle, the instrument that protects the peritoneum - an instrument made of wood or iron - is placed. This is its picture:
It is similar to a spoon without a rim, and its width should be according to the size of the bone, big or small. As for its length, it should also depend on the work you are doing, and let it have two edges as you see, one edge wider and the other narrower.
If the wound opening from which you removed the bone splinter is large and you are secure from hot swelling, then close the edges of the wound with stitches. But if the opening is small or you fear hot swelling, then pack the wound with a pad to the size of the wound opening.
If there is hot swelling, moisten the wound opening with rose oil and vinegar or wine, and then dress it. As for bone fracture without a wound or incision, you should apply a poultice made from flour mill dust mixed with egg white to the bone. Then, place a soft bandage on it and then put a pillow under his armpit if necessary. Then take a long turband that is one yard wide or so, fold a pad onto the bandage and dressing, then take a slender board. Its width should be three fingers and its length also, then wrap the cloth around the board, then wrap that cloth along with the splint in the part of the turband which falls on the fracture site, then tighten the turband over the fracture as it turns. And wrap it around his neck, under his sound armpit and under the patient's armpit, and turn it repeatedly on each side as you see that the compression holds the fracture firmly in place, which should not be hidden from you.فإن احسست فى موضع الكسر بالورم الحارّ وكنت قد شددت الجبيرة على الكسر كما ذكرنا قبل ذلك فافتح تلك الجبيرة وضع تحتها خرقة مبللة بدهن الورد والخلّ او الشراب فإن سكن الورم فأعد عليها
It is important that the plaster does not slip off the broken bone. And so you must examine the patient every day and whenever you find that the plaster has shifted, correct it by tightening the bandages, then make sure the patient sleeps on his back with a small pillow under his armpit.
to elevate the collar bone when the shoulder is elevated, or tie his arm to his neck. Do not loosen the bandages unless something happens in the area - itching or swelling for instance - during the first twelve days.
Then renew the dressing if you see a reason for it. and leave it until the collar bone is set and healed, which usually takes place in about eight to ten weeks. In some people this may happen sooner.
Chapter 6.
On the treatment of a broken collar bone. Collar bones are seldom broken in their broad part, but rather in their edges; this is determined by touch, and the shape of the break depends on its form.
Reducing and returning it to its natural shape by every means possible, then press on the break with flour mixed with egg white and a soft sponge, and put over it a splint made of wood.
Make the splint as wide as, or a little wider than, the collar bone itself; if there is a bump under the splint in any part of the collar bone, smooth it out with a soft sponge until the splint lies flat, then wind a long bandage tightly around it.
Make it as tight as possible, and make sure the splint does not slip; examine the bandage every day, and whenever it becomes loose, tighten it again, and adjust the splint if it has shifted; let the patient lie on his sound side, and the collar bone will be set in twenty days.
Let the ligature remain for one or twenty-five days, and if this time elapses without misgiving, as there is no fear of a fracture or dislocation, then untie it, for it belongs to those bones which are not apt to splinter or break. But if any fragment of bone should protrude and lie under the skin, cut around it and extract it. And do as I have said regarding a fracture of the collar bone, by applying cold compresses if any inflammation should occur.
Chapter 7
On the treatment of fractures of the chest.
The chest may be fractured in the middle, but this is rare; its sides, however, are more frequently fractured and splintered. The symptoms of a fracture in the middle are a sinking of the chest, severe pain, difficulty in breathing, and cough.
The fracture may be accompanied by the effusion of blood, and the concavity in the fractured bone can be felt, and has a tendency to be easily perceived by touch. To reduce it, the patient should lie on his back with a pillow between his shoulders; then his scapulae are pressed down, his ribs are gathered together with the hands on both sides, and they are gently smoothed into place in any way that is possible.
And wait until the bone returns to its proper shape, then apply the bandage and splint over it, placing a thin board of willow or aspen or something similarly light, after wrapping it in cloth. Then, gently fasten it to the fractured bone so that it does not slip off; pass the ligature around in a circle towards the back several times and tie it tightly, then examine the ligature at all times, tightening it whenever it becomes slack.
If it becomes necessary to loosen the ligature on account of callus, pain, or swelling occurring at the site, quickly loosen it, remove the bandage, and treat whatever has occurred according to its treatment; then replace the bandage if you consider it advisable. Let him apply poultices and compresses until it heals.
Chapter 8.
In the treatment of broken ribs, know that fractures occur in the thick portions near the back, and at their fronts, they are only bruised because they are cartilaginous. Knowing this is not hidden from the sense of touch when probed with fingers.
To treat them, align the fracture with your fingers in the most proficient manner to restore the shape as it should be, then dress and compress the fractured rib if necessary. If the rib is fractured at an angle towards the inside, then it will cause severe pain for the patient.
And it is pricked like a prick that occurs in those with a punctured lung, because the rib pierces the diaphragm and causes shortness of breath, coughing, and vomiting a large amount of blood. This is difficult to treat, and the ancients have devised many treatments for it.وإن استدعاه الأمر الى الكيّ، فإنّه يكوى موضع الكسر، وينبغى أن يكون الكيّ بعد ثلاثة أيام من وقت الكسر، ومع الكيّ يدنو من الموضع الذى يقابله فى الصدر، ويكون
If it requires cauterization, then the site of the fracture should be cauterized. It is appropriate for cauterization to take place after three days from the time of the fracture. With cauterization, one should move closer to the opposite site in the chest. From those who have said that it is appropriate for the patient's diet to generate flatulence and winds so that the abdomen expands and stretches and pushes the fracture outward, and we dislike this so that it does not confirm the occurrence of a hot tumor if it has not occurred. But if it has occurred, then it increases it and confirms it.وأما من قال إنّه ينبغى أن يجوع ويظمأ فإنّا لا نرى ذلك، وإنّما نراه فى أول الأمر أن يطعم ويشرب ما يقوى به على الكيّ
As for those who say that the patient should be made to fast and thirst, we do not see this, but in the beginning, it is appropriate for the patient to eat and drink what strengthens him for cauterization. Some people say that a spoon should be placed on the site and sucked with force, which is similar to analogy, except that there is a fear that the spoon will attract foreign particles to the site due to its weakness. Some people say that the site should be covered with wool that has been soaked in hot oil.ومنهم من قال ينبغى أن يدلى فى موضع الكسر بزيت زعفران، وقد يحتاج الى الكيّ بأن يكوى فى الموضع، وأنّه ينفعه أن يكوى بقضيب ح
And make a dressing between the ribs until it is filled, so that the ligament is flat when you wrap it around, then treat the patient with the treatment of the wound from food and medicine, if the patient exerts something severe that he does not have patience for. And the bone pricked the diaphragm painfully, and we feared for the patient, so we should make an incision on the site and expose the broken rib, then we become under it with the tool that protects the peritoneum, which has been described earlier, and cut the bone gently and take it out.
Then we bring the edges of the wound together with stitches if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it heals. If a hot swelling occurs during this time, take action quickly by wetting bandages in rose water, place them on the site, and treat the patient with what reduces the swelling from within as well.
And he should lie on his side which makes sleeping easier until it heals.
Chapter 9.
On the treatment of spine and neck fractures.
As for the bones of the neck, when they are fractured, and there is little chance of that happening, and it most often happens due to a blow, and likewise for the vertebrae of the spine as well, if one of them is affected, and you want to know whether it will heal or not Look and see that his hands have become weak and numb, and have died, and he cannot move them, nor extend them, nor flex them, and if you prick them with a needle or stab them, he doesn't feel it and doesn't experience any pain in them, then know that in most cases it will not heal and is sure to perish.وإن رأيت يديه قد ماتتا ولكنّ فيهما روحا وحركتا قبضا وبسطا وأحسّ بالألم إذا نخسهما أو قرصهما فاعلم أنه يبرأ فى أكثر الأحوال.
And if you see that he can move his hands and feels pain when he is pricked or stabbed, know that the bone marrow is safe and that the patient will heal with treatment. If a spine fracture occurs in the same way and you want to know whether it will also heal or not
Examine his legs; if you see that they have relaxed and what has happened to the hands has also occurred, then when he lies on his back, wind and stool will escape without his wishing it, and when he lies on his stomach, urine will escape without his wishing it. If he lies on his back and wants to urinate, but cannot, then know that he is doomed, so do not trouble yourself over treating him; if nothing of this has occurred, then the case is less serious. The treatment for what has happened is to try to soothe the hot swelling.
You should place rose oil on the affected vertebrae, either alone or mixed with roasted egg yolks; you should apply this three times a day until the hot swelling subsides. Then apply one of the strengthening and astringent dressings to the area and secure it with a bandage. You should also instruct the patient to rest and remain静.
The patient should not sleep except on the side which does not cause him pain until he recovers; if a piece of bone or something else has become dislodged from the bone as a result of the injury, then you should split the skin and remove that bone.وإذا وجدت فى موضع الرّضّ عظما قد تكسّر وتبيّنت ذلك ونظرت الى الموضع فوجدته قد تقارص واجتمع وتآلف، فضعه على الحجر واطحنه بحديد حارّ حتّى يسكن ما به من الورم ويذهب ما فيه من الألم، ثمّ ضع عليه أحد ال If you find in the site of the injury that a bone has broken and you see that it has come together and united, then place it on a stone and crush it with hot iron until the swelling subsides and the pain goes away; then stitch the lips of the wound together if it is large, then treat it with healing ointments until it recovers. If the last vertebra of the coccyx, the tailbone, has broken, you should insert your left thumb into the anus.
You should smooth out the broken bone with your other hand as best you can, then apply a dressing and a splint if necessary, then secure it.وإذا وجدت فى موضع الرضّ عظما قد تكسّر وتبيّنت ذلك ونظرت الى الموضع فوجدته قد تقارص واجتمع وتآلف، فضعه على الحجر واطحنه بحديد حارّ حتّى يس
If you feel a broken splinter in it, make an incision over it and extract it, and treat the wound with the treatment mentioned earlier until it heals.
Chapter Ten.
On the treatment of a broken pelvis.
Rarely do the pelvis bones break, but when they do, it is usually a result of the bones shattering at their ends and splitting lengthwise, tilting inwards. The patient experiences pain, discomfort, and numbness in the affected leg.
To treat this type of fracture, you must feel for the broken bone with your hand to determine its location and shape. If the fracture is only at the edges, then reduce it according to what you can manage to make it look normal again.
If the fracture is lengthwise or has tilted inwards, then you should lay the patient on their stomach so that you can reduce the fracture. Once it is reduced, apply a bandage over it and place a splint made of wood or leather over the bandage and tighten it securely.
Do not be alarmed if the fracture shifts or the splint needs to be removed, simply re-adjust the splint and fill any concavities in the sides with padding to ensure a smooth surface. You should then instruct the patient to sleep on their back or unaffected side, especially if they experience swelling and heat in the affected area.
Do not rush to treat the fracture if there is hot swelling, instead wait until it subsides and then resume treatment. If you find any splinters or shards of bone in the fracture, do not attempt to remove them.
Instead, simply reduce the fracture from the outside as we have described and leave it loose until it heals.
Chapter Eleven.
On the treatment of a broken humerus.وأعظمه عظم الكتف وموضع الكسر فيه
The humerus is the bone between the elbow and the shoulder. If it fractures, there are two main methods of treatment: one is to use a curved, smooth rod of moderate thickness placed along the bone as follows:.
And tie it at both ends, then suspend it from a high place and have the patient sit on a chair. Then throw his broken arm over the pole until his armpit sticks to the middle of the bend in the pole. Then suspend something heavy above him.
Or a servant extends it downward, then the doctor adjusts the fracture with his hands until the fracture is reduced as it should be. The other method is for the patient to lie on his back and his hand is suspended from his neck by a ligature.
Then order two servants, one of whom holds above the fracture with his hands and the other below it, and each of them pulls in his direction. If you want a stronger pull, tie a ligature under the fracture and another above it, and each servant pulls in his direction.
If the fracture is close to the shoulder joint, the middle of the ligature should be under the armpit and the other under the fracture towards the elbow; likewise, if the fracture is close to the elbow, the ligature should be on that spot and on the elbow itself.
Then adjust the fracture gently without violence until the fracture is reduced as it should be and has healed well; then tighten it if no hot swelling appears. If a hot swelling appears, leave it until the seventh day, and put on it a woolen compress wetted with vinegar and rose oil.
Until the swelling subsides, then tighten it. The method of tightening is to lay the bandage on the fracture, then wrap a new cloth around the bandage, then bring the arm towards the chest and put his hand open on his shoulder,.
carrying the cloth and tightening on the arm so that the arm performs the function of a splint if nothing prevents you from doing so, and nothing has changed in the broken bone. If you are afraid that something might change in it, use splints instead.
And to place on the fracture itself a cast that is wider and stronger than the other casts, and to make between each cast the width of a finger, and to make the length of the casts according to the fracture, increasing by three fingers on each side.
Then tighten the casts as I mentioned in the first part of the chapter.
And it is that you should tighten more on the site of the fracture.
And the farther the fracture is, the less the tension should be. If you see that putting the casts and tension as we said in your hour of setting the member, then do so.
And if you fear a hot swelling, then leave the tension and casts until the seventh day as we said, then check the ligament every three days so that an itching or swelling does not occur in the area, or food is prevented from reaching the member due to excessive tension, then all of this can be corrected as mentioned.
If you are sure that nothing like this will happen, then do not dissolve the ligament except after many days, and it should be that the patient lies on his back with his hand on his stomach, and a pillow filled with wool, moderate, is placed under the axilla.
And check at any time, day or night, so that the shape of the broken member does not change or the ligament becomes relaxed, then correct all of this with your effort, and make the patient's food on the rank that we presented, so that the food is gentle first, until the bone is ready to harden.
You should then thicken his food, because it is the custom of the arm and leg to harden in forty days, so at that time you should dissolve it and use the bath and treat with ointments that are suitable for that. If the fracture was severe and crushed.
Do not dissolve the ligament until fifty days or two months.
Chapter Twelve.
On the Treatment of a Fracture of the Forearm.
The forearm is composed of two bones, one of which is small and lies next to the thumb, while the other is large and sits under the small bone from below. The larger bone may fracture on its own, or the smaller bone may fracture alone, or both bones may fracture together.
When the small bone at the top of the forearm fractures, its treatment is straightforward and recovery quick. However, when the larger bone at the bottom fractures, the break is more difficult to treat and recovery slower. The worst-case scenario is when both bones fracture together. If the small bone at the top fractures,.
The surgeon should apply a gentle and gradual extension to realign the bone. If the larger bone is fractured, then a more forceful extension is required. However, if both bones are fractured, an even stronger extension is necessary.
The hand should be placed on a pillow during the extension, with the thumb pointing upward and higher than the other fingers, and the little finger lower than the rest of the fingers, while the patient sits cross-legged.وينبغى أن يبدأ المدّ من تحت فيوضع حديد تحت الزند ويكون المدّ برفق فإن رأى الطبيب أنه لا يتمّ مدّه دفعة واحدة فليكرر عليه المدّ حتّى يتمّه ولا ينبغى أن يجعل اليد ممدودا على وسادة واحدة بل على وسائد شتى من تحت الذراع الى أسفل وإ
The extension should begin from below, by placing a bar under the forearm, and it should be performed gently. If the surgeon sees that the extension cannot be completed in one go, then he should repeat the process until it is complete. The hand should not rest on a single pillow but on
Then, an assistant should extend the forearm from below, either with their hand or with a strap, while another assistant extends it from above. The surgeon should then realign the bone to the best shape possible. If there are fragments in the fracture,.
do your best to return each fragment to its proper place. If a fragment is protruding and irritating the skin, with no hope of setting it, then make an incision over it as described in the previous chapter. If there is both a fracture and a wound,.
Take the treatment from there, if the swelling in the first dressing is hot, then spread a patch of cerotem made with rose oil and white wax, and let it be somewhere between thick and thin. And bind the patch gently until the swelling subsides.
Remove the cerotem and place the prepared bandage from flour dust with egg white, then wear the splints and let the splint that is placed on the fracture itself be a little wider and stronger. Know that in most cases, the number of arm splints is six.
If the fracture is in one radius or both radii, then make your grip on the site of the fracture stronger and harder. And whenever you rotate to above or below, make the grip a little softer as mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And let the patch that wraps around the fracture be a soft, moist patch and not too hard. And let the thread that is tied with it be of linen especially, intermediate between thinness and thickness as we described. And check the limb and ligament after a few days.وإن وجدت الورم قد سكن وبدت العظام فى موضعها، فأزل الجبائر والضماد وألقها جانبا وعلّق الذراع بجريدة نخل أو بقطعة حبل مطولين من الكفّ الى فوق الرأس، وليكن الحبل على جنبيىّ الصدر، ثمّ ارفع الذراع الى فوق حتى يصير موضع الكسر الى فوق مستوى الرأس
And if you find that the swelling has subsided and the bones have returned to their place, remove the splints and bandages and put them aside, and suspend the arm with a palm tree branch or a length of rope extended from the palm to above the head. And let the rope be on both sides of the chest, then lift the arm up until the site of the fracture is above the level of the head.If something happens like an itch that occurs in the limb, it should be soaked with warm water until the itch subsides and the limb is left loose for a night until it rests, then resume the grip.
If the grip has loosened and the bone has moved or something like that, then you should fix all of that as hard as you can. Also look, if food is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive grip, it should be loosened a little and left for days until nutrition reaches it, then it is tightened.
If nothing of what we have mentioned is exposed, then it should not be incised until twenty days or so have passed. Then the patient's hand should be suspended from his neck, with his arm straight and he should be cautioned against restless movements, and he should sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm is healed in thirty days, or in two and thirty, and perhaps it is healed in twenty-eight days, all of which depend on the conditions of the temperaments and the conditions of strength.
Chapter 13.
On healing fractures of the palm of the hand and fingers.
The metacarpus and phalanges of the fingers rarely suffer fractures, but they often suffer contusions. So, if a fracture or a contusion occurs in the palm
the patient should sit cross-legged with a chair placed in front of him at an even height.ويوضع الكفّ المكسور تحت الكرسىّ على الاستواء فيوضع عليه حمل خفيف يثبته ويجعل اليد
Then the patient extends his hand, and the bone-setter holds it in place while the surgeon sets the broken bone until it is healed. Then, if no hot swelling occurs, the bandage and splint should be applied over the wound.وإن حدث ورم حارّ فأمّا أن يغسل بماء بارد أو يدخل فى الضماد مرهم النرجس أو مرهم الخل وقطران.
If a hot swelling occurs, either wash it with cold water or apply nerf's ointment or vinegar and pitch ointment to the bandage. I have included it in a soft cloth. If the fracture is towards the bottom of the palm, make a ball out of cloth and have the patient hold onto it with his broken hand, then tighten it with a long cloth.وإن كان الكسر الى فوق نحو الظفر فأمّا أن يشوّس الخادم عليه أو يعطّل الخاتم عنه، فان تعطيله أفضل لأنّه يدفع الورم ويطفّئ حرارة
If the fracture is towards the top, towards the fingernail, either the bone-setter should press on it or remove the ring, and removing the ring is better because it reduces swelling and cools the heat. The splint should be made of soft leather to conform to the bend of the whole hand and tightened as it should be. If the fracture is to the outside, the splint should be placed on top and another splint on bottom in the palm so that the hand is open and straight.وإن كان الكسر الى داخل فينبغى أن تجعل الجبيرة من تحت وجبيرة أخرى من فوق لتقبض على ما ينبغى، وإن كان الكسر ف
Then, the bandage is wound as the hand turns and the fingers are interlaced with the bandage. If the fracture is in one of the finger phalanges, then if it is the thumb, adjust it as it should be, then tie it with the palm. And if you want to make a small splint for it to straighten the fracture, do so.
And it does not move if the fracture is in any of the other fingers, such as the middle, index, ring or pinky finger, then adjust and tie it with the next healthy finger or tie them all together, this is better, or put a small splint on it to straighten the fracture.
As we said with the thumb and check at the time of your casting and distance from the hot tumor, meet it as appropriate whenever something happens to it as repeatedly described.
Chapter 14.
On the casting of a femur fracture.
The femur often breaks and is felt by the senses because it rotates forward and backward, and its fixation is by tying a bandage above the fracture and another below, and the patient lies on his face.
Then each bandage server extends to its side on moderation, this if the fracture is in the middle of the bone, and if it is close to the hip joint, a soft bandage should be tied, either of wool or the like.وينبغى أن يكون الرباط الذى فوق الكسر على المفصل لئلّا يعوق حركته، ويقوى هذا الرباط ويشدّ فى اليوم الثانى ويجبر الكسر بالجبيرة.
The bandage that is above the fracture should be on the joint to not impede its movement, and this bandage is strengthened and tightened on the second day, and the fracture is cast by the physician with both hands until it returns to its natural shape.And if the fracture is at the hip joint near the pubic region so that the extension is upwards, and the other bandage under the fracture, and similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then let the bandage be near the knee so that the extension is downwards, then the physician adjusts the bone with both hands until it returns to its natural shape.فإن حصل فى الجرح مزلة او عرج أو اوجاع أزعجته فليعمد الى موضع الكسر بخرقة مبلولة بماء الحلبة ويزول عن
The bone then heals well, and the dressing and compression should be applied; unless there is hot swelling in the member, in which case it should be left for a few days until the hot swelling subsides, after which treatment should be resumed.
As for compression, a wide, firm bandage should be wrapped around the fracture twice or thrice, with some left over, then the leg should be bound until the heel reaches the hip joint, and a long thread is inserted between the thigh and leg near the knee from below, with its ends protruding above from both sides.
Then you wrap the remaining bandage around the leg and thigh, then you place the splints on the thigh in the same place as the fracture, making one splint for the shin bone, then fill the gap between the thigh and leg with soft padding so that the compression is even.
Then begin with strong compression from the middle on the fracture site, three or four turns, and as you move away from the fracture site, make the turns looser, softer, and gentler.وإن وجدت فى موضع الكسر ورم حارّ أو تورّم فلا تشدّ شدّا قويا بل تجعل الشدّ معتدلا وتبدأ بالشدّ من الوسط نحو الأسفل حتّى لا يزيد الورم الحارّ وتجعل بين كلّ
If you find hot swelling or inflammation at the fracture site, do not apply strong compression, but make the compression moderate and start from the middle towards the bottom so that the hot swelling does not increase. Then take the ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and leg and tie them to the splints above, then pass the thread ends down to the ankle and tighten them on the other side as well.
So that the bandage does not slip from its place, then leave it as long as there is no pain, swelling, inflammation, or the like in the member; if something happens, hasten to loosen it and repair what has happened, as we have mentioned several times before.وإن كان الكسر فى الساق من الأعلى أو من الأسفل وكان الورم الحارّ قد سكن فابدأ بالشدّ شدّا قويا حتّى يبرأ، وقد ذكرنا قبل هذا أنّ الشدّ إنّما يكون بحسب حال الكسر وورم العضو ونفخه وما حدث فيه.
If there is a splinter of bone protruding, you should smooth it over if possible; if not, cut it and remove it, and treat the wound in the same way as previously mentioned until it heals. This fracture may be bound up from the thigh without adding the leg with splints.
As we have mentioned in the case of the humerus and arm, except that its healing in this way does not cause a limp for the patient; and if it is bound up alone, without the leg being added to it, the patient will always limp.
Know that the thigh bone heals in 50 days or a little more or less, all depending on the difference of temperaments and other conditions.
Chapter 15
On the fracture of the patella.
The patella is seldom fractured, but it is often bruised. When it is fractured, it is either a crack or a fragmentation into parts, and this may occur with or without a wound.وأما علاج الكسر فاعلم أنّه إن كان شقا فإنّ علاجه بتمزيق الجلد وإخراجه من الشقّ وربط ما تحته حتّى يلتحم وإذا لم يكن مع الكسر جرح فلا بأس من إدخال الجلد فيما بين العظمين.
And its treatment is as follows: if it is a crack, the treatment is to tear the skin and remove it from the crack, and to tie what is underneath until it heals. If there is no wound with the fracture, it is not harmful to insert the skin between the bones. You can test this by touch. The fracture should then be set by smoothing out the dispersed parts with your fingers until they come together and unite as much as you can manage with finesse and skill, then apply a bandage and carry a circular splint on top if necessary.وإن كان تفتتا فمن علاجه أن تستخرج القطع المتفلّتة وتضع موضعها عظما آخر من عظام أخرى ملسا مستقيما فإن لم تجده فاستعره من
If it is a fragmentation, its treatment is to remove the broken pieces and place in their stead another smooth, straight bone; if such a bone is not available, borrow one from another source. You should then apply the appropriate counterirritant from above, as described in other fractures, addressing each symptom as it arises with the appropriate treatment until it heals.وعليك أن تعلم أنّ الكسر إن كان فى فوق الركبة من غير أن يسقط معها الفخذ فإنّما يبرأ فى عشرين يوما أو أقلّ ويشتدّ عظم ذلك المو
Chapter Sixteen.
On the Treatment of a Leg Fracture.
The leg has two bones, one thick and called the shinbone, the other thin and called the tibia. They are subject to fractures in the same way as the two bones of the arm. Therefore, its treatment is the same as that of the arm fracture, and the procedure is the same. If both bones are fractured, the leg will turn to all sides. If only the thinner bone is fractured, the leg turns forward. If only the thicker bone is fractured from below, it will be obvious to you.
Therefore, use extension and reduction and apply splints according to this, except that if the leg fracture is severe with many fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and you should be gentle in reducing it.وإن كسر العظم الأرقّ من أعلى فربما خرجت شظيته مع الكسر إلى برّة القدم، فيجب عليك إذا جبرت الكسر أن تبحث عن تلك الشظية وتجعلها موضعها، ثم تربط الجبيرة على ذلك فإن لم تفعل ذلك ولم تقم الشظية في موضعها أفسد الكعب واعوجّ وأنت لا تشعر بذلك.
And in the leg, there is something more to be done than in the arm, which is that when you have finished reducing the splints and completed all your work, take two splints of fir wood, which are used in leveling the gaps between the split logs or from palm fronds or the like.ثمّ لفّهما معا وقطعهما على قدر الساق من فوق الكعب الى تحت الركبة، ثمّ ضعها تحت الجبيرة وشدّ عليها حتى تلتصق بالساق، ثمّ اربط الجبيرة على ذلك.
And choose one that is slightly thick and not thin, and let its length be from the knee to below the ankle, then wrap around each one two turns along their length, placing one on the leg and the other on the other side.فإنّه يمنع توجّع الكعب ويمنع خروج الشظية ويهون المشى على المكسور، وهذا العمل انما هو للكسر الفاحش الذى يكون فيه الكعب مستعصيا على التسطيح.
Let it be from the knee to the bottom of the foot, then tie the two splints in three places at the ends and the middle, for with this binding the leg will be prevented from tilting side to side and will be well-set. A wooden rod may also be used along the length of the leg.وإن كسرت الساق من أعلى الركبة ولم يكن لها شظى يخرج، وكان الكسر معتدلا فليس عليك الا الجبيرة فقط ولا تحتاج الى الفَسقيتين، فإن احتجت اليهما فليكن الكسر شديدا ويكون خروج الشظية الى برّة القدم.
And it is placed in it to preserve it from movement, and most of all you should do that in fractures if there is a special wound with it, then examine the leg every day and about it with great care for swelling or inflammation or anything else. When something happens, respond appropriately until it heals. The tibia heals in about thirty days or so,.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the bones of the leg and fingers.
As for the heel, fractures never occur there. As for the bones of the leg, fractures may occur, as may also be the case with the fingers, which are rarely fractured. More often they suffer contusions.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the leg and you see those bones protruding, have the patient stand with his foot on the ground and straight, then you stand and place your foot on the raised part of those bones and press and smooth it out.
until they return to their proper places, then take the bandage and sling from above and place a small wooden board with two flat ends under the sole of the foot, then tighten it tightly after wrapping it in rags and everything else you need.
After three or four days, loosen the bandage, and you will find that the bones which were broken or dislocated have become smooth. Proceed as described to you in the description of setting the fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger along its length, and let it be slightly wider than the finger; then place under the foot the board described to you and tighten it firmly. If two or more of the bones are broken,.
make a splint for each finger the size of the finger, wrapped in soft cloth and tighten the board at the bottom of the foot so that each end of the ends of the board is outside the sole of the foot so that it is firmly secured.
You should not forget to attend to all the symptoms we have mentioned in connection with any fracture, and oppose each symptom as it arises.
Chapter XVIII.
On the Fracture of the Pubic Bone and Male Genitals.
When the vulva of a woman is broken, let her sit cross-legged and then bend her backwards a little at a time while you hold her from behind. Then have the midwife fill her vulva with cotton until it becomes like a ball within her.
Then the woman is shaken, and her back is raised a little at a time until that cotton comes out until it becomes like a ball at the entrance of her vulva; then the bone will be reset. Then a pad should be placed on her back. Whenever she needs to urinate, the cotton is removed gently so that she can urinate.
Then she is returned to her original position, and she continues this for seven days or so, it will heal. Or you can take a goat's bladder, tie a tube around its opening, and insert the entire bladder into her vulva.
Then blow hard on the tube so that the bladder inflates inside the vulva, and the fracture will be reduced. Then pack it with cotton, and keep it in place for several days as we have described until it heals. Now, if the pubic bone of a man or woman is fractured, the following should be used to reduce it:
And adjust it as described for the hip bone; you should have no doubt about what is right in these strange fractures, which occur seldom, especially for those who have some experience and understand this book. Yes, because the fracture itself usually points you in the right direction.
So that it can be set and bound in the right way, understand this. Now, if a man's penis is fractured, take the neck-bone of a goose, insert it into the penis, then wrap a piece of cloth around it and tie it and leave it for three days or so until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
In the treatment of broken bones when accompanied by a wound.
If a person sustains a fracture along with a wound, especially if the bone is large like that of the thigh or the arm, you should act promptly and bleed him as soon as possible, provided the conditions for bleeding are met, as we have already presented.
If the wound is bleeding, you should act promptly and apply powdered alum to it if nothing else is available. Then proceed with setting the fracture on the same day and do not delay.وإن لم يكن به جرح فينبغى أن يعطى شيئا ينفع فى ذلك من المسهلات والمقيئات فان احتاج الى قطع عروق أمكنه ذلك فان لم يمكنه فلا بأس فان الكيّ ينفعه ان لم ينضج بالحميات فان انضجها فالكيّ أفضل وان كان الجرح قليلا فنكأته بالماء المغ
If there is no wound, he should be given something that would help in this regard, such as laxatives and emetics. If he needs to have his vessels cut, that can be done, but if not, it's okay. But cauterization benefits him if the fever has not been reduced by a high fever; cauterization is better if the fever has been reduced. If the wound is slight, you should probe it with warm water if there is no swelling, but if there is a swelling, you should leave it until the ninth day until the hot swelling subsides and do not approach it at all on the third and fourth days,
If the broken bone is lying on the skin, exposed, you should try to push it back and smooth it with your hand gently and with a slight stretch. If you can't do this with your hands, use this tool, which is made of iron, about seven or eight fingers in length.فإن لم يمكنك تسويته فلا بأس بأن تتركه مائلا فان تعذّر ذلك فالصبر على الألم أحبّ الى الطبيب من جبره على غير التسوية فإن تمّت التسوية فى اليوم الأول فهو خير، وان لم يتمّ فالصبر به أحبّ من العجلة فانّ العظام إذا كسرت ثمّ جبرت قبل أن تلتحم فلا بدّ من وقوعها فى موضع الكسر مجد If you can't smooth it, that's okay to leave it tilted. But patience is better for
For this reason, the doctor should make three or four of these, according to the needs of the treatment in each type of fracture. They should be rounded, with a slight thickness so as not to bend when pressed during work.وينبغى أن يكون نصلها من حديد مذوّق لئلّا تؤذيها وتفسدها ويكون غلظ النصل فى الوسط أكثر منه فى الطرفين ويضمد عليه بالكتان المغ
And it is sharp-tipped, with a curve at its tip, and its upper part is thick, while from the middle to the bottom it is very thin. This is its image:
It is called in Greek, perm-yridon, a small crowbar; so you should position its sharp, hooked tip on the protruding end of the bone and push it with one quick motion until the bone goes back into place and is partially straightened. Then smooth out the edges of the fracture by pushing the broken ends together.
If the broken end is thin and the instrument does not get a good grip on it, then cut off that end of the bone so that the instrument can get a hold of it. If you are unable to put the bone back in place using the method we described, then cut it with one of the saws we mentioned that is similar to it.
Or spread it with one of the saws, as best you can, then strip off any roughness and thin scales that remain on the bone. If the patient experiences severe, painful discomfort after the bone is put back in place, be aware that the bone has not returned to its normal position.
If you are able to return it to its normal position, do so, for you will greatly benefit the patient. Once you have completed the setting of the bone, immerse a cloth in a black astringent solution, especially if it is summer, and do not place any cerate or anything containing oil on the wound.
So that rot and decay will not occur in it, then use splints when you have finished setting the bone and leave the wound exposed by cutting a hole in the bandages with scissors that is the size of the wound.
Beware, above all else, of constricting the wound along with the fracture. Many ignorant physicians have brought about either death or gangrene or a cold on their patients by doing this. Your tie should be gentle and loose, contrary to the tie for other fractures.
If the wound is bad or is a large wound and you fear some of the bad symptoms that we have described, and he feels a worrying pain in the spot, then you should not put on bandages, but make him rolls from hard rags in the place of the bandages and tie them on him.
If, after a day or two, you see that the wound has begun to generate pus, then take off the cloth which you placed on it with the ointment, and then use bandages and ointments that are part of our usual treatment for wounds, such as the quadruple ointment, and others like it. You should also loosen the bandage.
You should examine the wound every day, in the morning and evening, until it is healed and closed up. You should also elevate the limb so that the pus can flow out easily. If many days pass and the wound does not heal or the pus does not stop flowing, then you should know that there are small pieces of bone in there.
You should examine the wound with a probe, and if any of those splinters are loose, then remove them. If they are not loose but still irritate the limb and cause pain, then cut them off or extract them by any means possible.
If the wound develops a cold, or an ulcer, or any other kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you should treat each condition with the appropriate treatment described earlier in its respective section.
It is important that you pay attention to my words and remember them when a large bone is broken, such as the femur or the forearm, and others like them. You should not attempt to pull it out or extract it. Often, this can lead to death, so leave it until it putrefies. Sometimes, these bones may fall out on their own after twenty or thirty days.
At that time, you should treat the wound if you see a place for treatment; otherwise, leave it alone.
Chapter XX.
The treatment of complications that may arise after certain fractures.
This complication often occurs after the healing of a fracture, especially those near joints, which results in an unsightly appearance of the limb and may even prevent the limb from performing its natural function.
If the complication is recent, use astringent medications such as myrrh, gum arabic, aloes, and aloe vera, either alone or in combination, by mixing them with astringent drinks, egg white, or vinegar.
Apply the medication directly to the complication, and then tightly wrap a bandage around it. Leave the bandage in place for several days before removing it and reapplying the medication. Repeat this process until the complication is resolved, God willing. Alternatively, you can use a tight lead plate.
If the complication has become hardened and severe, and necessity demands its removal, then make an incision from above and cut away the excess bone or grind it down with a chisel until it is removed. Treat the resulting wound until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
The treatment of a fracture that has healed but has left the limb weak and fragile.
When a bone fracture heals, it is possible for the affected limb to remain weak and fragile for several reasons. ومن أعظم الأسباب فى ذلك أن ينكسر العظم من غير أن يتعقّد فيشفى وهو معقّد، وذلك إنما يكون إذا انفصلت القوتان عن الع One of the main reasons for this is when a bone fractures without any complications and heals while remaining complicated. This can occur due to several factors, including excessive stretching or ligature of the ligaments beyond what is appropriate, over-tightening of the ligaments preventing nutrients from reaching the affected member, excessive movement at an inappropriate time, or a decrease in blood flow and weakness throughout the patient's body.
The treatment for this condition involves nourishing the patient and enriching their body to increase blood flow, using a hot bath, introducing happiness and joy, and similar methods. Then, apply pitch to the affected limb to attract moisture and continue with gentle stretching using lukewarm water.وإن استعملت الحجامة على الموضع المنكسر فهى مفيدة جدا، وقد حدّثنى أبو بكر ابن زكريا الأنطاكىّ أنّه رأى غلاما ميتونىّ وكان صبيّا فلما كبر عظمت يده وعلّقها فلم يمكنه استعمالها فى الأكل وغيره فنظرت فإذا عرو Until it allows food to pass through and returns to its normal shape.
Chapter Twenty-two.
In the treatment of broken bones that are bent and crooked, preventing them from functioning properly.
Now, if after healing, a member becomes crooked or bent due to the broken bone, or develops a complication and the appearance of the member becomes unsightly because of it. However, if the member is not prevented from performing its normal function, then one should not accept the claim of those who say that the head of the bone must be broken. Many ignorant physicians and setters have done this in our country.
This action is highly discouraged and can lead to great danger, at the very least injury. However, if the crookedness and complication are recent, one should use water in which softener herbs have been cooked, such as ivy leaves and roots, and royal wreath, among others.
And a poultice of soothing agents such as well-prepared diaholon or the sap of ivy leaves mixed with chicken fat and tallow, or fig pulp pounded with dove droppings, among other remedies that are known as wound-healers.
And the complication may be broken up by constant gentle massage with the hands, and the movement of the member in all directions at all times; if the crookedness has become established, severe and calcified, however, and it is necessary to treat it with iron.
Then the top should be split, and the connection of the bone released and any remaining complication or bone cut away with delicate cutting instruments; great care and effort must be employed in this procedure. Then the wound is treated as already described until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-three.
Dislocation is the separation of a joint from its socket, resulting in impaired movement, unsightly appearance of the member, and severe pain for the patient; when it occurs in one of the joints, it should be reduced immediately.
It should not be delayed at all, for if it is, the area will swell and become inflamed, making it difficult to close the jaw. Therefore, when this happens, it should not be delayed or moved or extended while it is swollen, as often happens with sick people, experiencing spasms and painful sensations.
However, if it occurs, the patient should be bled immediately, then left until the swelling subsides slightly, then the limb should be bathed with warm water and ointment, then closed gently, and each member should be treated as mentioned in its place.
I have also arranged the sections of the jaw according to the order presented in the fracture, from the top of the body to the bottom.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of the lower jaw.وصفة الفصد: خَرُص الخِنْصر من اليد اليمنى الى
The recipe for phlebotomy: Pricking the little finger of the right hand to It is rarely that the jaws become dislocated except in rare cases, and their displacement can be either slight, in which case they can return to their position with the slightest effort, or complete and total, in which case they will relax.and his tongue will stagger and he will not be able to speak clearly. If it is only slightly displaced, in most cases it can return to its position with the slightest effort.وإن كان تامّا فلا يرجع إلّا بضربات المطرقة مع العمل عليه، وقد ذكرناه فى موضع الكسور إن شاء الله تعالى.
However, if it is complete and total, it should be returned quickly without delay by the doctor hitting it with a hammer while his assistant holds the patient's head, while the doctor inserts the thumb of one hand into the jaw, inside the mouth, if it is on one side.ويدخل الخادم الآخر إبهام اليد الأخرى من أصل الفكّ الخارجى فيدفع الخادمان الفكّين معا بقوّة، فيرجعان إلى موضعهما إن شاء الله تعالى، وينبغى للطبيب أن يطبّقهما بيده ويردهما ويمسكهما حتّى ينزلا إلى موضعهما، ويقول الخادمان: لا أمسك ولا أترك، فيرجعان إلى موضعهما إن
Then he should push in with both his thumbs if the jaw is dislocated on both sides, and with the other fingers of both hands from the outside; he should order the patient to open his mouth and move it to each side, while the surgeon adjusts and pushes back the jaw until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to reduce them, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then use a poultice of hot water and oil until they become easy to reduce. Do not delay reducing them at all, as we have said. Once they are reduced and aligned, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then place splints of cloth with a cerate that has been made from beeswax and olive oil.
Then bind it gently with a loose bandage, and let the patient sleep on his back with his head elevated between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, and so that he does not chew anything. His food should be soft porridge.
Until the pain subsides and the jaw heals, let him eat whatever he wants, but he should be gentle and not force himself to open his mouth wide when eating, drinking, or yawning, until the jaw heals and is cured.
If the jaws are difficult to reduce when they have become dislocated at any time and do not return to their places, then it often happens that there are fevers and constant headaches, and sometimes the patient's abdomen becomes distended and he may vomit repeatedly. If you see this, know that it is harmful.
It is not uncommon for patients with this condition to die within ten days..
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the jaw and shoulder joint.
As for the collarbone, it does not dislocate on the inner side because of its connection to the chest, but it can dislocate outward, and this can be felt by touch. To reduce it, let the patient lie on his back and extend his arms..
Then press the site with your palm firmly, for it will return. Then place a bandage and splint on it and tighten it. As for its end which is nearest to the shoulder and connected to it, it does not dislocate except rarely. If it should ever dislocate, it should be reduced and put right as we have mentioned and as you can manage.
Then place a bandage and splint on it and tighten it. You should tell the patient to keep quiet and still until he recovers. With this same treatment, you can also reduce the dislocated shoulder joint if it has become separated from its socket.
Chapter 26
On reducing the dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Know that the shoulder joint can dislocate in three ways: one is that it dislocates towards the armpit, down and below; the second is that it dislocates towards the chest, and sometimes the shoulder joint dislocates above the shoulder, and this only rarely happens.
It does not dislocate to the back because of the position of the shoulder, nor does it dislocate forward because of the position of the nerve. It most often dislocates and comes out below towards the armpit, especially in those whose flesh is scarce, for it comes out and goes back quickly in them.وأحسن ما يكون الفكّ والردّ فى المنكب إذا كان الى أسفل بأن يأخذ بيد العليل فيجعل راحة كفه على قفاه ويضع مرفق يده الأخرى تحت ذراعه التى هو بها أليق، ثمّ يضعهما جميعا تحت موضع المنكب، ثمّ يقبض عليه ويشدّ في
However, in those with much flesh, it is the opposite, meaning that it comes out and goes back with difficulty. Sometimes a person may suffer a blow or fall, causing the shoulder to swell and feel hot, leading them to believe that it has dislocated. You should examine this to determine its true condition.فإن رأيته رَمِداً فهُوَ المنكب قد انفكّ ويجب فيه الرّدّ وقد ذكرناه، وإن رأيت تحت جلد المنكب كسرة بيضاء رقيقة فقد ذهب عظم المنكب وحده ولم ينفكّ المنكب، وهذا يعالج بشدّ الذراعين جميعا.
Then you can proceed with the treatment, and identify the jaw if it is pointing towards the armpit. If you compare the dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, you will find an obvious difference; you will feel a depression at the head of the shoulder, and when you touch under the armpit, the head of the shoulder feels like an egg.
The patient cannot lift his hand to his ear or move it in any direction, and if the dislocation is towards the chest or upwards, you will feel this clearly when you touch it.
This dislocation can be reduced if the joint is flexible or if the patient is a child. To reduce it, have an assistant raise his hand above his head, and then place your thumbs under his armpit and push the joint upwards with force to its proper position, while the assistant raises his hand and extends it above his head.
Then lower the hand and it will return quickly. If it does not return with this method, and if the dislocation has occurred many days ago, the patient should take a hot bath and use a poultice that softens and relaxes, such as one made from the roots of hellebore, fenugreek and royal rosemary, applied to the affected area.
Then the patient should lie on his back, and a ball of wool, which is neither too soft nor too firm, should be placed under his armpit. The doctor then places his heel on the ball, holds the patient's hand with his own, and pulls it downward.
The doctor pushes the ball with his foot, and it will return to its place. Alternatively, you can reduce it in this way: bring a man taller than the patient and stand him on one side, with his shoulder under the patient's armpit, lifting the armpit upward so that the patient hangs in the air. Another assistant pulls the patient's hand downward towards his abdomen. If the patient is light, something else should be attached to him to weigh him down; then the joint will return immediately. It may also be reduced in another way.
And that is to fix in the ground a long piece of wood, the top of which is rounded like a pestle, neither too thick nor too thin. Then place it under the arm pit of the patient after placing on the head of the wood a soft cloth, and the patient standing upright along the length of the wood.
Then he extends his hand to the bottom on the other side, and also extends his body on the other side with force, then the joint will return to its place quickly. But if it is difficult to return it with all that we have mentioned, then use this treatment, which is to take a stick about two cubits long. Its width is about four fingers and its thickness is about two fingers, it has a rounded head to facilitate its entry into the depth of the armpit in this way:.
Then tie a soft cloth on the rounded head so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then place it under the armpit and extend the whole hand, arm and forearm down, and tie the wood to the arm.
Then the arm is placed across a horizontal beam. A ladder is placed horizontally and the hand is extended downward, and the rest of the body is left hanging on the other side, then the joint will enter at once in any way it can. When it has entered in some way, a ball made of wool of moderate size should be placed under the armpit
Then the bandage prepared from flour, gum and egg white is carried on the shoulder all around, then the ball is tightly tightened under the armpit, and the band is wrapped around the bandage above, and his hand is suspended from his neck.
He should not move his hand for seven days, and the patient's food should be kept small until he becomes strong so that the member becomes stronger, then it is unbound after the seventh or fifth day and exercised with movement. If it is stable and does not relax, it has healed.
If a joint dislocates repeatedly due to moisture or another condition, one should apply cauterization with the three iron points as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. If you do all this and dissolve the ligament after seven days and the joint still does not heal,
you should know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder has been severed, extended or relaxed. At this point, you should know that the joint will never heal in its place.
As for the jaw that is towards the chest and breast, and to the back, its treatment is by pushing and extending with hands until it returns to place. All other forms of splinting and treatment should be used until it heals. If, after healing, there is stiffness in the limb and slowness in movement,
the patient should use the bath frequently until that stiffness softens and returns to its original state.
Chapter 27.
In the treatment of a dislocated elbow.
The elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty, and it is also returned with difficulty. It can dislocate in all directions, especially forward or backward. Its dislocation is not hidden from you, as it occurs under your vision and under your touch, no matter what shape it dislocates to.
When you join the dislocated elbow to the healthy one, this will be evident to you through the concavity of the joint, and he will not be able to bend his arm or touch his shoulder. You should act quickly and return the dislocation at once before a hot swelling occurs.
If a hot swelling occurs, it is difficult to return it, and it may not heal at all, especially if the dislocation is backward. It is the worst of all types of dislocations and the most painful. Death often occurs with it.وأمّا الفكّ الى قدّام فمفسدته قليلّة وذلك انّ عظامه متساوية ومقاطعه مستوية ولا ينضغط الأعصاب التى فيه كما ينضغط اذا مال الى خلف، ولهذا المعنى.
And if it is something that can be reduced, let the assistant extend his hand with both hands and his arm outstretched, and the doctor's hand above and below the elbow, and he pushes the joint with the thumbs of both hands or with the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
And if the jaw is forward, it can be reduced by bending the hand once so that it strikes with the base of its palm the shoulder joint which it opposes. If the jaw does not return, then use strong and forceful extension, which is that two assistants extend the arm.
The patient should also be held by two assistants so that he does not move when extended. Then the arm is turned to each side after being wrapped with a folded garment or a wide bandage. If the doctor applies his hands directly to the joint, he should smear it with grease so as to make the joint滑 more easily.
Then the joint is pushed hard until it returns. After it returns, the bandage which contains contraction and drying with egg white should be applied tightly, and the arm suspended from the patient's neck and left for a few days.
Then you should loosen it, and if the joint is firmly in place, remove the bandage and leave it. If you see that the joint has not healed properly, re-apply the bandage and ligature, and also leave it for a few days until it heals, then remove it. And if there is stiffness after the joint has returned and been removed,.
and difficulty in movement, then moisture in the bath, gentle massage and gentle compression should be used until it softens, or place a fat lamb's trotter on the joint, then tie it and leave it for a day and a night, then remove it and admit him to the bath. If he sweats, then massage the joint gently.
Then do this again, once, twice and thrice, with admission to the bath until it softens. If you wish, you may also apply a cow' s hooves, moistened and thinned with fat, and tie it on several times; it will soften and return to its original state..
Chapter XXVIII.
In the treatment of a broken wrist.
The wrist joint often becomes dislocated, and its reduction is easier than that of most other joints; but it is important that reduction should be effected immediately on the dislocation occurring, before any heat or inflammation sets in at the part.
To effect the reduction, let the patient's wrist rest on a board, and an attendant extend his hand; the surgeon then places his palm upon the articular prominence, and pushes it inwards until it is reduced; but care must be taken to see that the dislocation has not occurred towards the palm of the hand.وإن كان الفكّ إلى الظاهر فليمدّ الخادم الكفّ وليضع الطبيب كفّه على نتو المفصل ويضغط عليه ليستقرّ.
If the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of his hand upon the board, so that the surgeon's hand may rest on the articular prominence; and if this be not reduced at first, let it be bound up with a compress to allay any inflammation.وإن كان الورم حاراً فليعمد الطبيب الى الخل أو الملح منفردين أو ممزوجين بالماء ويغسل به موضع الورم ويكرّر ذلك حسب الحاجة حتّى يبرد.
If the inflammation is acute, let the surgeon use vinegar or salt, either separately or mixed with water, and wash the swollen part as often as may be necessary, until the swelling subsides.Let it not be again dislocated; for if it be allowed to become habitual, the joint will remain out of its place, and the patient will experience much inconvenience from being unable to close his hand tightly
When this happens, you may be sure that the nerve has been either divided or crushed; in such a case there is no remedy except to bind it tightly with a bandage; sometimes this is beneficial, but often it effects nothing; when the wrist has been reduced, apply the bandage which we have described, and leave it on for five days.فإن احسّ العليل وجعاً شديداً ورمّاً فى كفّه وعجز عن تحريك أصابعه إلّا حركتها الباطنة ولم يستطع القبض بها شيئاً وكان الورم حارّاً فى الموضع فاعلم أنّ العصب قد انقطع من موضعه.
Then, loosen and train the hand. If its movement is difficult and there is something of stiffness in it, soften it with warm water and massage repeatedly until it softens.
Chapter 29.
On the treatment of finger dislocation.
The fingers may dislocate in any direction. So, whenever a finger dislocates towards the back of the hand or the palm, extend the finger and push the joint with your thumb until it pops back into place, then tie the top of the finger and suspend it towards the direction in which it dislocated.
And let it be for two days, then release it and extend it until it is straight that same day. If it's at night, tie it in the same way and don't stop حلها during the day and train it with movement and tie it at night. Do this for days until it strengthens.
And you should do the same if it dislocates to the palm of the hand, tie it towards the same direction and act on it as you did before until it heals. The same goes for when it dislocates to other directions.
Chapter 30.
On the treatment of back dislocation.وإن كان فكّ الظهر فإن استطعت أن تصل اليه وت
And if it's a back dislocation, if you can reach it and adjust the fully dislocated vertebra or many vertebrae have come out of place, there is no treatment for it because death comes quickly to the patient.فإن لم تستطع فمدّه وشده بكلّ ما أمكنك من وسعك وأضجعيه على جانبه الذي انفكّ فيه الفكّ فإن استطعت أن تعيد خرزة واحدة فأعد واحدة ثمّ اربطها حتى لا تنفكّ الى جهة الإنفك
But if you can't, extend it and tighten it as much as you can. Lay him on his side where the dislocation occurred. If you can put one vertebra back in place, then do so and tie it so that it doesn't dislocate again towards that direction. The sign of this is that the patient's bowels move without intention and he cannot hold them in, and often one of his limbs becomes limp, either his legs or arms or one of them. But if only one vertebra has come out of place, then it often does.وإن زالت خرزة واحدة فهي كثيرا ما تزول وإن زالت خرزتان فأقلّ في الشفاء وإن زالت ثلاث فلا بأس به وأمّا إن زالت أربع و
And its disappearance is in four directions, so that which disappears to the rear is called a hump, and as for its treatment, you should look, and if the hump occurred from adolescence, there is no treatment for it and there is absolutely no cure for it. And as for those who happened to fall or hit and so on.
The former generations mentioned it with various types of treatments in a long discussion, most of which does not return to benefit, and I have abbreviated from that what is enough for little of what they brought up from their approximation to the meaning and explanation of it. I pictured the machine contrary to what they explained.
So I say that the hump that occurs from the front in the chest has no remedy and no cure, and so does the one that occurs on both sides. Only those that occur on the back can be treated with what I am describing, which is to extend the patient on his face.
On a flat table near a wall, and spread out on it a damp mat so as not to hurt his chest, then place a vertical board planted in a hole in the ground at the head of the table, and another board at the other end of the table towards his feet.ثمّ تمسك رأسه وتسحبه نحو الخشبة القائمة وعليك بالدعة والملاطفة فإن لم يطاوعك فلا تقوّى عليه فإن أمكنك ذلك فامسكه وأقمه على الخشبة حتى يدخل ناهله ومدّه مدّا رفيقا وشدّ عليه شدّا لينا ثمّ إن كان طويل النّاحية أو عظيم الحدبة لم تصل إلى ذلك كلّ
And a servant holds the board, which is not secured in the hole, and another servant holds the other at that position, then wrap around the chest of the patient and under his armpits with a soft and tight bandage, and extend the end of the bandage to the board at the head and tie it there.
Then tie another bandage around his hips, knees and ankles, then gather all the bandages and tie them to the board at his feet. The boards should not be moved from their positions.وإن كانت الحدبة عظيمة ورأس الخشبة لا يبلغ إلى نهايتها فعند ذلك يأخذ خادم بمؤخّر الخشبة ويحركها حركات رفيقة نحو الرأس ويقف آخر عند رأس العليل فيمسك الرباط ويشدّه على الخشبة إن أمكنه وإن لم يمكنه استعاده حتّى يلصق بظهر العليل.
But they are not documented, as we have said; the surgeon places his hands on the stone with force until it comes out, or he places a board on it and then leans on the board with his feet until it comes out. If it does not come out with this treatment, take a board about three arms long.
And dig a hole in the wall, as we have said, near the patient; insert one end of the board into this hole, then place the middle of the board on the lump, and the surgeon puts his feet on the other end and pulls hard until the lump is crushed.
And it returns to its place. If you want to make it with the screw that is twisted by hand, it is that you insert in the ground at the patient's head at one end of the shop two beams, and at his feet at the other end of the shop also two beams.
Let there be a distance of one span between each beam, and in every beam there is a hole through which the screw passes; the wood is secured firmly in the ground so that it does not move at all. You insert a revolving stick, namely the screw on which the ligature is wound, into the holes in the two beams.
At its end there is a hole, and a stick of a span in length is secured in it by what is twisted; the same is done in the other two beams. Then you tighten the ligature which you have tightened on the patient's chest on the screw at his head, and the ligatures which you have tightened on his legs on the screw at his feet.
Then a servant stands at each screw, twisting his hand with the twist that twists the screw, and the surgeon smooths out the lump as we have said before. This is the image of the screw, the dais and the patient:
Then, after the vertebrae have returned and the area has healed, you should apply the dried bandage with egg white, then the plaster, and then put a splint over the bandage made of a board that is three fingers wide and long enough to cover the lump.
And on some of the correct beads, then tie with the band that is appropriate and use the invalid delicate food until he recovers, if some of the protuberance remains in the place at the end of the recovery, it is appropriate to use drugs that relax and soften with the use of the plate that we described a long time ago.
And in this, a lead plate can be used. And it may expose protuberance at the last beads of the back and believe that it is dislocation and that is an extra bone that has protruded so do not expose it to this treatment for death might occur.
Chapter Thirty One.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip..
Know that the hip joint and the shoulder joint are only exposed to dislocation and not exposed to what is exposed to other joints of slight displacement and concavity. The hip joint is dislocated in four ways..
This is because it is dislocated inwardly and outwardly, forward and backward, and most often dislocated inwardly, rarely forward or backward. And the sign of its dislocation inwardly is that if you join the healthy leg of the patient to the sick one, the latter will be longer...
The knee is bent more than the healthy one and the patient cannot bend his leg at the groin, and the place that follows the groin is swollen with a prominent swelling before the head of the femur has come to rest there...
And the sign of what is exposed to dislocation outwardly, its symptoms are contrary to these symptoms. And the sign of what is exposed to dislocation forward, it fully extends its leg except that he cannot bend it without pain in the knee, and if he tries to walk he cannot do so forward...
And it retains its urine and its groin is swollen, and when walking it steps on its heel, and the sign of what is exposed to dislocation backward, he cannot extend his knee or bend it before bending his groin, his leg is also shorter than the other...
And the arbia relaxed and the head of the thigh at the site of the waist is clear, and as for the return of this jaw is that you look, if the jaw is old and has chronically suffered its owner and did not attempt to return it and remained in its condition, then there is no treatment at all.
You should not expose it, and as for the jaw that is recent, whether it is of one of the four types of jaw, you should hurry to twist the joint and stretch it inside and out and move it right and left, maybe.
It will return and will not need any other treatment, if it does not return like this, you should prepare a strong servant to extend his leg from below either with his hands or with a splint tied to his leg above the knee, and another servant extends him from above.
By putting his hands under his armpits and then tightly wrapping a soft splint at the base of the thigh, and another servant, a third, holds the end of the splint and extends it either from the front side of the arbia to the side of the collarbone or from behind to the back.
And they should all extend at the same time until the patient raises his body from the ground and remains suspended, for this type of extension is a type that is common to the four types. If the jaw returns with what we said, otherwise, it is necessary for each type of the treatments I will mention.
As for its special return, if the jaw is inside, the patient should lie on his healthy side, then a splint should be made at the base of the thigh between the head of the thigh and the place under the arbia.
Then the ligament is extended above from the side of the arbia to the top of the body to the side of the collarbone, then a strong-armed servant takes the thick part of the patient's thigh and extends it strongly to the outside, for he will return to his place.وإن كان الفكّ من خارج فاستلق على جنبك الأيسر ومدّ ساقك اليمنى وأنت مستلق وجافّظ مفصل الورك، فإنّه يرجع، وإن لم يرجع فعند ذلك عدّ خادما قويا يجلس العليل مستقبلا بطنه الى الأرض وقدماه مرفوعين ومنحنيا على ساقه اليمنى ويمسك الخادم بقدميه ويرفعها من تحت ويمدّها من خارج مدّا شديدا
And this type is easier than other types of treatment that it by which this member, if you found it difficult and did not respond to you at all to enter with this type of treatment completely, you should tie the feet of the patient both with a strong soft bond on the heels and knees.
And after each of them is separated from each other by four fingers, and the sick leg should be stretched more than the other by two fingers, then the patient is suspended from his head to a board that is in the house, and he should be at a distance from the ground of about two arms.
Then order a strong servant to hug the head of the thigh and another servant to hold the patient, and the other servant who is hugging the thigh pushes with force, then the joint will return to its position quickly. As for returning it specifically when the jaw is on the outside,
the patient should lie on the bench as described in the case of the hump, and the bond should be tightened on his sick leg especially on his chest, then two boards are placed, one at his feet and the other at his head, then an additional board is placed in the middle of the bench, very secure.
may be wrapped in wet rags so that it does not hurt the patient, and the board is placed between his thighs so that he does not pull down when stretched, then each servant stretches to his side and the doctor adjusts the hip with his hands, if it responds to return,
if not, then put the board on him and compress it as we mentioned in the case of hump except that the patient should lie on his healthy side, and if the dislocation is to the front, then the sick leg of the patient should be stretched at once while he is in this position on the bench.
The doctor puts the palm of his right hand on the sick groin and then compresses it with his other hand, and at the same time, he makes the compression extended down towards the knee, and if the dislocation is to the back, then the patient should not be pulled down.وينبغى أن يفعل هذا مرّة واحدة لئلّا ينقض الخلع أكثر ممّا هو عليه، فإن أجاب فى المرّة الأولى وإلّا فليعد مرّتين.
The patient should not be raised from the ground, but should rather be placed on a solid surface, and his hip and thigh should be turned outward as mentioned, while he lies on his back with the bands tightened.
As we mentioned earlier, the capstan should also be used on the area where the dislocation occurred. When the hip joint has been reduced as it should be, and the sign of reduction is clear to you, which is that you extend the patient's leg.
If you see them both straight and the patient is able to flex and extend his leg without difficulty, then know that the joint has been reduced properly. At this point, you should bind the thighs together and apply the bandage tightly so that the hip does not move in any direction.
The patient must remain still for three or four days, then the bandage and splint should be removed and the leg measured against the other, if you see that they are equal in length, know that the reduction has been successful and the patient can walk, but if you see any relaxation.
then go back and dress it, and tighten it as you did before, and leave it for another three days, then remove it and walk slowly on it for a few days until it gets stronger, God willing.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of knee dislocation.
The knee dislocates in three ways: it dislocates inward, outward, and backward, but never forward. The sign of its reduction is that you order the patient to flex his leg against his thigh.
If it does not adhere to the thigh, know that the knee is dislocated. The reduction of all its dislocations is that you sit the patient down with his legs extended as far as he can, and you sit behind him to hold his waist and twist him backward slightly, then you sit on his thighs yourself.
And press your back against his chest and place his leg between your legs, then grasp his knee with your palms and intertwine your fingers around it, then squeeze the sides of his knee firmly, while another attendant extends his leg until the knee returns to its proper position.
The sign that it has returned is when the leg sticks closely to the thigh without being forced, then bandage it and press the leg against the thigh, then tie them both with a bandage for three or four days, then release it. Only minimal walking should be done for a few days until it strengthens.
If it is impossible for you to return it using the method I have described, then use strong extension with the bandages that I previously described for treating the hip until it returns.
Chapter 33.
On the treatment of releasing the heel.
The heel may be displaced slightly or completely, and its displacement may be towards the inside or outside. The sign of its displacement is that you see the heel swollen and protruding to the side to which it has been displaced.وعلاجه إن كان الى داخل أن تمدّه مدّا قويا الى الخارج بآلة رفيعة مستديرة، وإن كان الى خارج فأميله ميلا قويا الى داخل بكفك واستعن على ذلك بآلة مدببة.
Its treatment if it is displaced towards the inside is to extend it forcefully to the outside with a thin, round instrument. If it is displaced to the outside, then tilt it forcefully to the inside with your palm and use a pointed instrument to assist you.Now, as for its treatment when it is displaced slightly, that is easy: just gently pull it back into place with your hands and adjust it until it returns. But if it is completely displaced, you should have the patient sit while a strong attendant holds him from behind by his waist.
Then you grip his foot with your right hand from the top and with your left hand from the bottom of his foot at the ankle, then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then extend it with your left hand and push the front of the foot with your right hand towards the leg without being violent.وأعد الكرّة مرارا حتّى ترجع، وعليك بالرباطات والسكنات الباردة والماء البارد والضماد.
You do this twice as described, and then on the third time push the instep of the foot towards the leg while you pull at the ankle. If it goes back once or twice like that and you see the foot is straight, otherwise do it again, for it will go back.
If it does not go back as described, then you lay the patient on his back on the ground and drive a stake firmly into the ground to lie between his thighs which you have wrapped in cloth so that the patient is not hurt, then the assistant holds his thigh tightly.
Then another assistant extends the leg, either with his hands or with a ligature that he ties around the ankle, while each assistant pulls in the opposite direction to his companion and the stake remains upright between the patient's thighs, holding him so that his body is not pulled down when they pull, then the surgeon straightens the jaw with his hands.
And another assistant holds the sound leg down, for the jaw will go back quickly when you do this; and when you see that it has gone back correctly, take up your bandage and sling, and fasten them with tight ligatures, and tie the foot to the bottom of the sling; you must be careful of the nerve which lies above the heel at the back.
So that the ligature is not too tight and hurts him; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature eases, tighten it again, and then loosen it on the third or fourth day, and the patient must abstain from walking for forty days.
If he attempts to walk before this period, you do not ensure that the jaw will not come back and be ruined, and will no longer accept treatment; if a hot swelling occurs, you should apply what we have described earlier in other parts of the treatment, anointing until it goes.وإن عرض ورم بارد فأولجه فى موضع الفكّ ماء باردا وقطّره عليه من فوق الضماد، وانزع الماء الذى كان فيه وأدخل غيره فى اليوم الثانى واحذر من أن تبل الضمادات فإنّه يؤذيه.
Chapter XXXIV.
The Treatment of the Fingers of the Hand.
The patient should gently straighten the separated fingers without force, which is not difficult but easy. If the dislocation is in one of the joints of the instep of the foot, the patient should place his foot on a flat surface.
Or, if standing, place your foot on a board, then you put your foot on what has protruded from those joints, and press it with force until it is straightened out and you see no protuberance in the area.
Then, place a board under the sole of his foot which covers the whole foot and has two ends, then tighten it tightly for three days, then loosen it and protect it from walking for many days until it strengthens and you are sure that it won't return, if Allah wills.
Chapter XXXV.In the treatment of a dislocated shoulder:
On the types of dislocation which occur with a wound, or a fracture, or both.وأمّا إذا كان فكّ الكتف منفردا بغير كسر ولا جرح فينبغى أن يُعط
However, if it is a dislocation of the shoulder without fracture or wound, it is often followed by death.وإن كان مع جرح فينبغى أن يُسكن بأدوية مفسدة للنشوة حتّى لا تؤثر به
If it is with a wound, then he should be treated with remedies that dissolve the euphoria so as not to affect him. And because of this, one should not undertake such treatment unless he is experienced in the craft, long practiced, gentle, careful, not rash or reckless, and he should use only remedies that soothe hot tumors at first, and leave the patient alone.وإن كان مع كسر فينبغى أن يسكن أولا الكسر بالعلاجات التى تقدّمها قبل علاج الفكّ ويترك أيّاما ثمّ يعالج الفكّ.
If it is with a fracture, then the fracture should be treated first with remedies that precede it before treating the dislocation and left for a few days, then treat the dislocation. For the sake of God, except for what you hope will save him from disaster with light illness and some hope appeared to you, then return it to your hour in the first place before the hot tumor occurs.وإن كان مع الكسر والفكّ جرح فينبغى أن يعالج الجرح أوّلا، ويقبل على علاج الكسر والفكّ بعد ذلك
If the part returns to what you want, then use the treatment that soothes hot tumors and treat the wound with a suitable ointment for drying. If there is a fracture in the jaw and a splinter of bone occurs, remove it by cutting. And comply with what we have mentioned in simple diseases, as previously mentioned in its places.
And strive your best and purify yourself from entering the path of risk, as I have previously advised you. This will preserve your honor and be safer for your health, God willing.
