O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, my very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made the end through its explanations and through its statements. 
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery". 
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and is estranged from everything, so the science is perished and cut off, and nothing remains of the former skills except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that hands have moved. 
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and science is estranged. 
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Now it seems to me that I revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the cautery instruments, and the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary. 
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged. 
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for whoever undertakes it to be instructed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of the parts, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of vessels, and the movement of the veins moving and resting, and the place of their origin. 
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because Hippocrates says that knowledge without practice is much, and with work is little; and the same in the art of hands. 
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction to this book that whoever is not knowledgeable of the things said before, beware lest he fall into error and harm men; so that I have wanted many times more than those who undertake this science and abandon themselves without science and without experience. 
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish man who cut open an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman and cut her arteries too, so that so much blood came out she died in his hands. 
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another man who treated a stone of a man in pain, and the stone was large; he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days. 
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if he were cut he would die. 
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another man who took charge of the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was a wound; and the ignorant surgeon removed the fracture on top of the wound as if it were a bone splinter with great force, and did not leave any bandage on the wound, and left it like that until the end; and he ordered him not to unwrap it; and he lingered until the leg was all swollen and the foot came to ruin. 
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and release his leg; and when I dislocated it, he felt at ease and did not feel any pain. 
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the way the corruption was already confirmed or member, and could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to go through the limb until the limb was completely lost.  
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another who burst the abscess ulcerated, and then inflamed by the wickedness of his lordship. 
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when a chancre is pure of melancholic humor, it is not right to touch it with iron unless it is in part where one can remove all that is corrupted. 
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, work where there is danger in several situations; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.  
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason it is necessary that you guard yourself so that the foolish people cannot speak ill of you.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his admonishments: "Do not take care of a bad disease unless you are called a fool." 
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters. 
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and about the shapes of instruments, and the fastenings of a cautery, and of everything that is necessary in the work. 
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is ordered and describes the shapes of instruments. 
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and describes the shapes of instruments. 
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we remember the work, it is fitting that I say the quality of help and harm of each complexion. 
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest words and subtlest science and secret answers; and many sages spoke about this and agreed upon it, but few satisfy their words because I fear length. 
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the cautery helps universally to all complexions where it has matter, except for two complexions: that is to know, hot complexion without matter and dry complexion without matter. 
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some said that the cautery is of great help, while others said the opposite: that the cautery is only helpful for illnesses that come from heat and dryness. 
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and should not be cured with heat or dryness; those who say the opposite claim that the cautery helps greatly with hot and dry illnesses that occur in the bodies of men. 
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold. 
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement. 
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it several times through experience. 
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in every way, let no one interfere except those who have experienced it and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, and the outcomes and the space of time; we do not fear other complexions, even cold and moist diseases. 
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all those who are wise agreed upon the cautery. 
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that a cautery with fire is among the secrets of cures and is of greater benefit than a cautery of burning medicine. 
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come forth except to the member that is cooked, and it does not harm another member, so it is said. 
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines come from one member to another while moving away, and they bring about illnesses in the member that grieve healing; and by chance they kill the sick. Fire, on account of its height and because of the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is superfluity.  
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experience and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself for the length of the speech, because it does not please me to withhold from you the secret that resides in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels illnesses from bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it into your thoughts. 
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time cauteries should be done, and they extracted intentions. 
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the arising harms are put beneath by the aid of the cautery; and even if the cauteries are for necessary and urgent pains which cannot wait for the time until greater harm comes to the limb. 
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as foolish men do; for the illness which is healed by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they think, because cauteries are only a medicine that moves the complexion, and dries the humors which are the cause of pain, and is worth moving than medicine for its speediness of its valor, and for the virtue of its work and its mastery. 
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the illness comes at some times according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the illness and its nature; and superfluities are assembled in him by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if this is not done cauteries are administered in the place where he has a lot of superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return at all; but it rarely happens. 
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and this is clear; but they do not believe that cauteries are valuable after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any illness and they are not effective, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective. 
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then understand well that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish folk. 
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cautery with instruments of gold is milder than iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and its purity. 
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And in any case when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly; and if one heats it too much, it will melt in the fire; and thus there are enough impediments. 
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use a cautery of iron which we have adapted to our work. 
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet so that the way may be easier to find. 
dou cautere olivaire	where olive oil cautery  
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two reasons why it is done because of an illness called "soda" and because of many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and because of a multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and even all illnesses which come from coldness such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses. 
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine modifying the head III days or IV, according to what the virtues and age and custom of the patient can suffer; and then make the hair of the patient grow back. 
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and have him put his hands on your thighs; then place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two thumbs will come, it will bleed a little and then you heat the cautery which is called "olivare", of which this is the form:  
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and make it descend while squeezing your hand bit by bit turning; then lift your hand slowly, and look at the spot if you see a little bone; and if you do not see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you; then take a piece of silk thread, and put soft cotton in it, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then put moistened cotton wool in butter on top, and leave it until the burn is gone; then treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmacon" until it is healed. 
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they say the ancients that when a wound remains more open, it purges more; and for this reason, aid is given. 
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them say that one should leave the cautery long enough so that part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone and treat it. 
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the others say that one should leave the cautery on and press it so hard that it lowers from the bone as wide as a spindle that women put in their spindles so that the humors may be freely drawn out; and one should leave the wound open for a long time afterward, then clean and suture it.  
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it out; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of the cautery is safer and gentler for me, and from this one I work altogether for salvation.  
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head 
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts long, then the patient must use herbs and pills which are called "cochie", and purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cautery as we have said before, and it is of no value. 
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the head of the patient is of strong constitution, and that he is not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a spot as we have said above.  
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making the cautery on each horn of the head until the bone, as we have said before, and make the cautery at the place which is called "vessels"; and it is these places where one puts cupping glasses; and lighten your hand so that you do not see to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauters the middle part of the head, and this is the form: 
dou cautere dou chief	From head cauterization 
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in a part of the head comes sudden pain, and the illness is extended to the eye, and the head is purged by purifying medicines, and one has done the other cures that I have said in the division of illnesses, and all this does not profit: then one makes cauterizations according to two manners, namely with hot medicine and with fire. 
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterizations of hot medicine are such that you take a date palm, and remove the bark and cut it into two pieces as big as the head, and then make a temple where the pain lies in half a manner so that you can place the date palm under the skin; and when it is placed there let it lie and bind it well and leave it like this for twelve hours; and then untie it and apply garlic over the date palm, and leave the wound like this for two or three days; then put cotton dipped in butter on top as much as possible. 
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until it is healed; and if you see that it does this with some burning remedies that I have written, or dose to treat burning remedies.  
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is according to this manner. 
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of which this is the form: 
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because its head is made in the shape of a bell or it has a beak of curvature, and in the middle a small protrusion; and you put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the iron a little lightly, until half of the thickness of the flesh is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is further away, and a lot of blood flows. 
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After you put cotton in a piece of silk and put it on the place for three days; then you put cotton moistened in butter and afterwards cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery that is called "cultellara," at the very tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this headache which is not old. 
de emigraine	from migraine 
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have previously said in divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cauteries before spoken of from medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is fitting that you should scald the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and thus sign on the painful place a line half an inch long, and remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come up to the bone; and be wary of the mandible which moves when one eats, and let the nerves have regard only for the movement and that spasms do not come upon the patient, and be wary of the flow of blood from the artery when it is cut, for cutting has great fear and also for him who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the work in the middle way; but I shall tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I shall show you at its place in this book.  
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of his head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with a cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful. 
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from cold, and one has worked remedies that dissolve and other cures as we have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called “point,” of which this is the form: 
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing all around the afflicted ear, or around both where the pain holds, and you remove a speck on top of the root of the ear after you have marked the place for the cautery; and make ten points around each ear; afterwards treat the place until it is healed.  
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torment of the mouth 
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torment which must be cured by cautery is none other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make a cautery for likenesses that come from dryness and spasm of nerves. 
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this likeness of torment that moves from phlegm of humors and purgings of head and gargling, and it is of no avail, then it behooves that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a firebrand above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part which appears healthy, and make a cautery on the head of the ear above a spot below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on it until half the core is burned; and this is the form of the cautery: 
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is similar to the scalpel we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and the knife should be a little larger; after healing the place as I have said before, until it is healed. 
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one behind the head, and one on the place that is called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and treat them as we have said before. 
de litargie	of lethargy 
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness it is fitting to give the patient large elderberries and purging pills that clarify the brain; after raising the head of the patient altogether, and placing mustard plaster on the occiput as is written in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: if you do as I have said. 
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healed thus, it is good; and if it is not, make him three cauteries on the head descending to the neck, and have a space of one finger's breadth between each cautery; and cure it as the others, and if you see it swell and the patient suffers, make one cautery in the middle; and if need be, two others on the two horns, and cure it until it is healed; and let the cauteries be called "olivare," as I have said before. 
de la froidor dou chief	from the coldness of the head 
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is fitting that the head be cleansed of herbs and of what we have said before; afterward raise the head of the patient, then make a cautery on the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the illness is severe, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the hottest part is burned, then lift your hand; afterward cure it until it is healed, and let the cauteries be called "olivare" as we have said before. 
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy 
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other remedies as we have said in the chapter when the patient is large and suffering from a lack of medicine. 
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, he should have gargles and chewable remedies that modify the brain often with good meats; afterwards, he raises the head of the child to the middle, and he makes the cautery according to what we have said before, and the cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffering, he makes cauteries as I have said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be with olive oil according to the manner that I have said. 
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is feverish, then make him a subtle cautery according to this manner: 
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When because of melancholy there are superfluities or corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then make the cautery with several cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis. 
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if because of melancholy the superfluities are declining toward melancholy and the patient's body is moist, then give him something to drink so that his brain may be cleansed, according to what precedes in the division. 
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you raise the head of the patient; then make a well-made linen tourniquet, just like a circle, and place it on the head; and have the patient cross their arms and be well held on all sides; afterwards apply the ointment, made with butter of old rue; and heat it over a temperate fire so that the two may withstand the pain; then empty the circle within the head and let it cool; do this to the patient once a week with another good government until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see cauterization being done, make many points with the whole cautery iron. 
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This way of cauterizing removes the brain thoroughly; and then put cotton moistened in butter and hog fat. 
de l’awe des eulz	from the edge of the eyes  
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe first comes to the eyes according to the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and make the patient drink things purifying the head, and keep him from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times fasting. 
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands to shave his head, and make him cauterize the whole head, and make him two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the awe is to both eyes together, or one if the descent is to one; and apply all the cautery along all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the flowing of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, staunch it as well as you can.  
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision the caution how you will stretch it; and never make a cautery or hot iron below the two bones behind. 
dou cors des larmes	where the body sheds tears 
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are upon the veins, or beneath the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is superfluities cold and phlegmatic, then make the cautery that I have said at the beginning of this chapter descending to the eyes: one cautery on the forehead, and two cauteries upon the two temples, and two cauteries or hot irons beneath the two bones; and if there is need more, then cauterize bleeding above the eyebrow with all small cauteries.  
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	where the body sheds tears inside the eyes 
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit, then give the patient three nights of chicken broth; afterward, shave his head, and burn him or a small amount with an olive cautery; and make two burns with a cautery called “clavilis” on the two temples, one below the hair; and be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis": 
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the skin is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olive." 
de coi ci est li forme:	of which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see fit to make two burns on the two temples as long as the eyebrows are; and do not remove your hand until one third of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said. 
dou poil qui point l’oil	that hair which pricks the eye 
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to bristles and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two methods: that is to say, with fire or with burning medicine. 
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. 
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are equal, then place the patient in your chair; afterwards draw on a piece of paper above the hairs a shape like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then put cotton moistened with egg white and juice of parsley onto the eye, then heat the cautery which has this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the face spot by spot many times, so that the flesh is burned in that place; and the signs of the healthiness of the work are that you see the paper shrink back, and the hairs rise to the point of the needle; then lift your hand, and leave it like that for three days, then put cotton moistened in butter until the burn is gone; afterwards, treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come in and the paper is softened then begin the cautery on that same spot as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the hairs at the point of the needle. 
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauteries of burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even; then make parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and quicklime, of each one .3., and grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape that you have made like the myrtle leaf, and put it on the paper along with the hairs; and if the illness is only in one eye, then work on only one, and if on both also; and put cotton moistened with egg white under the eye; and the patient's head must be in your lap, and put your thumb showing on the medicine, and press once and remove it every time that the patient feels a bite from the medicine, because they will feel a bite as of fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand. 
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, lift the place of awe, and see if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, it is well. 
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal and your eyes are set; then put cotton moistened in butter on it until the heartburn is gone, afterwards cure the place of the ointment which is called "diaphanous" and others, until it is healed. 
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to be careful of your work with great care so that the medicine does not fall into your eyes. 
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, start the medicine again on that place which is softened from the paper properly, just as you did before; afterwards cure it until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle leaf: 
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this are your constraints; and let not the right way be answered to him whose study is this art. 
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of a fistula by cautery 
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not profit, then it is necessary that you make a cautery according to this manner. 
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap; and have the attendants hold his head between your hands in such a way that he does not move or shake his head; then put softened cotton steeped in egg white or parsley juice on the eye; afterwards, heat the cautery which is shaped like this: and it is sharpened at the point like the shape of a quill pen, together with which the cautery is. If you see it pointed from one side to the other, and if you see it as a tent; but all the same, this which is sharpened is worth more for your work.  
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, and treat the decay, and dry it; and if it is closed, do the work, and treat the bowels after; then put a hot cautery on, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part where the fat is under the eye, so that your hand does not shake; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it. 
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. 
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, start the cautery again once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days; then put soft cotton soaked in butter on it, and cure it with a desiccant ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, put on corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king according to what he would bring in his chapter. 
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients said. 
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand a fistula and make the place; then put in the fissure a subtle piece of which this is the form: 
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make it the size of a 3 of lead; and hold your hand or piece firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the melted lead does not run to his eye; and it is necessary that one put on the patient's eye moistened cotton in wine or ale: the lead will burn the place of the fistula, and heal wonderfully. 
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. 
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, it is necessary to administer a potion at night, and bring the fistula back to the body through the nose according to what is suitable in its proper place. 
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in lips 
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks happen in the lips which are called "furrows," and likewise in the lips of children. 
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in sections and the treatment does not work, then heat a small surgical cautery knife according to this form:  
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And quickly place it in the cracks until it reaches a boil; afterwards, treat the area with wax until it is healed. 
de l’aposteme de la goule	of an abscess of the throat  
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or roots of the teeth, after decay and rot it becomes old and develops into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in sections, and it does not work at all: then it is necessary that you have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, open or pierce the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the heated iron reaches the bottom of it, and where no other place remains; and do this once or twice, afterwards treat it as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is cured in this way, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter. 
dou movement des dens	tooth movement 
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicine but it is of no use, then put the head of the patient on your lap; after, heat the cautery whose shape will be shown later in part so that you put a cane on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside quickly, and hold your hand there until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after, lift your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish; after, fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let him gargle for an hour and rinse well. 
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the moving tooth is fixed, and the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupt moisture is dried up. 
de la dolor des dens	of toothache  
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or wind, and remedies of medicine are useless, then it is necessary to use a cautery according to two methods: a butter cautery and a fire cautery.  
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	The cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon of iron or silver; afterwards take cotton and wrap it on the point of a tent peg, and wet it in boiled butter, and put it on the aching tooth hastily and hold it until it is cooled; and thus do often as long as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wet wool and cotton are in cold butter, and put them on the aching tooth, and put the hot iron on it as long as the fire reaches the end of the tooth. 
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauteries together with fire are such that you take a cane of iron or silver, and it is thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; afterwards heat the cautery, from which the form will come hereafter, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next. 
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is fitting that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in haste for the cautery, and then cool it well; and this is the form of the cautery: 
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery of whatever kind you wish, and according to what you are able; and this is the form of the cane: 
des scrophules	of scrofula 
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is of phlegm and cold humors, and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery red hot as follows: it has two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice, as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and put softened cotton buttered on top until the burn is gone; afterwards treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.  
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane: 
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moistures overcome the channels of the body, and especially when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by dissolving medicines; after you make a cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come near the throat, and do not burn the heart but only a small spot. 
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you make another cautery at the juncture of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauteries be called "clavile" as we have the form before; and heal the place as we have said before until it is healed. 
de la toust	Of the cough 
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and illnesses of the body are from cold moistures, and the patient has neither fever nor dryness, and the illness is old, then make two cauteries on the shoulder blades in their hollows; and the other cautery between the two breasts; and let the cauteries be called "clavile" according to the form that is said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, make a cautery by pricking with all the cauteries that are called "points," whose shape is shown above in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to thirty, or even more. 
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment according to what is said above, let the cauteries be at three distances according to this form: 
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cauteries are lighter, make three of them in a row. 
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation 
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first loosen the dislocation. 
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards place the patient on his back and on his side; then lift the heart which is inside the shoulder with the two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inwards, heat the cautery that has two points like this: 
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the ribs, and the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries; and for this reason, a cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, so that the figure of the cauterization are six cauteries; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves: 
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is added on this one nerve so that there are eight cauteries. 
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put on the cautery for a short time crushed with thread; after make the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well comforted. 
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thickness of the shoulder blade cautery, or many cauteries in pricking. 
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed. 
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and much moisture come to the stomach until they take away its complexion, and phlegm is multiplied in it, and customary cures are used and do not profit, then it is necessary that the patient be laid on his back, and extend his legs and hands. 
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Then make three cauteries under the spoon of the buttock for the quantity of two grains, with each cautery marked, and two cauteries below the two ribs so that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and have half space between one and another so they are not joined together when they rot; and let the cauteries be so perfect that they color the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries according to this form without adjustment:  
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and signing on the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you see of enche; then cauterize with the whole cautery which is called “poins”. 
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the cure that we have had before, as long as it is healed. 
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes pain from cold and moisture and from great windiness, as long as it is out of its natural complexion because of superfluities; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, then it is necessary that the patient be soothed on his higher part; and sign three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, beyond the hypochondria, where the ribs come; and have space between each cautery the thickness of a finger; and let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too much on the whole cautery; and it should be burned only half of the heart, and the patient should be standing on his feet; and if he cannot, then he should lie down, and extend his legs, and lift his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your desire is, to cauterize these burns with a knife, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the heart, for you would dry up all the body; and that it does not reach as far as the eye, for the heart is very delicate in that place, and look carefully to see. 
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh or the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, he feels very intense pain. 
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure requires the mires, it is fitting that the patient be placed on his head; and then mark the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray, of which this is the form: 
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I the cautery until the heart is burned, and comes to syphasis, until the poultice is all gone; after the cure according to the cure of wounds until it is healed; and it is not right that any use this cautery except those who have long studied in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never run. 
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly work, and nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave it. 
dou cautere de pleuresin	of cautery of pleurisy 
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one must make cauteries of pleurisy with the roots of aristoloche, and in this manner: take a root of aristoloche long, the largest that you can find, and let it be dry, and also as thick and as long as your two fists; and soak it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the shoulder blade and the neck, and two small cauteries a bit lower in the part that is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a bit; and one cautery near the breast, and one on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as the two sides of the breast behind the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand at all, but make it openly as when smelling. 
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancients say that no man should use a fire cautery resembling a razor, and heat it and put it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and the pain flees, as we have said in the liver abscess. 
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed. 
de la mice	from the hand
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the hand as we have said in the divisions of the cures, and it does not profit, then apply three methods of cautery which are all good. 
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these, one method is that you make three or four cauteries, in a line according to the length of the hand, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand on the whole cautery, and let the patient often turn onto his back; and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two points, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is located at the hand, where the side of the patient comes towards the left, and be the elevations from which you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and let the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After he puts the two inflamed nerves in so that the heart is pierced from the other side, and then pulls out the cautery iron, thus he will have four. And if you see, cauterize with the whole cautery iron at three nerves. 
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has festered for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures previously mentioned.  
de ydropisie	of dropsy 
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not worthwhile for a person with dropsy except in the manner called "asclytes".  
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not profit at all, then it is fitting that you make him four cauterizations around the shoulder blade, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the thigh, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place near the breast; and let the cauterizations be very close to the hopes of the heart.  
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the cautery uncovered for a long time to prevent rot, and do not leave the wound of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and the two intentions would be together with the help of God. 
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be a key as we have shown before; and that for the back should be oval, according to what has been mentioned previously.  
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet 
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in those who are dropsical and are full of clear yellow water, it is fitting that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. 
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, so that the clear yellow water is strongly driven out, and let the cautery be according to this form: 
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After you make two cauteries on each leg at the point of a knife; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries uncovered for a long time so that the pus dries out; after that, cure with the other cures that we have said. 
de la menoison	of the meniscus
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When a solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened and cannot be cured by any methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the stomach cautery, or the circular cautery; and four cauteries around the navel subtle with all the subtle cleavers, and two cauteries on the thighs. 
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, then make a cautery on the shoulder, and a cautery on each arm, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help. 
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids 
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are at the fundament, one or several, and they are old and are of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, those that are furthest below the scapula, bit by bit in a triangular shape, and one cautery below the buttock two times; and if you think his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling in the face, then put one large cautery on the stomach as previously said, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the cautery marked; and leave the cauteries open for a long time.  
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the place so that it is healthy. 
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul" 
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut thethelul, if you heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and then put it all ablaze upon that thelthul cut; and leave it as long as your hand and the cautery reach the beginning of the vein, so that the blood stops; do this once or twice, and if there is much thelthul, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards treat with profitable ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery upon the flesh, it will be of greater help. 
de plaie mal curee	of a poorly treated wound 
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting nor opening, which we will relate in its place, there comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery. 
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes to be, and is old and has foul rot and corrupted moisture, you must test it thoroughly with a subtle probe, and be sure that you know exactly how deep the probe penetrates. 
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery which resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the depth that the probe has entered, and repeat the application of the cautery until all rotten and corrupted flesh is burned once, twice or thrice according to the amount needed; and be careful not to burn the nerves which are there, nor the large veins.  
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, be careful of these places, and do not make these incisions except in healthy flesh, and consider that it is not yet pierced; after cauterize the place until it is healed, and if the place is salted, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed; and if the materials are not removed, know that the place is too deep, and corrupted bone lies at its base; and as one of these we will say in its place. 
de la maladie des reins	of the illness of the kidneys 
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and from great windiness, and does not take pleasure from a woman, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other with a sharpened cautery as we have previously said; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more help. 
de la vessie	of the bladder 
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the back part above the bladder where the hairs begin at the pubic bone, on the right and left, and let each cautery be as long as the nail of a thumb; and make one cautery on the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauteries be sharpened according to the form previously mentioned.
de la marris	From the marrow 
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain; then it is necessary to make III cauteries around the buttock, as we have said for the bladder cautery, and II cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be sharp, as we have said. 
de la hainche	Of the hip  
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moistures descend to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and two places are found in the division of the veins, then you must cauterize the patient on the socket of the hip at one cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the place around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and let the cautery be such as those with which we have cauterized the stomach. 
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present for you, make three large olive wood cauteries, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all hearts; and cure it until it is healed. 
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip 
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of the gross humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good-looking pills. 
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After you make the cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods: that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery.  
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many methods, of which some are such: that you cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and size, and put between each cautery space the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive wood; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on top of the hip, so that there are four according to this form: 
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cautery with the circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the whole hip, and all the muscles of the heart are burned. 
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg. 
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make II cauteries where the patient says the pain is, and I cautery above the ankle IV times, on the left side a point; and let the cauteries be lancets, or burn the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes or near them, cauterize him where he feels the pain III points or IV with the cautery which is called "points". 
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, do more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, make a cautery with a knife-like or circular cautery; and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave it long enough to burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more pain and contraction. 
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen several who made a cautery on the ankle of the foot and left it so long that the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and the whole foot became pierced and corrupted. 
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After which a purge led to his death. 
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in one and the other, according to this manner. 
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sages said about the cautery of the hip, in this way, make a tool like this and let its head be as thick as a doctor's nail, or a little less, and let it have crossbars, and from one crossbar to the other space the amount of a thumb's knot; and let the crossbars be on two sides, and also be like knots; and let there be a well-made iron handle; and this is the form: 
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it should be heated until it is all red and gives off sparks, and then it is put on the box of the diseased hip, and turned on the healthy side; and the cauterizer once he has cauterized it leaves it for III days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards cure with anointing until it is healed. 
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery little because of the fear of its appearance, and we rarely see anyone who uses it; and nevertheless it is a good cautery, which can endure it, and where it applies itself. 
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning medical cauteries are such that you make one instrument with interspaces in which the edge of the door descends, and it is made of iron or bronze with a long handle, and at the height there are two points, and between each point there is the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and they are open outside and above, and join together according to this form: 
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After you put the box of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and quickly put your hand very firmly on the box of the hip; then place between the two circles a hot awl that has been heated in the fire for one poke, and leave it for an hour or so, and let the patient endure the heat and the burn from it. 
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it will find a bite as well as from fire; and when the bites have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the hip with a soft awl, and leave it like this for three days, and put butter on it until that which is black from the burn is removed; and leave it for three days so that rot will be drawn out; and this would be the last help after the treatment of ointments as long as it is healed. 
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that has an awl according to what you have done in the hip similarly; and this is the way of the hot awl, and I have written it in a treatise on the rectification of medicine. 
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and hot coal, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. 
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Where it has a small hole so that the point of a razor can enter; and put this pot into another well-sealed pot, and put hot coals and sweet ashes on top, as much as there are two handfuls above the powders until you have well preheated it in your hand; and leave it like that until it descends with water and cheese into the sealed pot, then take all that liquid and pour it onto the hot coals and alkali as before. 
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very watery and is administered in many works of medicine and for cauterizing other members because it performs the same work as fire, and it has other medicines with which one cauterizes well the flesh such as turpentine and honey from Anacardium trees and hot coals with soap, all these things mixed together. 
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us of a cure by which a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and he praised it greatly, and said that no other cure was done, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as he teaches here after. 
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in this manner that you take two drachms of fresh and dry green vitriol, and grind it very much with a bit of fat, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain lies, and bind it; and leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burn. 
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter a bath until his body is slightly warmed, and let him enter bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed. 
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a cautery of such medicines unless it is after the evacuation of the body. 
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung fire, it helps a lot; and it must be done in this way. 
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and soak it in old oil, and put it on the hollow between the thumb and the other finger which is called the knuckle. 
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Then take dry goat dung and set it on fire until it is charcoal, and put it on the wool, and leave it until it is extinguished; and do this again, and continue to do so until you think through feeling that it has reached the hip, and that the pain has ceased; and this manner of cautery is called "goat dung cautery". 
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain 
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either from falling or from percussion or from excessive evacuation, or from similar cold spreading matter, none of these likenesses are worth cautery, except for that which comes from infusion of cold matter. 
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is fitting that after the patient has been purged of foul pills or other such things that are placed on his back where the pain lies, three lines should be drawn with ink, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauteries be done according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see fit, make three cauteries or four at a moderate cautery according to this form: 
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Often this illness comes to young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight throat when they rise, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes up on the other spines. 
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to cure it, cauterize it with a cautery according to this form. 
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery properly brands each part of the spine equally. 
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, when you cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery making two or three lines, and the points are close to each other. 
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful that you do not administer a cautery in gibbosity which is in spasm of a nerve. 
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints  
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of the joints is from moistures that are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the leech properly calls "podagra," and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form: 
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you seize upon the face of the foot, then cauterize it completely with a cautery that we call "point". 
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which happens often, then cauterize each knee with three or four cauteries on each side, using an olive oil cautery; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand too long except until the thickness of a kernel is burned.  
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in this chapter. 
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist for two lines; and if there remains any pain in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and take remedies. 
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give it good treatment and purge phlegm, it will be healed with God's help. 
de la routure dou syfac	of the fracture of the bone
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a fracture comes in anger, and the bowels descend as far as the hips and it is recent, it behooves that when you have him cleaned, he must not eat anything that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly, so that the waste descends from his belly. Then make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath while the bowels are being repaired, and set them at your will, and draw a line below the fracture upon the bone of the shinbone, and a whole sign which is like half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery 
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and gives off sparks.  
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bowels to their place; and have the assistant keep his hand on them so they do not go back; and work the thighs of the patient well, and put a cushion and a serjeant under the thighs, and another under the foot which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again another until you come to the bone; and be careful subtly that the eyeball does not protrude when you make the cautery, so that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or suffer other ills. 
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. 
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to their size, and those of large people also large according to their size; after three days cure the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is gone; afterwards cure it with other ointments until it is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well closed; and it is necessary that his nourishments be satisfied for a long time, so that the eyeball does not protrude when he gets up to go to the chamber. 
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, give him a well-made bandage and let him wear it for another forty days; and let him have good rest, that he work little and beware of excessive repletion of drinking and eating, and of shouting too loudly; and when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healed. 
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here afterwards the treatment of the hip in its chapter. 
de la routure dou ventre	of a rupture of the belly 
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are recognized, and you see that they no longer grow, make a cautery with the cautery according to its quantity, and burn one-third of the hernia; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery according to this form: 
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the place of incision and make a line across its width above the rupture, and another behind, and hold your hand steady over the entire cautery iron. 
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and gentler.  
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb 
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether from a fall or a wound, and that pain lasts for a long time, and medicine does not help, then it should be cauterized with a cautery called "points," and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and virtue and location of torsions and pain. 
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, start another cautery on top of that one, because such custom dictates that it should change to a limb that is close by, for which reason you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.  
de meselerie	from the craft 
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The healer is aided sometimes by cautery with great help, and likewise the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. 
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	But if you see that it needs to be cauterized, take heed if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the patient, then make V cauteries on the head: one I apply to the nape, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and II on the two horns, and I behind on the haiterel; and leave it as long as the cautery reaches the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can escape; and cauterize according to what is presented before the mice. 
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the malady is scattered everywhere and it clearly loses, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said or first the cautery on the nape and two cauteries on the spine of the neck and six cauteries on the spine of the back and one large one on the rump and another nearby and two on the two shoulders; and two on the elbows and two on the tendons of the foot and one on each joint of the hands and feet and on the pits of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the last bone of the heel, so as not to burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver. 
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you make cauteries, the more help you make and the more it benefits; and know that the sick do not feel any pain from the cautery as the healthy ones feel it because the body is already all corrupted. 
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is fitting that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons. 
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, bathe the place with flour of vetch with honey and other treatments until it is healed. 
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauteries on the limb according to its size; and let the cautery be a small puncture entering the thickness of the flesh; then treat it with ointments until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is done on the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; and nevertheless no one should interfere with this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the origins of the nerves moving the body.  
de albaras	from herbs 
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the illness which is called “albaras” is old, and medicines are of no value, then cauterize a spot perfectly with a hot iron, according to the quantity of the species from the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes. Then cure it with flour of vetch and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and hen’s blood and almond blood, of each an equal part; mix all together and bind it with a cloth, and air it in place until it heals. 
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of ulcers by cautery 
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When an ulcer appears at the beginning and you see it stop, cauterize it with a hot iron that resembles a circle, all around the ulcer. 
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And although some surgeons say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer, it does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen several times; and furthermore, it is better for it to be cauterized around it with a hot iron which is called “circular”, as we have said in our description of irons.  
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot move 
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a sickness which is called "adubelati", and it is slow to heal because of the superfluity which it makes or because of the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or because of time; and you wish to hasten its healing: then the cauterizer applies many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards he leaves them thus. 
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to heal. 
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you wish to pierce it with the whole cautery, heat the cautery in this way: 
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this sickness which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the core, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it from afar in a way so that the course of the putrefaction is alleviated.  
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure, as long as it is perfectly healed. 
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure by fire with iron 
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another manner of disease which is called "corroding," and it is nothing other than a devouring of the limbs, for it eats away at the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood. 
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat small and large cauteries, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is; after cauterizing on all sides until you root out all the corruption, and none of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed. 
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for 3 days, and put on the burned places soft bread mixed with oil until the burns from the fire are gone, and all the corruption.  
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of wounds causing flesh. 
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; and if not, you begin the cautery again on that which remains corrupted. 
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this condition has sometimes been cured with a hot medicine instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for hot medicine in the division: take it when you need it. 
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of boils that come to the feet 
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often it happens that at the feet due to disorders a disease is born which is called "close" according to our understanding, and it is a large foul thing which wounds the foot. 
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are according to two manners. 
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know the fire cautery, and the hot iron cautery. 
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery like a quill pen, and it is made of good iron to the measure that it can burn the nail on all sides, and that it has subtle edges; then you put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and you leave it thus for III days as long as it begins to rot; then you make a plaster of wild mallow bruised with salt, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nails will fall off and be rooted out from their roots.  
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the place of the ointment rubbing it well until it is healed. 
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by fires the body, and it often happens in hands and feet, it is fitting that you administer hot iron cautery; and it is in this manner: take a cane of ash or iron, or a quill pen, and put it on the nail and the athlul, that is to say warts; and put the cane on so that it surrounds all around, then he puts a piece of hot coal, and holds his hand well, and presses his hand by turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot iron deep down to the root; and let the patient suffer one bite from the hot iron for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot itself all at its roots. 
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Then make one after another, until you pull out all those that are on the body, then treat the ointments which engender flesh. 
li cure dou trembler	The treatment of trembling.  
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from coldness of nerves, or from a quartan fever or another, it is fitting that you make four cauteries or IV on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive-oil cautery; then let the trembling go, and hasten the health from the cold illness.  
des pustules puans	Of stinking pustules 
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes appear by default the body bathed, or stinking pustules, that come from large corrupt matters.  
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	Then it is fitting, when they first appear, that one makes a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, in which the point is taken by fire, or of long aristoloche root, or with lentil cautery.  
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow forward any more, but are broken up of the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood. 
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut  
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great flows of blood from the cut artery at the wound that comes afterwards, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very troublesome thing to staunch. 
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And however when this happens to anyone, if you hurry to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and press it very hard so that the blood is quieted under your finger, and no drop issues any more; then heat several small and large olive-wood cauteries over fire until they are all red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is stopped up. 
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a vein bursts when you lift your finger from it, and the cautery is extinguished, immediately take another cautery that is in the fire. 
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do one after the other until the blood is stopped flowing; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well stopped immediately when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by a strong ligature of thread, or by medicines put on which have the power to stop blood; and let it be tied and restrained tightly. 
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever would administer the stopping of bleeding by tying tightly with cloths or putting hot things on, or other similar things, it will not profit and will do harm. 
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has neither mirror nor medicine at hand, he must place his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press well until it is numbed both on the wound and on the vein; and do not move his finger, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and numbed; and make inquiries ahead about those who need cauteries and medicines. 
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of cures by incision. 
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all illnesses in which it is fitting to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and the indications and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I have put this chapter from head to toe, and I will go in this chapter by the same way so that one can find more easily what one desires. 
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this one, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first one on cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution. 
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter there often is evacuation of blood when opening a vein and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die. 
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. 
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment. 
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	Some come who are so afflicted with their illness that they die easily because of the violence and severity they experience from their ailment; and one must fear these. 
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are some who give you their meaning and say: “Wait, I am cured”; and the illness is hateful. 
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your greed, and do not work foolishly but wisely from those of whom you are certain, and from whom you can take advice; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your patients so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and lasting remembrance. 
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	My dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen. 
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what it is before this chapter of cauteries, which I have devised from the head down to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you will need. 
dou chief plein d’aigue	Let the head be full of sharpness 
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this ailment often comes to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls the child's head too hard; and sometimes it comes from a cause unknown. 
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this ailment except in children, and all those that I have seen hastened death; and for this reason it seems to me better to leave the work of these cures to others. 
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of sharpness, and the head swelled each day so that it could not support it; and the moisture grew so much that it died, and this moisture assembled beneath the bone on top of the spinal cord, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you cleave a wide split in the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out; and see here the shape of the spatula: 
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more severe and the abscess larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form: 
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the corners of the head open on each side, and the sharp point jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three cuts in the middle of the head according to this manner: 
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture. 
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After extracting the cuts with cloths and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it like this until the fifth day; then untie it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and allow the head to be straightened evenly, and give the patient dry food free of moisture so that the limb is strengthened and healed. 
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look where the size of the abscess appears, and the gathering of the point; for it is sometimes in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left. 
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut where the abscess appears, and the gathering of the point, and make the incision according to your ability; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and let a small amount of blood flow, so that the patient does not die from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture. 
de reume	of the joint
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there occurs in someone a sickness that is called "catarrh" in the eyes or breasts, and the sickness is old, and the cure of medicine does not help, then the last resort is the cautery with which one cauterizes the two arteries. 
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see them swollen, make the patient bend back their head; after that, rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear; then pull the patient's neck tight with the cloth; then look where the vein beats and its direction is behind the ears, and they are filled up; then mark the veins with a cross, then cut them both with a sharp knife from two sides, so that the vein comes out to the bone and this should be done by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, put the knife under the artery and cut it above, cutting as much as needed across. 
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood will flow continuously upward.  
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not appear to the touch, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then mark with a cross and cut down to the bone; and the quantity of blood that should be released is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone with a small sip, so that pus does not come in, then bind the wound and dress it with ointment until it heals. 
de emigrainne	from a migraine 
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and the heats in the temples and the old, fierce headache and similar things, and it is treated by ways of cures of medicine and all that does not profit it, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have told. 
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is this: let the patient shave the hairs from his temples and listen to the artery that appears in the temple, for it appears well by its throbbing, and is more full than in some men who are too cold; and if it is full, then let the patient grasp its neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a coarse cloth, and apply hot water to the area until the artery appears clearly. Then take the spatulate of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then carefully scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then grasp it at the top with forceps and remove all the webs below it from each side; and if the artery is delicate, turn it with the point of a hook, then cut the part according to the quantity of the two joints. 
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, the blood will not stop altogether. 
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And drain the blood from six to three fingerbreadths, and if the artery is large, tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread, so that decay does not occur before the wound heals, and allow blood to flow; then cut off the excess between the two ties at that moment, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a hot iron until the bone, making sure the joints are severed; this is a small operation if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion. 
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is a help to finish the humours; for this reason it is of greater help against humours. 
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries it is necessary to fill the place with old cotton and put well-made tents on top; and when they are untied, it should be cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healed; and if there is a cut of the artery as long as you work, hurry to cauterize it, or use vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you do not have this, put your finger on the place until the blood freezes, and apply cold water to the place until the blood stops, and extract it as needed; and what is easier and lighter in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with a two-sided cutting cautery, but make sure the cuttings are well spaced to hold the heat longer. 
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat. 
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two knives a space of one finger's width, and then when you have marked to incise the two sides, and you place the hot iron upon it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein into two parts; and they should be spaced apart between the two sides because it is not soldered with this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cautery: 
des larmes	tears 
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are on the bone of the forehead and no medicine treatment helps, and you see the face of the patient reddening, and feel a trembling in their forehead like shivering; and where their hands are thin and moist so that the hairs on the papers are falling out, and the papers are inflamed and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this cure is needed. 
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called the ancients "cure contuse," and it is that you do behind to the patient who has this disease the hairs that he may have on his forehead, then make him III cuts on his forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the cuts be as II doe all down the forehead in swallowing down juice up to the nose, and the other II as II ribs by above the paper, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are as II sides by above the paper; and remove your hand from the continuation of the II jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of III doe across joined; and have ready a piece of sponge and much of cloths his to wipe away the blood, then put the spatula sharp of II parts of which here is the form: 
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision which is behind the temple up to the second incision; and flay all the core which is between the II cuts at all the syfac which is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision up to the other second, and then extract with this spatula. 
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put the instrument called "cultellaire" into the first fissure, it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other. 
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	Place the sharp side towards the flesh burned at the core and the blunt side toward the bone and push it until it reaches the middle fissure. 
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cut all the vessels that descend from the head to those points so that the incision is continuous until it reaches what appears at the core and then do likewise in the middle fissure until the other end; then draw out the blood equally and press the area for the blood to be absorbed; then put a tent of old cotton into each fissure and place soft cloths soaked in wine, oil and alum on top and watch so that no boils appear; and on the third day untie the ligature and apply a large poultice of hot water, then cure it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other remedies for curing wounds until it is healed. 
dou reume des eulz	about the burning of the eyes 
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When some catarrh arises accustomedly, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weaken the sight, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and when the head is full of pain, and the patient sneezes; then know by these accidents that those humors and this catarrh come forth from many veins, and the remedy which there is, if it is this. 
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you order the patient to lie on his back, then make a large incision along the forehead, and another two fingerbreadths wide from the first. 
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be down to the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move during chewing; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then insert between the two lips of the incision cotton wool soaked in linen threads; then bind over cloths moistened in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is removed, it is fitting that you rub the bone until a char begins to form, then cure it with drying agents, which cause charring. 
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and administer it in these wounds to draw flesh throughout. 
de l’estoupement des oreilles	For the stuffing of ears 
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Anything that is found in the ears is one of four things: either grains, or an animal, or a stone from a mine or similar things such as iron; or seeds, such as lentils, beans, peas; or flowing things such as water and easily removable things and similar things.  
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When there is a stone or another kind of thing in the ear that does not fit in the ear nor grow in it, put the ear in the sun.  
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then instill a few drops of violet oil or sesame oil, and then administer extraction; and make him sneeze forcefully, and stuff his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear above. 
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times force comes by this treatment; and if it does not come by force, then administer extraction with delicate pincers, of which here is the form: 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes by force with the pincers, that is good; if not, then administer extraction with a delicate awl of small diameter; and if it does not come by this, then make a cane of iron and push the head of the cane or the perforation of the ear forcefully, and stuff that which is around the cane with soft wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane; then pull forcefully, for many times force comes as we have said; and if it does not come by force in any manner, then take glue of which we take birds, and put some on any instrument suitable for this, and put a piece of cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forcefully. 
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not jump from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear in this way as for an abscess, chalazion, and spasm; and the manner of the incision is such that you make the patient healthy from the cephalic vein, and extract blood according to the measure of his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear at the fat or place depending; and let the incision be as a crescent moon, until you come to the bone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and cure it until it is healed. 
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a thin spatula according to this form: 
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain. 
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have cut it into many pieces; then extract it with delicate forceps and a syringe, as we have said, so that the extraction is clean. 
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In acute pain, when the head is in the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use a sneeze first, and to fill the ear with old cotton. 
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And he should lie on that same ear where the pain is. 
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps strongly this way, it's good. 
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many pebbles according to the length of your thumb, light and warm them a little in the fire; then place one or two pebbles into the patient's ear and press down on it with your foot on the other side, and strike another pebble upon the one that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this from pebble to pebble until the pain subsides completely, and thus it will jump out entirely; and if you see that, take a piece of wire and heat one end in the fire, while the other end remains cool; then repeat with other wires until the pain subsides, as we have said for the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of a beast, if it is of small size, such as a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size that one can feel it, then use extraction with pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear. 
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the removal of worms lodged in the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, then you must look at the ear in the sunlight: if there appears any worms, remove them with fine pincers, and if there are none, take a cane of which this is the form: 
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above. 
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the most delicate tip into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then slowly withdraw the whole cane; do this often until all the worms come out. 
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to come out, then cauterize around the canal with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come out strongly as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the excision of worms, and you will find them where you treat distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, this is the form as you see: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And whether it is of silver or iron, three holes below the small openings, and above covers for distilling; and to press the distillation inside the instrument of well-made iron for this purpose, and if you see take the razor and wrap around the point with cotton gently; then put your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the canal, and the canal is in the ear; then push the razor all the way into the cotton, and press your hand moderately so that the oil is distilled or reached from the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillations be slightly heated over the fire like this, we distill them in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, because the medicine would not be as good. 
de l’estoupement des oreilles	For the softening of the ears 
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have a hole in their ears; and the same thing happens to adults by softening of a wound or a splinter inside the ear.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when it comes to those that are hidden and cannot be seen, they cause grief and impede healing in many ways. 
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be sharp and cutting in front and behind all plain, so that it does not scratch the ear; if the hair is from flesh or bone of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and pull lightly, as long as all the hairs are removed. 
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the hairs are embedded deep in the ear, then take a subtle razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then apply it to the flesh of the ear. 
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the hair that the patient feels pain in the ear, pierce lightly and be careful not to touch the nerves of the ear; then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. 
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for no day until the wound is closed, or else take a tent and moisten it with rose water and powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear swollen, then you should draw out the tent and insert another moistened with cerate made of rose oil and wax, as long as the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healed.  
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloths in cold water, and place them on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding which are found in treatises on distillations. 
de la char des papieres	of parchment  
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This athlull that comes in papers from the time they are moist and dry, it behoves you to extend them with tongs and pincers, and the end of a spatula from its roots; then put on the spot pulverized vitriol. 
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they do not come off, cauterize them gently with a lentil-shaped cautery, and cauterize again after the incision has healed; and often they are repaired, so that nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return. 
de la gresle	of gravel  
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come upon the eye things that resemble hail in their shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of moisture thick on the eye above and below; the work is such: take heed if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and this is a light thing to know; then make two wide incisions, then scrape lightly each part, then take it with pincers and cut it off. 
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cut it off, then pierce a bit the eye, it will not grieve anything to the patient; and if the fissure is large, then sew the gathering with stitches and treat it until it is healed; and if it is small, then do not apply any force, for ointments will quickly restore it and bring forth flesh.  
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine is descending into the inside of the ear towards the upper part, then invert the eyelid and grasp the grandine with pincers, cut it off and press from one side to the other; and if the eyelid is loosened by the incision, it will not grieve anything; and when the grandine is cut off, wash the eye with clean warm water, and treat the place which brings forth flesh until the patient is healed. 
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes 
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is ingrained in cloths of paper on it, and this happens more to children than to adults, and grieves much their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hasten to their eyes; and because of this they lie down on their faces then, and sleep upon them, and have their papers beneath their eyebrows moist so that it swells and its appearance has covered from the exinach which appears in the eye. 
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place at your fingers and feel the exinach between them. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is such that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take a cloth of linen, and arrange a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity which contains exinach from each part, then put it on top of it; and press with your fingers on one side and the other so that the exinach is gathered within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a cut as wide, and no larger than the wound one makes at the opening of a vein; and make the skin perfect as you come to the exinach; and in several positions comes exinach from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.  
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract then at once a piece of charred cloth between your fingers at the fire and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and see that you do not thrust into the fissure, lest you come to all the marrow up to the eye, lest you blind it. 
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the splinter does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then widen the fissure slightly until it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths in water and vinegar, and place them on the spot, and bind with bandages. 
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are some men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains. 
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then care for it until it is healed. 
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes to the place, then treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed. 
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of the paper 
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs from paper are added to those that are natural and aged, they harm them and cause various illnesses such as accustomed tears and softening of the paper, to such a degree that it causes their destruction; and the cure is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by an aqueous medicine as described in the preceding chapter on cautery, and which is done either by incision and suture or by canes, as I will say.  
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper from the oil to your left hand; if it has converted, it is good; if not, insert a needle along all its threads above it; and let this be done at the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow next to these hairs, and draw the thread above the entire paper, and return it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the added hairs, along the whole spatula cutting, from the large tear to the small one; then extract the thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then trace on the paper a figure of an anchor, such as the leaf of myrtle, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you see raising the paper which is divided into all.  
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if one needs to take a large quantity of paper according to how soft the paper is; then make all along the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the large tear to the small; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the lancet into one of the two angles of the heart, then flay it all; then bring together the two lips with a stitch of a needle with all fine thread linen, and wipe away the blood, and air out the superfluity of the threads on the two eyebrows with anything sticky, if you see fit to do this; and if not, don't worry about it, then leave the stitch and the threads until three or four days; then treat the wound without a stitch with drying and constricting things, for the paper will come alive at the healing of the wound and its joining, but the stitch is useless (as the ancients say), and this is work without fear; and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a shape that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have said, with three lancets according to the shape which is here: 
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then take what is above, the small forces equally according to the form which is here: 
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you do not have the strength to hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with thread, and put it in the shape; and put the other thread below the large tear, and the second thread below the small one, and assemble between your two hands the threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have said, then assemble the two edges of the wound by suture, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointments; and it sometimes happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: then you must use what we have said about the incision; but the suture in one and the other is more artificial.  
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the canes is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and put the end inside according to what I have said, and then make two canes by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of a span; and cut at two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on that which rises from the paper from the eye, and strain the two canes of the two parts formed; and leave it like that for several days, and the skin which grows strained will die and heal and bear, as long as it seeks by itself. 
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, and if the cut has some strength, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is stitched, and if the paper is removed, and the hairs will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width: 
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The works are such that you take a subtle needle, and you put a fine silk thread through it; then you assemble the hairs and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then arrange in the loop another subtle silk thread quickly, and tie the heads of the two threads; then put the patient's head on your lap; and let it be under the sun so that the work is clarified, for this is a subtle and small work, then put the needle all through the loop at the root of the hair closest to it, and make it pierce the paper quickly as you drag it over the natural hair; then pull the hair up to the loop, and put it in the loop, if there are one or two or three or more hairs; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out all through the loop in the paper with the natural hair. 
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will treat the hair underneath all the way along the line that you have ordered, until the hair comes out freely through the holes above it and you can see it with the vision of your eye; then you will treat the hair and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows on top; and if the hairs are small, you will accompany one long horsehair, and let it grow with the one that you are leaving, until it is lengthened and then remove it. 
de la porriture de l’oil	of the corruption of the eye 
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacratio" or corruption comes to the eye, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. 
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens through cutting of a wound, or by a cut or by a cautery, and by similar things. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work in it is that you cleave that suture, and separate the lips of it, and put inside linen tents, and bind it as long as it is healed; and it does not suit that you use in the cure of it things that dry and restrict. 
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the sickness returns worse than the first; but it works from things softening, such as fenugreek; and rose water or elderflower and flaxseed boiled, and ointments of diachylon melted in any of the oils, and it wraps a tent, and cures it with that. 
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure is that you give yourself in guard that it does not weld according to the form that it was before; and this work which we have said is nothing but dressings for this sickness, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before. 
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh which comes in the eye 
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness, which is below and is truly called "axacrati," and is natural and accidental. 
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidental cause comes from wounds and fissures and cautery and similar things; and the way to perform the procedure is that you take a needle, in which it has a double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left tear duct so that the threads come out at both sides of the flesh; then stretch the flesh above the entire needle, and cut it with a spatula two finger widths wide. 
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is proper, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the paper, and make two fissures on either side within the paper; and let the sides of the two fissures be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make an angle so that when they are joined together, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has the Greek letter "I"; then remove that flesh, according to the amount its sides extend below, from what surrounds the paper, then join the two separated parts and sew them with a thread of wool; then apply the care that we have mentioned of softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed. 
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a split or seam or cautery, it is fitting that you split a full split below the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare themselves from all their power how they make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what suits them of work and instruments are in several dispositions. 
dou soudement de la papiere	Of paper reinforcement  
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture occurs in a bad manner so that the paper above is sewn with the white of an egg and cannot move or do its natural work, then it is fitting that you put the point of a razor below the paper and lift it up; and hold it with forceps, as long as you cut what is attached to a subtle spatula which is not too sharp nor too cutting so that the patient may not suffer that the spatula is too sharp nor bleeds the oil; and let your incision, by which you flay the assembled one, be lightly so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and heal all the assembled one, and sometimes do it in salt water and lift it with fresh water and colire; then put between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and put on the oil wool moistened abundantly with an egg; and after the third day use lukewarm colire and such things as are soothing until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the corner of the eye 
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembling hard bone; and another which is not nervous, but resembling white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and one thinks to pinch it, cannot be pinched by anyone; and both kinds begin near the large lachrymal gland, and grow little by little until they cover the whole vision and all the light and movement of the eye. 
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is such that the patient puts his head in good health, then he opens his eyes; and lifts the paper to his hand, then cuts the nail with pincers of small doubleure, and stretches it above; then takes a needle, and puts a hair of horse, or cow, or ox, and a strong thread; and doubles the point of the needle a little and sticks it into the nail, and pierces it through the whole needle, and ties the nail with a thread and stretches it above, and scrapes all the hair along the side of the nail which touches the prunele and the silk to the hair up to the head, then cuts off the remainder at the root near the tear gland with all subtle spatumile and small forces, and leaves the flesh natural or tear gland, so that by incision no body accustomedly comes from tears; and sometimes the nail is stretched only on the oncine alone, and to the thread, as we have said; then the scrape has been scraped at all the spatumile of which this is the form: 
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and tear it, and that the prune kernel is not pierced; and after the incision, put a piece of silk thread into the eye, and make a collar from silver, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it is healed. 
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, many times this type of nail is cured by medicine; and it grows back as I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, work on the eye of the patient, and take a light spatula with a sharp point according to this form: 
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail subtly, and if you see that it weakens a little and the razor presses it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of silver and a red collar of silk thread, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed. 
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing else is against you in the eye, such as an abscess, then milk it and first heal the hot abscess until it is cured, then start the work again as before, until it is cured. 
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the tear duct harms the eye greatly, suspend it with a thread and cover part of it but not all, so that no tears come; then instill red collyrium into the eye which is made from litharge. 
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the iris  
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men's eyes, flesh sometimes grows red and covers the iris, it shrinks on the eyelids and is cut off at the root; it looks like a rose made of balauste.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless it is necessary that you relieve the cure of each weak part by nature's way; and by accident, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in either of these works until you see that this limb can endure that work. 
des voines des eulz	of veins of the eyes 
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	These are red veins that are covered above the eye, and they take away from sight their work and weaken the eye every day. 
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary then at first that you look to see if the eye, in which the red vein is, is strong and there is no other illness except the red vein; then proceed in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head on your knee, then suspend those veins at every ounce according to your skill, and let the ounces be subtle doubled according to this form: 
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be applied gradually throughout the body according to this form: 
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then one should press these veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after hour, until you see those outside veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to prick the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very eager in your work so that you only cut those veins; and when you have done this, then instill into the eye green and red colirium to corrupt what remains from the ailment. 
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot remove all of it in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of soothing things for the pain of those veins, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and you are sure of hot abscesses, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:  
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye 
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it by cautery and by burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then it is necessary that you cut into the abscess where it must be drained, and remove all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed. 
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, then you carve it with all the instruments of which this is the form; and it is called "aspre chief" and is made of hard iron at the head point, and is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the spot of corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press with your hand a little while until you know that this corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the spot with drying medicines.  
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound is soldered, and flesh grows, and the body of the fistula is soldered and remains thus for forty days, and it does not reopen nor become abscesses, and no evil accidents befall it, know that it is healed; if this is not the case, there is nothing else to do but to return the fistula to its opening according to this form:  and you uncover the bone a second time with an iron instrument and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take a drill bit according to this form, and let the head of the bit have three angles, and let the shaft be thinned down to the point as you see here. 
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it upon the bone near the lachrymal bone, and withdraw your hand from the point a little, then turn the drill bit completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it, because the veins in this area are sensitive if he holds his hand on his nose; and then restore the site with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when flesh grows and the wound hardens, the matter will go to the nose; which is a lighter thing for the patient.  
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the eye 
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye opens fully all around and there is no disturbance of the eyelid, nor any shrinking, then you should bind the patient; then he heals; then put cupping glasses or a leech on him without injuring to suck, then place a bandage made of gum arabic, aloe, incense and sarcocol upon the eye, and then strain the eye and apply plaster on bandages and cloths; and the manner of applying the cloths is that you should take cloths soft enough and double each one into four, and then put one on top of another according to the quantity which the eye needs; then strain it with a hard bandage over them and begin again the cupping glasses to suck without injuring; then remove the cupping glasses and leave the strained eye day and night, and if the bandages become loose, then you should tighten them greatly; then remove the bandage after a day and a night, and if you see the eye recovering, it is good; if not; begin again the plaster, the cloths and the bandage and the cupping glasses until it is healed. 
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Where there is a tear in the woven cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption comes in the woven cloth, then it opens up, and there come forth papers as thin as a grain of resin, and is observable to see; then if you see it thus covered, the work is such that you put a needle into the root of the part below up to that above. Then put another needle where it has the double thread of the part near the tear; and make it pierce through, and leave the first needle according to its position; then take hold of the place of the double thread and tie one part of the cloth around it, and pull it tight, then remove the needle and put on the oil a linen cloth soaked in plenty of egg; and leave it until the threads grow with the cloth, then cure the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed; and at no time is the wound confined by the cloth each side of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed. 
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye has a large appearance, pierce it with a fine spatula that comes perfectly from the oil, and correct the albuminous moisture and draw out the eye, and insert it quickly then; then extract it while it is healthy. 
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bowel of the oil 
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but bowel that is assembled in the oil, seeming like sharp descending, and it is not sharp; and the manner of the appearance of the work is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands in two parts, and move it until you see the bowel come up to your eyes; then let it be attached, and do not descend and be obscured the light, and see the patient the things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is sharp, and if the descending of the bowel is not level as we have said.  
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine spatula and place it on the cornea, making an incision along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea, until the pus comes out; and when it has come out, pour into it sharp oil heated with honey, or sharp water where fenugreek has been boiled with honey, then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healed. 
des aigues de l’oil	Of the sharp oil 
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the resemblances of sharps in the division, and what it takes to pierce; so work according to health. 
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is fitting that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, far from the light of the sun, and bind his healthy eye tightly; then place the paper with oil in your left hand if his eye is left, or in your right hand if his eye is right; then take in your right hand, if his eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if his eye is right; then put the point of the instrument below the cornea by the thickness of a hair in the white part of the eye towards the smaller tear duct; then push the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand until it pierces into the white of the eye, and feel that the "almagda" comes to the empty space; and it is fitting that the measure of the "almagda" path be at the perfection of the measure of the space which is from the prunele to the end of the blackness; and this is the cornea of the eye; if you see the bone in the paper due to the clarity of the cornea, then put the instrument up to where the sharp point is, then press it down one path after another.  
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the point is descending now, let the patient see it in front of him and the instrument in his eye. 
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a short rest, and if the point goes back up the second time, put force on it with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and it does not rise, extract the almond slightly while turning your hand little by little; then replace it with a point of silk thread, and lift the eye from within. 
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put oil dressings or moistened linen soaked in rose oil and egg yolk on the eye, and bind with the healthy eye.  
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Nowadays, we and those of our time put a common poultice with plenty of egg yolk on top.  
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have eyes too hard, then you must take the instrument called "alberit," which has this form: 
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce therefore the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep, but make a subtle place, then it will bring almond, as we have said; and for the completion of the work prepare the patient with a doctor coming near him, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and let it be devoid of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to its disposition until the third day; then untie it in that same dark house, and try its sight, and make it see some things, and then put the bond back on until the seventh day; and it is not fitting that you do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is fitting that you relieve it, for the sharp pain rises quickly. 
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If an abscess comes, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and direct it to him who soothes abscesses; and when it is appeased, untie the sight and put on his face an orilliet to cover for a few days, and be then again in that dark house. 
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then he must leave the house little by little, and gradually return to his usual activities; and know that no disciples should interfere in this matter. 
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	One came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in some places they made a kind of almond paste, which we suck for sharp pain, but nevertheless I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read of it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing. 
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almond paste, so that those who do not know them may recognize them: and they are made purely from starch: 
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the head is of the same subtlety, and the rear in three sharp angles. 
de la char sor le neis	From the flesh to the nose  
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there are born or arise moles of various shapes, some of which appear like scorpions with many feet; and if there are such that have a mole tinged with a fiery color, and some that have a mole of a good color. 
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In those cases of these cars which are soft and not hardened, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and work on his nostrils, and pour a little ointment on those cars, and pull them hard; then take what you can hold with a delicate scalpel on one side, as much as you know that this car is all removed. 
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains that you cannot cut, work on it with all your subtle instruments lightly so that nothing remains; and if there is swelling or an abscess arises, make the incision as necessary; and if these are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize them until the blood is dried up and all the cars are removed, then pour clean wine.  
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the wine works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healed; and if the moisture does not break through as it should, know that there is a car lodged in the bone above which the instruments cannot reach to cut: then it is necessary that you put a linen thread one finger thick, knotted by hand at each knot with a space of one finger or less between them; and have the patient hold the head of the thread in his nose at the top, and pull while smelling so that it comes through the nose into the mouth; and many times children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for those who want to do it; then hold the end that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other end that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them apart as we are with those on a thread. 
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do what you know the new flesh has corrupted that body, then pull the thread, wipe away the blood, and wet the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back at the beginning just as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments have corroded everything that remains of the flesh; and then place a cane of lead on the wound for several days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, into which one pours oils and medicines. 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it is of silver or steel, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and conduct it the same way; and if you see fit, make a closed cane, and let the instrument be filled for purging the head; and have a handle on the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquid. 
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh take the birth 
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" is born at the head of a birth and grows and becomes large until it is visible; for this reason, you must cut it off at the beginning, and bone all strong, then put on it the cautery or burning medicine; if one delays cutting it while it is large, be careful if it is hard, dark red color, and poor sense: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchantered abscess. For when one cuts it, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not dark red in color, and you see that it can be all cut off, then empty the patient and cut without fear, and treat the place with drying and restraining things. 
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the birth is cut and sewn 
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes to one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, except in some men. 
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary when this happens to anyone, if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips at a suture, and then treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you flay all the parts of their core until they bleed, then assemble the two lips at a suture, and remove it, and powder with powder of dragon's blood, and ground incense; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of strong or another soldering plaster, and leave it until it dries by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the suture is such that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have shown you. 
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips 
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	With bare hands, there often occur within the lips abscesses hard, appearing like grains of millet, both small and large; then you must turn back the lips and slit open each knot, and take them with pincers and cut into each part; then apply the place after incision with powdered vitriol, as long as the blood is stopped; and then a poultice of flaxseed, and treat the place with dry things until it is healed. 
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums 
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often arises upon the gums flesh overgrowing, which the ancients called "albulus"; so you must hold it with forceps and cut at its root, and let run the pus or blood; then apply to the place powdered vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders; and if that flesh returns after incision, as often happens, cut it the second time and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting. 
des sordens	of the deaf 
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and citron and worm-eaten, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are stinking; so it behooves you to make the sick person sit between your hands, and his jaws be in your lap, and raise the teeth where the scabs appear, until there is nothing left; and thus do with the blackness and the greenness, and the jaundice and the other stains, until they are cleansed; and if one removes what is at the first reason, it is good; if not, one recommences on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth need various forms of instruments for raising, according to what the work shows, for the razor with which one raises sharp teeth has other forms than those with which one raises between the teeth; and these forms and others be prepared with you. 
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat a tooth for its pain that you delay as much as you can in extracting it, for this one must not do; for it is a very high substance until which one has no excuse for extracting it. 
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to extract, it is necessary that you are certain of the aching tooth. 
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient and he thinks that it is in a good tooth and extracts the good tooth; and nevertheless the pain does not depart because of this, as long as the bad one remains, for we have often wanted to do this to these saints; and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, then it is necessary that you flay around the tooth at its entire cusp very strongly in order to ward off the gums from all sides; then move it to your two fingers or with subtle forceps at the first blow and blow, as long as it is well loosened, then confirm it well with the forceps; and let the head of the patient be in your lap between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move. 
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take any of these instruments and insert the tip into each side gently, and stir it as you did first. 
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and chewed, it is necessary that you fill it with rags, where the holes are; and you must extract it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break when being extracted; and it is very wise to work around the gum to loosen the tooth. 
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take good care that you do not break it, and a part remains, and returns to the patient through the mischief of the root greater pains than the first. 
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not do as ignorant healers often do, who by their haste and boldness break the tooth sometimes, and do not apply what we have said; but they bring about great sickness through the remaining roots or the broken tooth, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is drawn, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the place; and if that does not work, cauterize it. 
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, with which one can pull teeth first, should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you extract the tooth; and these are the forms: 
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have thick shanks so that they do not bend when pulling, and be of well-made iron, and have teeth to hold the jaw. 
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth 
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains after extraction, it is fitting that you put cotton moistened with butter on the place for one or two days. 
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the gums are softened, then you put the forceps which are called "algefri", of which the head resembles a bird's beak; and they are made inside like a file, and this is its form: 
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is fitting that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say, a scraper, of which this is the form: 
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it must be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out because of this, it is good; if not, you help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come here after: 
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two handles, of which here is the form: 
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other ironworks that are in front in the manner of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tongs, of which here is the form: 
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument must be strong so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and wise master-surgeons find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the illness show them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach an instrument because of the diversity of others, lest they break the chariot or other bones, or it rots, if he seeks the instruments that suit him, which I told you, and help yourself with gestures, of which here is the form: 
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and strong to hold the bone so it does not escape, but can hold it and remove it; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, if you have all these instruments. 
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the body's natural form, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, it is necessary that you know if the density is born after the tooth and is not in its proper place, and cannot be smoothed or filed; then use a rasp; and if it sticks with the tooth, take this instrument of which this is the form, and resembles a small beak, and be made of sharp steel. 
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the rasp pecks little by little in the hands for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then use a file of this shape:  
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and file the tooth bit by bit in the hand every day lightly, so that it does not move until it comes out; then plane the end completely without any rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, then you must file down the sharpness so that it is equal, so that it does not cut the tongue nor corrupt speech. 
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth loosens 
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth in front loosens, either by percussion or by falling out, and the patient cannot press on what he is chewing without it coming loose, and you have treated it with astringent medicines, and that does not work; then you must restrain it with a gold wire, because silver wire turns green and rots, but gold never changes; and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth; and if you want to straighten the teeth, take the wire and wind it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the loose teeth between the teeth that are good, if there is one or more, until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side; then start the wrapping again up to the part where you began, and pull your hand subtly and gently so that it does not move; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.  
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the bone with pliers and assemble them, and place it between the healthy teeth so that it does not stain the tongue.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is knocked out, if one puts it back in its place, again and again, as we have said; and no one intervenes who is not wise and experienced, and sometimes one makes the shape of a cow bone tooth, and puts it in the place where the defect is, and removes it as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time. 
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut the ligature of the tongue 
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this ligature comes from under the tongue naturally, as one is born; or by accident of a sewn wound; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your lap, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligature broadly, so that the tongue is loosened from its attachment, and if there is hardness or knot, and it is from the sewing of a wound, then insert the hook and cut the ligature broadly; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery which is underneath; and when you have done so, lift the area with rose water and alum, or with cold rose water, then put under the tongue a linen tent; and the patient should wash it every night so that the wound does not close. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood flows, put powdered vitriol on the spot; and if it does not stop, cauterize it with a lentil-shaped cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed. 
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is of a dark color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it is inclined to become white, and there is moisture, cut it with a scalpel, and make an incision with a fine spatula, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if it still bleeds in your work, put powdered vitriol on it until it is extinguished, then return to your work until you have removed all the pus; then lift the place from its surroundings, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.  
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat 
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes boils come inside the throat which are called "godath", and we properly call them the two tonsils, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron. 
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the evacuation of blood; but leave it until it is ripe, and then you will cut it, or it would break on its own; and if it is whitish in color and the root is thin, have the instrument ready to cut, but first look to see if the abscess is warm, at rest and appeased. 
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then have the patient sit facing the sun, and let his hands be on your breast, and open their mouth and take the scalpel in your hands, and press the tongue down below with the instrument, so that it is shaped like this; and it should be of silver or a thin iron as a knife: 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Don't press the tongue against all these instruments, and see the abscess. Take the lancet and put it into the almond, and force it upwards as much as you can; and do not draw anything from the cloths with it. Then apply the instrument to the abscess, in which form it seems a strength; but the head is bent, and one side against the other, and they are very sharp, and are made of steel or iron: 
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, take the forceps, in which form it is:  
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other. And when you have grasped one of the almonds, grasp the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water that is sweet and mild. If bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with hot water, or decoctions of pomegranate rinds are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then cure it until it is healed; and if other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two almonds, cut them as you did the two almonds. 
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born inside her throat, to be precise, a small-sized abscess; and she had almost completely closed off her entire throat so that the woman could not breathe through the passage which was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she would have died if she remained like this for one or two days. 
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had forced two reins through the two holes where it was born. 
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then and inserted a scalpel into one of the holes, then I drew out a large portion of pus; then I proceeded in the other hole where it was born, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I inserted the scalpel into these abscesses and drained a part of them, and only a little blood came out; and thus the passage of her throat was cleared, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and I did not cease to cut this abscess for a long time; and the abscess would grow again, filling the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I lanced it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it remained without growing; and I departed from these parts, and only God knows what happened to her after me. 
de l’uve	of the eye 
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When a cold descends to the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below large and round, it is called "eye". 
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the boil below has subsided, and it is subtle, then it is fitting that you cut it; and the one which is round, gathered, and not long; and it is bloody or of a yellow color or black, then it is fitting that you make an incision. 
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient. 
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is fitting then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned before; then insert the lancet into the eye, and draw it beneath, and cut it with one of the two instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.  
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is fitting that you not cut away more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut away more, it grieves the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and heal it until it is healed. 
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears being cut, it is fitting that you apply something to cauterize the sense of fear. 
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cautery is sharp and piercing. 
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient put his head in your hand, and then press his tongue against the instrument that we have said in the chapter of cautery, and hold with a sharp, lively grip so that it is not too thick nor too thin; and use the point of this instrument, from which comes the form: 
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And he says that on the head where one puts the medicine, like the hair of a spoon, and put the instrument all over the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the bleb; then hold your hand all over the medicine and press it on the eye for half an hour, as long as you see it shrink and the bites of the medicine are appeased; and if you see fit, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument all the way into the cotton on top, as long as the cotton burns on the eye; and do this often until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and leave it alone for four or five days. And if you need to start the cautery again from the medicine, start it again, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse that which is around the medicine; and keep it cool with cold water and cure it with gargles until it is healed. 
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamus and wormwood and oregano and rue and chamomile and lavender and similar herbs, and gather them all together or some of them in a pot, and put in water and let it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot let there be a tool fitted according to this manner: 
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or iron, and let one end be put in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through a tube until the eye is mortified; then repeat this often until the eye dries up, and make sure that you do not do this at the beginning of the arrival of the hot abscess, because many things can happen; and do not do this except when the hot abscess declines. 
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put inside the head a crust of egg, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot; for the crust of egg does not make the vapor burden the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with salvation. 
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or fishbone, or something else lodges in the throat. Therefore it is necessary that you draw out what you can see and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you see the thing move; and that which does not appear to you and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if it extracts the thing through vomiting. Or the patients swallows a piece of sponge or a piece of navel or a root of lettuce or a piece of stale bread. And tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it. And when it comes to its place, it will come out, and then you will draw it out; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take an instrument according to this form: 
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the patient's head raised high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest he lose his voice, or push any bone inside; and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because he knows where the thing is airy; if it goes down, or he pulls it back evenly with the whole instrument, as long as it is pulled back. 
de la sansue de la gorge	from the back of the throat 
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes medicine is enough for the back of the throat as I have said in the division by means of remedies; and when this does not help, then look into the patient's throat towards the sun, while you press his tongue with the instrument that I have told you about. 
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the back of the throat, pull it out with a small hook or with fine tongs that are suitable for this.  
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a dog's hair and put it in the throat of the patient, then put the tip of the iron into the hair while it is hot and do this often. 
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And keep the patient thirsty every day. 
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water and open the mouth and pour it in without letting him swallow and move his hand often; and as soon as he feels the water, he will cry out.  
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if he does not cry out as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times for it will fall out without resistance. 
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	The way to fumigate is that you take a pot with live coals in it, and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and put the head of the instrument through the hole; then pour in your fumigation, and have the patient put the end of the cane in his mouth and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape but goes straight to his throat; and now the object will fall out.  And if it does not cry out, begin the fumigation many times again; let the patient thirst, and eat salty and sour things, and do not drink water; then it is necessary for it to come out by this method. 
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the sinus, if it is such that one can see it, resembles tongs curved to enter into the throat; and it has a resemblance to the beak of a bird, and it has the roughness of a file so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and look at the shape: 
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters on abscesses  
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many types of abscesses are, according to what memory comes here after one and the other in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size; and it is in two ways, one of which is in its appearance itself, and from what it holds moisture. 
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is by the places where they are on the body. 
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For abscesses on the head are different from those on the buttocks, and abscesses in fleshy places are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if an abscess should not be pierced, as long as the pus is mature according to its completion; and if there are those that should be pierced when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses that are near joints. 
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and it is left until it is ripe around, it may happen that the ligament and nerve of the joint become corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb. 
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is near a principal limb, and you delay perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal limb; if it is near the fundament, pierce it even if it is not ripe; and it is not right that you pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for the one that is near the fundament, so that it ripens completely, and is elongated inside, and fistula may develop; and it cannot heal in a long time. 
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess which is death according to fulfillment, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of the fever, and the diminishing of the pain and redness, and in the softening and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation or more depending on the place of the abscess, and where it appears to move; and let the perforation be the length of the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their equal places where there is no weeping. 
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that weep, according to that member. 
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, if it moves it is worth leaving the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. 
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it in front of them, the body will be lengthened by the venom from it, and is full of a lot of filth; and perhaps the lips and the depths of it harden. 
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there are any abscesses that are pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what its members may need. 
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is fitting that you administer small abscesses, small holes; and in large abscesses, large holes, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is fitting to sever the core, and cover; when it has become as hard as a cloth, and is mortified, it is fitting to do as one does for buboes: and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are such that one covers as the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of the ankles; and if there are such where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuts. 
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, such as a superficial abscess, it befits you to pierce it fully; and when the abscess is large, and it has gathered much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that hour, but draw out some of it. Then poultice the abscess until the next day, then draw out something more; do this many times in stages, until all the pus is drawn out; likewise if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old decrepit men. 
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit leaps sometimes with the discharge of pus, and it may happen that the patient dies, and you do not blame yourself. 
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a clean incision, apply strips of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many holes, it befits you to place a strip in each one so that they come against each other; and if you have found a piece of skin within the abscess which has been cut around, fill it with old cotton or lint from linen free of moisture, and bind it until the third day. Then unbind it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, apply cold, clean water and moisten a cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times. 
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding continues, apply a bandage and dressing, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is wintertime, and the wound or abscess is very sensitive, then you should put on cloths moistened with wine and hot oil; and if it is summertime, and the wound is fleshy, then you should put on cloths moistened with water and oil, or with wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then untie the abscess, wipe it, and dress it as appropriate, until it is healed. 
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is what you should universally know in the treatment of abscesses; I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter. 
des soros	of sores 
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where small abscesses come on the head, they are like threads woven together, as like the seam of a tunic, and many of them resemble each other. 
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	Some are greasy and some have moisture like boils; and if there are such that are hard and stony at the waist, there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose it.  
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the works of the waist are such that you should try all instruments called "entrometteurs," whose form comes afterward, what it contains. 
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, so let it flow through for a long time. 
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is emptied, scrape away without leaving any skin that contained it, because it will return if you leave anything; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in vinegar and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; this will carry away what remains at night. 
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then begin again the cotton, as before, the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain at night; then treat the wound with ointment suitable to it, until it is healed. 
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds a lot of fat, so cut it according to this form, long; and he throws on his ointments, and flay it from all sides, and put all your care of milking for the coat where it lies; and if the artery opposes you, do what I told you after. 
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this for an abscess if it is pierced, and in the waist and in the groin as I told you. 
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the pierced abscess and the pus is lighter, because they are few drops of blood.  
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses or the head where there is no moisture, and of these were the abscesses that I cut or the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess also like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if someone had made any incision on it, they would have done just as well to make a wound like from a stone. 
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	For other abscesses that come or rise, especially those that come at the head of children and at the roots of ears, the opening should always be in the lowest place so that the pus comes out; and treat them as is appropriate. 
des scrophules	of scrofula  
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and below the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are many, and are joined together. 
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its own area, just as the wart and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrofula. 
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and others so malignant that they will not obey health.  
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that case, which you see of good disposition to touch, and resembles the color of the body, moves in every part, and is not raised at the nerves of the neck nor at the artery nor at the duct, and is not deep; it is fitting that you cut it off from above, and scrape it from every side, and extend the two edges of the scar to one-inch lengths, if you need, as we have said in abscesses on the head; and treat it bit by bit, and be sure that you do not cut a nerve nor a vein, and let neither the scalpel nor the knife be sharp, lest your hand slip, and do not go too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not. 
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not let you work, put powdered vitriol into the wound, or some powders that staunch blood, and extract the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed and the wound softened, and begins to rot. 
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is stanched, return to your work until you complete it; then look with your index finger if there are any small scrofuls remaining, and cut them out and clean them. 
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scroful, it is not fitting that you cut that scroful at its root, but tie it with a strong doubled thread, and let it fall off by itself without harm; then apply the wound with old cotton steeped in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it. 
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you have cut out all the scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula. 
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary that you understand how to cut out its root, and draw it out with force, and sew it as we have said. 
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules which retain excess, pierce them where it appears rotten; and pierce it as the one previously mentioned, depending upon it, then apply dressings with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, then apply a cure of ointment, promoting flesh, until it is healed. 
de squinance	of squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their word. 
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have strabismus, it is necessary that the fold of the throat which is called the "epiglottis" be removed; and this should not be done by anyone else, because all the veins and the pores of the patient are affected in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in the tonsils. 
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the pores, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from choking.  
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cleave the epiglottis, we must cleave it below three or four circles, a small cut across between the two circles or according to the quantity of the cut in the mucous membrane, not in the cartilage; and those who are skilled in sectioning the epiglottis will find no flesh there, and the vessels are long. 
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it is fitting that he extend the skin of the throat to the entire width, then split the chest as long as it comes to the windpipe; and shun the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the sinew, as we have said; and it is proven by the section through the windpipe which jumps out from the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece. 
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the chest, and sew it all alone without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until it is healed. 
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely torn open, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the fault lies with the windpipe. 
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then hold the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death; and because the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. Then they commanded to sew the wound and clean it, as long as it was cleansed; and I will tell you what I have seen. 
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a maiden who took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the cartilages of the windpipe; and I was called to clean it, and I found her as dead. 
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found the blood that had come out of it, and even though she had not cut a vein nor any passage except the throat, the veins were severed by the wound. 
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound and treated it until it was healed; and nothing further happened to the young woman except that her voice became hoarse, and she returned afterwards to her former state; for this reason I say that there should be no fear in cutting the epiglottis. 
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat 
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in the color of wine, and it is very common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural and accidental; in the natural kind there is no cause. 
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	The accidental kind occurs in two ways, one of which resembles fat tissue, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from a blood vessel; there is danger and it is not fitting to operate with fire except in those that are small, and test and search at all the openings: if you find it as soft as new fat and it does not yield to any vein, cut it out, as one cuts out warts, and treat it at its entire length, if there is any; and bind it well immediately and treat it as is fitting until it is perfectly healed. 
des nous	from us 
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways that we use, of which I will say all the resemblances; and now it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between us and issue. 
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is heat and fever lasting, as long as the boiling is not passed, and is completed the putrefaction; then rests the fever and the heat. 
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With a boil there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins also as a small pea, and becomes large; and they are according to two resemblances, either fatty or moist, and much of color are as I have said in the division. 
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a boil, that you probe and inquire first with all the instrument which is called "introducer," according to what its shape will come or chapter which is after. 
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way to inquire into abscesses of us is that you take the wettest place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the center, then according to the size of the abscess; then extract the interposing thing, and be careful that it does not jump out. 
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture runs out, whatever color it is, if it comes forth as I have said of the other abscesses; and if after the interposing thing no moisture comes, know that it is greasy, so then cut it in a cross shape, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape it on each side and keep the skin where it lies so that you draw it out healthy with the new growth; and if you cannot draw it out healthy, draw it out piece by piece so that nothing remains. 
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it remains there nothing, the nerve returns many times; and if one part remains, and it does not grieve him, apply the wound with some corrosive powders, and extract the wound, and put soothing things on hot abscesses, and cure it with other cures until it is healed; and if the nerve is large, cut the two edges of the wound, and cure it according to what enflames flesh. 
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein pulsating is contrary to you or another hastens you and apply the place of ground vitriol, and leave it for II days or III, until the wound rots, and relieves the boiling of blood; then return to cutting what remains in the nerve. 
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of inserting instruments, and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three of these: large, medium, and small, to encircle fistulas abscesses; and they are also like the needles with which we cut off warts, and they are made of citrine iron, or silver, and those tinged yellow are worth more, and are better proven with black lead to encircle the bends of fistulas; and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the holes. 
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of lancets are of much similarity, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are lancets which have two curves in three ways also; and there are lancets which have three curves, and are also in three ways; and there are lancets which have two curves, and lancets of one curve only, and are in three ways; and all this is necessary in their place. 
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these that we use are sharp, and there are some which do not cut except on one side, with which we scrape the skin, so that we do not cut the vein nor the nerve; and among these are introducers made up like handles, so that the patient does not notice them when opening abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one does not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places; and sometimes one uses another instrument small and resembling a butcher's scraper, according to this shape, with which we cauterize blood. 
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it back in place where it heals by joining of veins, and arteries, and never return according to this great form: 
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, so much so that they look like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to follow this form from this line .b. to .g.: 
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine ointment containing charcoal, then bring together the two edges of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed; and if the breast hangs down, and is softened by its size as it happens in women, then cut it into two ribs above, by two similar slits; so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.; then scrape off the skin that is between the two edges, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with softened cotton in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it softens the remaining fat, then treat it until it is healed.  
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits 
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come below the armpits are types of hard scrophula where there are ribs, and some contain moisture. 
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those then that contain moisture it is fitting they be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.: 
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, apply the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and cure it with ointment suitable for this until it is healed. 
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrophula, do it as we have said for incisions of scrophula, and if the wound runs pus, apply a cautery as we have said before. 
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery 
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is joined, there often come many abscesses, and the same happens when a vein is swollen and has an abscess; and if the knowledgeable one knows when it is for the artery, the abscess is long and straight; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel it pulling away; and when it is for the vein, it appears round and deflated; and it is foolishness to cut this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits and at angles or at the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. 
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to remove the iron cure, and also the one who is in charge, and in the one that is swollen from a ruptured artery make a long incision over the skin; then operate with the size of your fingers, and neatly separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed; then insert a needle under it and make it pierce through to the other side, and remove the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then point the place between the two ties with an intromissor until the pus that is there comes out, and the abscess is released; then apply a cure that contains balm, as long as the ties hold; then treat it with ointment suitable for this type of thing, as long as it heals; and if the abscess is in the size of a vein, you must hold what you can of the abscess to all the skin, then insert the needle under the place that you are holding, and make it pierce through, and put in a double thread so that you pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess as I told you, or tie one of the two ends with the two threads; and if you doubt that the threads will come loose, insert another needle into all the thread under the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and remove the threads in four places; then cut the abscess so that the excess comes out, then cut away the excess of the flesh and leave what is tied; then put a softened cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply cures of tents and ointments until it heals. 
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves 
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are injured, or by too much hard work, and similar things. 
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	This happens more often in the shoulders and arms and throughout all their joints, and this is a grievous abscess, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it is in several positions without pain; and when it is removed, the patient feels pain, and it is not the same as the flesh, but below the heart; and it moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor down nor up, and that which is in the joints should not be covered with iron: for fear of contraction; and that which is on the head or forehead, make a cut with a scalpel. 
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it from an incision, and scarify it, then the bone should be exposed and the wound assembled by sutures, and cured until it is healed. 
des grosses boces pendans	large boils hanging 
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in the bellies and not elsewhere, a disease called "funge" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and its root is subtle, and its head large; and there are small ones and very large ones; and I saw a man who had two in his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were split open, and there was always moisture flowing out. 
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them open and found that one weighed XVIII ounces, and the other VI 3., and the operation is such that if you look and see that the patient is moist, and the color of the cartilage is white and moist and has a subtle root; then cut it with a scalpel wide, and have the fire cautery ready.  
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For at the waist there often comes too great a flow of blood, and if it does not stop, then cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision of iron, then take thread made well and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it two days; and then restrain it, and do not cease to tighten the thread until it stops the artery, and bleeds through its work; and if the roots are large, fear to cut yourself in the belly, but you can well cut half, then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful that you do not cut the nerve which is of a dark color and poor sense and milky appearance.  
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an ulcerated abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers afterwards. 
quant li boude ist fuer	When the arm is strong 
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the arm comes from cautery of wound or cleavage of flesh, and is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as it happens in other ruptures, or from blood that cuts from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or from windiness; and if it is from the rupture of the flesh and by the exit of the bowel, then is the color of the abscess resembling the color of the body, and is a light thing without pain, and appears from diverse exits. 
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its two sides it will answer back, and then return, and by chance if it is tightened, and enlarges much at the entrance of the bath and by great exertion. 
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is from moisture, it is a light thing and appears well when you press it with your hand and it does not constrain at all; and if it is from blood, then it appears by these signs: the abscess is large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity; and if it is from windiness, then it is soft to the touch, and the works are such that you see if the appearance is from the blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness.  
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the care. 
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein. 
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and be extended straight out, then sign a circle all around the abdomen; then command him to grasp often between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed with your entire spatumile, then extend half of the abscess above at all the great uncine; then tie it around with a strong thread, or a strong silk cord firmly, and let the knot be loose; then work on half of the extended abscess upon the tie, and put your index finger in, and search for the intestine; if you find it caught by the tie, untie it, and put the intestine out through the opening of the belly; and if you find the bowel, grasp it with the uncine, and cut away the excess; and if the artery works against you, or the vein, go carefully around, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads in them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross so that you pierce through; then pull the abscess in four places onto the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it rots, and let the dead flesh come off by itself; or cut it away when it becomes subtle and rotten, then cure the place as is necessary, and sew up the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as is necessary, and suture the place. 
dou chancre	where a sore 
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the resemblances of a sore, and how one must work by medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron; and we say that the sore enlarges in the flesh, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancients said that when a sore is in a place where it can be scraped off, such as a sore which is on the breasts, and on the thighs, and in similar places, one must remove it all when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it does not behoove you to approach it, for I have never been able to heal any, nor has anyone ever healed any before me. 
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient several times with black bile; then make him fast if he has manifest repletion, then put the patient in a good place to do the work; then cut your oncines or sore, and shave all around, and bone all around without leaving anything; and let the blood run out completely, and wash the place well with your hand or something else, and if the running of blood prevents you from making the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood is stopped; then cure it with another cure until it is healed. 
de ydropisie	Of dropsy 
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and in what manner the gathering of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure which is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: if it is only erupted; and one should not touch iron in these two resemblances: to wit, tympanites and hypoarche, for it is a mortal thing; so when you medicine this resemblance of dropsy which is called "erupted" with medicine, and the cure does not profit, see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as cough and loosening of the bowels and similar things; then do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient is of strong constitution, and he has no other illness than dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must work thus: lay the patient straight upon your hands, and let the attendants press the belly at the end by pushing the water to the lowest part below the hip, then take the spatulet with a pointed end according to this form: 
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cutting of two parts. 
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	At a point, and in no way let it be so inserted that it can reach the intestines when you put it in, nor can it pierce; then look to see if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if it is fitting that you cleave into them below the navel three fingers' width to the right on the loin; and if the dropsy is for the illness of the liver, let your incision be to the left of the navel three fingers' width; and if it is for the spleen, let it be to the right, and it is not fitting that the patient lies upon the incision lest superfluities run to that weak place; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push it in, and lift your hand at all the scalpel between the skin and the flesh as much as when paring to the quantity of a nail or thereabouts; then pierce the flesh until the scalpel comes to the eighth place, and this is the place of the sharp point, then pull hard, and push this instrument which has this form: 
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a subtle silver cane, and is made of iron or light artichoke, and has in the lower part one small hole; and on one side there are three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head is shaped like a feather pen, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes use to cut the quill: 
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the handle, so that when the instrument comes to a point, now draw it back on the instrument; empty out then one half or one third part because if you empty out more than what is right at that time, by chance the patient might die due to his spirit separating from the body, or his flesh may rot, or he may approach death; but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulse; then treat the instrument and hold back the point, and it is now held for the heart which stops up the hole that is on the syfac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then start the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw out a small quantity from the point; do this every day, and beware of drawing so much out that there remains but a drop of blood.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the patient and leave a lot of water in him, then use the cure of burial or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun; and let him drink; and the cure of drying medicines until he is healed; and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before. 
de l’estopement de la verge	of the foreskinning of the penis 
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who do not have an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place. 
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary soon as he has not pierced through all the spatula very subtly according to this form:  
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then put a small opening with a sharp tip, and tie it and leave it so for III days or IV and when he wants to urinate, remove the tie and let him urinate, then replace it; and by chance none may be needed because the urine that comes out will not allow it to close. 
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose anus is small, if it is treated with a plum stone as we have said, then it will enlarge. 
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have their anus in its place are unfortunate, for none are born who have the anus at the head of the penis, because they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upward; and they cannot copulate because the matter cannot come up to the vulva, and this is a bad disease. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way of the operation is this: the patient lies on his back; then they extend the head of the penis and cut it as large as a feather so that the anus falls in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding which often occurs, and if it happens, have the one who stops blood stop it, and treat the wound until it is healed. 
des pustules de la verge	of the pimples of the penis 
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these sores come on the penis, and they are an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; it is fitting that you take them with a sharp lancet, and cut and cleanse all of them, then put softened cotton with Egyptian ointment on top; then cure him with diafinition ointment until he is healed. 
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the sore is malignant, of a foul color and discharging, it is fitting that you apply a cautery to it. 
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the sore is at the top of the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is fitting that you remove the part that is inside first; and when it is sewn up, then you care for the outside part. 
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all together, unless the flesh of the penis is well secured so that it is not pierced, blackness and corruption come to his penis and testicles; it is fitting to cut away everything that is black and corrupted, then bind an adhesive plaster made of honey and flour which is made from pomegranate rinds and vinegar on top, then treat him with other remedies until he is healed. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding comes, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: 
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries help in two ways together: that is to say, in the stopping of bleeding, and in corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is fitting that you draw or pull a cane of lead from the penis and make the patient urinate through it; and when the hairs burn at the head of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or there is a sore or abscess, then it is fitting that you scald it with a heated instrument until the bonds are loosened and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides; and if this is a difficult thing to do, it is fitting that you scald it with a spatula in a few places at the head of the penis and on the skin; then separate them well between the two and put a fine linen cloth softened in cold water so that it does not burn immediately. 
de la circoncision	Of circumcision 
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a simple matter of continuation like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work of our own volition, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for salvation. 
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience. 
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I want the greater part of the masters and saints who performed circumcisions did so around the tenth day, and with force, and with a single instrument; if it were cut deeply for there are two layers, and by chance one is severed above and the other remains below. 
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then it must be cut again, and the pain is doubled, and at ten days the point of the member is not securely cleaned; and when cleaning the foreskin, the iron may slip, ruining the work, and many times they are born so that they need no cleaning and I have wanted this. 
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the modification which is made to all the thread of the line I have found the goodness of the experiment for the forces cut precisely both above as below. 
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, if you cut equally in I all the time; but let the thread be well twisted around the leather; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not doing anything to him except tying the thread around the penis just only, and then let him rejoice in all the ways that you can; then let him stand between your hands straight, and put the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the penis and blow on it, or suck on it, and pull it up as high as the head of the penis is in; then cleanse it well from the filth which has gathered there, then tie the marked place with a double thread, then tie it under the other tie; and hold it with two fingers by the second ligature to the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two ties, then quickly remove the heart above it and pull the head of the penis; then let the blood run little by little, for that is the best; and put powder on it, and on the powder put a plaster glued with half an egg yolk cooked tempered with rose water, confected with good fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and cure it with another cure until it is healed. 
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forceps for purification is this: the two jaws should be held tight and sharp, and the jaws should be as large as the handle equally. 
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of purification occurs when the core comes out at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail, just as the pus face an abscess; and the cap equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, take it with pliers and then cut it. 
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pass three days, and that which is below the glans penis is swollen, leave it until the abscess boils are appeased, and lightly scrape it; then cut as you can move, and beware of the part of the glans penis, for it will not harm anything. 
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat then the place of things within a wound with powder, which we have said or treated in powders, and if you cut too much core, and it goes up, it will not harm anything; treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed. 
dou retenement de l’urine	For the retention of urine 
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine may be due to a stone, or congealed blood, or the bowel, or a tumor, or similar things, which we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone which is at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent on his knees; and let his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly above his back, and restrain the patient from moving as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder will be forced towards the stone above, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction with any instrument called a "syringe", of which this is the form: let it be made of fine silver light in weight, like the quill of a bird; and let the cane be a palm and a half long, and let it be fine at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of drawing out the urine is such that you take a doubled thread and tie it to the head of a bit of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut off the excess of the wool and put it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and yolk of egg, and make the patient sit on a seat, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and lukewarm water; then gently put the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis above towards the buttocks; then push the syringe forward up to the bladder, and let the patient feel it coming up to the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because the one who guides it where it goes is crooked; then pull out the thread at all the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows the wool, then draw it out and let the urine flow; and begin again the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved. 
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder 
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood comes into the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see sharp waters and medicines distilled, then make with all the instrument which is called a "clepsedre," and it is of this form: 
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the canals are made so that the medicine will pass easily through the urethra without addition, so that if one can draw out the moisture, and push it in when needed; and when you see the medicines flow into the bladder, put the end of the catheter into the moisture, and pull on the string which is inside; pull the moisture towards the catheter, and then tighten the string well inside; the moisture will enter inside, and will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder: it is as follows: 
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	It is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher; and below at the breast where the arm bone joins; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in which you see to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts formed with a good strong thread, and heat the pot with that moisture over the fire; then put the head of the enema into the penis, and hold your hand on the bladder with all the moisture coming up, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle out of it, and pierce it round about; then put a strong thread through those holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a bowl, and put in what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it into the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder. 
de la piere	of the stone 
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the ways of stone and the extraction together with medicines; and we have said the difference between a retained stone in the kidneys, and all the signs, and in what kind of stone one should work by incision; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly. 
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is retained in the bladder happens more often in children, and the sign of it is that sharp pain jumps from the bladder resembling sharp pain in its subtlety; and it opens widely, and grates the patient's penis, and he can urinate many times, and then becomes rigid; and with many of these pains, urination stops; and healing is easy for children until they are four years old, and it is very grievous in old people, and moderate in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.  
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is fitting first to purify the patient by enema, to draw out all the phlegm which is in the intestines. 
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes hinders the search for the stone. 
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and push and move them downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from there; then make him sit between your hands evenly balanced, and let his hands be below his thighs so that the bladder is completely sloping downwards; then search for and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut upon the stone. 
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if you do not feel it at all upon touching, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is an infant, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young man fully grown; and insert it into their fundament and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, hold it at the neck of the bladder; then press upon your finger, and push it outwards where you see to cut. 
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend the testicles upward with his right hand, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the testicles in the part where the circumcision is made; then he inserts the spatulum cutting tool, which has this form: 
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And it enters between what is between the testicles and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left buttock; and let it be straight on the stone, and its two points be then at the fundament, and let the incision be made so that it is wide outside, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; by chance press with the point which is at the fundament, so that it jumps out without work; and know that there are some stones which have angles, and edges: these are harder to extract; and there are some which are below, resembling a bean, and round, from which the exit is easy. 
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	Where there are angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, you must pull it out with tongs which are also like a file at the head, to remove the stone so that it does not escape; or you insert a subtle instrument bent at the head; and if you cannot get it in this way, enlarge the hole, and if the flesh is cut, remove it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stones, insert the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull it out hard, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are several. 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it must be sewn up, and make a larger wound. 
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out immediately because the veins cannot be joined; but nevertheless strive to draw it out, or to break it with tongs, as long as you draw it out in pieces; and when you have completed your work, bathe the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, and remove it, and put a soft cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in rose water and cold water on top, to soothe the hot abscess; then raise the patient on his pillow, and do not untie the bandage until the third day. 
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, if it rises well with oil and water, then treat it with diachylon ointment and basil ointment until it is healed. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses should come in the wound and corrosions, and congealment of blood in the bladder, and it be retained by this, urine which is known in part manner that without leap with the urine: put then your fist in the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and rot it; then lift the wound with water and alum and salt, and help it in all ways that you know, until it is healed; and it is fitting that every hour that you treat it, that you tie the two thighs together, and apply the medicines upon the place. 
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is in a conduit of the penis, and stuck within, and the urine cannot issue; so treat it as I have said above, that you cut it many times, and one excuses the cutting by this treatment. 
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already seen this happen like this. 
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron forceps according to this shape and let it be fixed at three angles in the fire.  
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then insert the forceps into the shaft gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the forceps in your hand on the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone through; urine will soon come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the shaft. 
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is soon broken and comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and the other above, then cut the shaft in the place of the stone between the two ligatures, then extract it forcefully, and untie the ligature, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.  
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women 
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It can happen that a stone is lodged in women, and if it ever happens, the cure is grievous, and it is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to expose herself to the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.  
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows well this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is deeper lodged than the stone of man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessities demand it, it behoves you to take a midwife who knows well, and at pains one finds her, and if you don't find her, not even one chaste, but subtle mirror; and present her with a wise woman experienced in the life of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her that she do what you command her from the inquiry of the stone; and look very well whether the woman is a virgin: then it behoves you to thrust your finger or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, constrict it under her finger, and recommend that she thrusts her finger or with it into the patient, and want and press her left hand on the bladder above.  
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is fitting that she moves it from the entry of the bladder down below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then put it on the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the bone, where it is movable and palpable, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her foot above the stone or below, and let the incision be small at first; then push the knife into the incision, if you feel the stone so enlarge the wound as much as the stone may come out strong, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those which have horns. 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the resemblances to know the outcome. 
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the vein bursts, put powdered vitriol on the spot and hold it for an hour until the vein is cauterized; then return to your work as long as the stone is strong, and have the instruments that I told you in the extraction of a stone from men to help you in your work; and if the vein bursts, and it is an artery that is cut, put the powder on the spot and bind it with tents and bandages, and do not begin again this one, and leave the stone and do not draw it out, lest the patient die by chance; then heal the wound. 
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the swelling subsides, you may return to your work, as long as the stone is strong. 
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia 
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	A watery branch is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white yolk, which is below the heart of the testicles, which contains the egg; and it is called "yolk," and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white yolk that we have said; and this does not break off.  
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this branch is from weakness that comes to the testicles, and it is spread out matter. 
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: either it is a declining color to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more; and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is the white yolk that we have said, it is a boiled down abscess, the rupture long as the shape of an egg, and does not open the testicles, for it has moisture all around.  
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the very fabric, then the abscess will be sewn with one part of an egg, and for this reason one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white sinew, then he feels it well; therefore when you see to know the color of the moisture, try it throughout the instrument, whose shape is described above. 
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, which comes after the instrument, judge what is inside. 
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is fitting that the patient be healthy according to our ability and the repletion of his body; then lay him on his back, on something a foot high, and put many cloths under him; then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the foreskin to one of the two ribs near the heart of the testicles; then take the scalpel, sharp and clean, and cut the skin of the testicles between them lengthwise down to the base; and let your incision be straight, dividing the skin of the testicles up to the white sinew, and delicately scrape it according to our ability; then pierce the sinew full of pus with a large opening, and extract all the pus, and then put on your ointments, and spread the sinew upward; and do not touch the heart of the testicles, but only the sinew itself; cut all or piece by piece very carefully the side of it, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the pus will return; and if the egg leaps out during your work, put it back in its place when you have finished the work on the sinew; then bring together the two edges of the heart of the testicles with a suture, then treat it as other wounds, until it is healed.  
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspensory, in doubt of the flow of blood; then cut the scrotum at all the suspensory, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said. 
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the artery is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; then cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put into the wound linen moistened with rose oil; and put another linen moistened with wine and oil on the two scrotums, and put doubled cloths on top, and tie it all up according to this form: 
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and make them of shredded linen according to this appearance and let them be joined by stitching at the throat of the breeches, and one of the ends takes hold on the fundament up to the back, and the other at the side where the knife is; and the other two chiefs on the two angles, and let all the binding be assembled in the loop of the breeches; and never is this branch medicined with a cautery instead of an iron blade, and it is that you take a subtle culinary cautery, and cut the skin of the scrotums, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white membrane which contains the artery is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that membrane with small holes, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery:  
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cup in all ways that you can, so long as you scrape everything; and guard that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and be careful to prevent bleeding, and more careful than surgical works; and if anything opposes you, whether an abscess or bleeding or something else, treat what opposes you, according to what is said before. 
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this work because of its horror, then perform a perforation as I tell you, and know that when you are well certain by the signs we have said that the watery humor is there, then have the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess below at the whole breadth of the thumb, and make the perforation as long as the body; and let the opening be wide so that all the pus may flow out; then put cotton on the place and bind it, and leave it to drain the remaining pus, then treat it until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the pus to flow out at the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a quill or the instrument with which we treat the pus of dropsy, of which form is described before; and widen the opening of the wound, and know that the pus returns and gathers again after six months or thereabouts, and when it has gathered as before, then the patient will pass his days. 
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the thighs 
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the section of this branch there are many dangers due to which it seems to me better to leave it; and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess. 
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come on bodies, and especially on the thighs; and this is in many cases. 
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know by an excess of sharp and hot humors which are spread on the thighs or from percussion; and the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and it does not find any pain, and is a grievous abscess; and perhaps there are painful and hard abscesses, dark in color, and sometimes it comes from a new artery or swelling of a vein. 
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from a new artery, it is known by the disposition of a hot abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it is not fitting that you touch it. 
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made of a vein swelling is known by its arrangement to the expression from the touch of the two fingers and one can well make the cut on this resemblance and on the other carts; and it is that you cut the heart of the onions then raise the egg on high, and draw the thread through the white part, and deliver the suspensory from all sides of the egg. 
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already soldered with these carts new, then it is fitting that you draw the egg and cut it; and if it is airy at the white part, or in that which is inside the vessels, then it is fitting that you deliver all that tension, and cut roundly. 
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the origin of the cart is or is behind, then it is fitting that you cut it all and extract the egg as we have said. 
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is complete, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed. 
de l’aposteme des coions	of an abscess of the testicles 
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a boil, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans when he walks; and the treatment for this illness is as perilous as the one before it, nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then loosen the scrotum of the testicles down to your knees, separating all the vessels which are close to the penis, and hold the masters, and stretch them out; then cut with a wide sharp scalpel at the transverse point where the vessels are exposed, then flay from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples; then insert a needle with double thread and tie it to the first place where the vein has come, and tie it directly to the other end; then cut them straight in the middle according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted humors; then treat the wound like the others where you inject broth, so that no vessel ruptures that nourishes one of the testicles; for by this there is no harm, but if all the vessels become visible, it is necessary to drain the testicles from all the vessels; so that the testicle does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of a break of the bone 
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The events of this branch are due to the section that comes from the bone or the extension on the belly in the part of the groin for which the intestines descend from this break to one of the bowels; and this break is either of the bone or of the extension of it, and these two ways come from many causes: either by percussion, or by jumping, or by brawling, or by lifting a heavy weight, and similar things. 
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the bone, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and the abscesses appear diverse under the skin nearby, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body outside of the bone. 
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never separate the intestines with the nerves, and they are held together, and cause the patient great pain to suffer, even when pressed. 
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron out of fear, for which it is advisable to avoid them. 
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of the operation is such that you command the patient to pull the intestine with his hand inside the wound, if he can get it in; then hold it squeezed between your hands and lift the thighs; then stretch the heart above, and cut all the skin of the testicles along the length; then put the levers of the hip bone into a cinch according to what you need to open the wound, and let them be such that the bowels can come out; then flay the loose tissue that is under the skin of the testicles until the white fibrous tissue is exposed on all sides; then put your index finger into what follows the testicle, between the white fibrous tissue which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second fibrous tissue; and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second fibrous tissue; and then push with your right hand into the heart of the testicles, and stretch the white fibrous tissue upwards with your left hand and lift the testicle towards the hip with all its fibrous tissue; and command the assistant to extend the testicle upwards, and loosen what is behind the ligature; and feel with your fingers if there is any intestine entangled or white fibrous tissue, and if you find anything, put it back into the belly below; then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, and push it into the rear part of the fibrous tissue which is after the skin of the testicles; after the hip bone, then cut the ends that appear from the threads, until there are four threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the fibrous tissue which we have said is under the skin of the testicles with a strong ligature of two parts; then wrap the ends of the threads and tie them in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter, and no abscess can come; and place the ligature according to the first ligature long two finger widths from it, and after these two ligatures leave the fibrous tissue which is under the heart of the testicles a thumb's width; and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the testicles until the sinews are severed; and the bowel, as we have said before; then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wounds, and apply the ligature that we have mentioned. 
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white flesh as we have said after incision out of fear of blood clotting. 
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens often, and leave the ligature as long as it bleeds by itself; and if it delays in ceasing, it should be moistened with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it bleeds; then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed. 
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia 
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to make the cure with iron. 
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made as in the branch which is together with it, in part the way you tie the vessels, after cutting above slightly below; then cut in half, and treat the abscess of he who works, until the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.  
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes a fracture occurs in the angres, as we have said, and opens the veins; and no intestines should be drawn out of the joints, and if any are drawn out, it is bad, and they should be repaired every hour; and nonetheless, if it remains too long in this condition, the wound or sinus grows, as long as the intestine is drawn out; and this happens through the extension of the sinus which is in the angres, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen, and opened; and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies often on their back between your hands, then you cut the place of the fracture swollen broadly according to the quantity of three fingers; then you extract the sinus which is below the skin where it swells up, then take a red-hot iron and put it on the apparent place of the sinus; and press it firmly against the belly, then sew the two apparent veins of the sinus onto the head of the iron, and sew one and the other; then you remove the head of the iron, and do not cut the sinus nor stretch the vein or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the ramification of the intestines; then cure it by the cure of wounds. 
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, let the patient wash and dress the wound until it is healed. 
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The cautery is constrained and has no appearance in the rupture; and the cauteries are milder in this place and closer to safety. 
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles 
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the cords within are softened, and it is made to be seen; and it is necessary, when one wishes to cure it, that one make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin upon the natural skin; then join the two lips with a suture, and if you see fit, sew first the superfluity of the softened skin at three or four sutures firmly; then cut between the sutures, and cure as other wounds, until it is healed, and draw out the thread.  
dou chastrement	Where cautery 
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that cautery is forbidden in our law, and for this reason it would please me not to speak of it in this book; but it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the master should be able to answer when asked about it, and know the cure; and the other, because we often need to cauterize certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, cats, and other animals. 
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that cautery is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.  
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and hanging; then we take them with our hand until they are retracted and you no longer feel them. 
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the castration of animals: it is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut on each testicle at one cut, when you have well skinned them; and leave no puncture so that the strong sinews and the fine sinews which are on the vessels remain; and this manner of castration is better than that which is done by attraction, because by attraction there may remain by chance some part of the testicles, by which the animal desires lust; then heal the wound until it is healed. 
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites 
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is according to two manners like men: one is that between the two testicles there appears also as the form of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes it urinates in the direction. 
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has upon the shoulder like a rod and two horns. 
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for the man and the woman is that you cut off all the added pieces, and treat them like other wounds; in the second manner, men whose urine leaks through the skin of the horns, have no cure. 
de la tentigene	of the tenting gene  
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A tentigene is an added piece on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure.  
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is fitting that you hold the superfluity of the tentigene in your hand or on your knee, and cut it lightly; and do not go too far so that blood does not flow, then treat it with other treatment until it is healed; and to another piece that is born at the mouth of the womb, and the navel, and perhaps jumps out, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and therefore they called it the ancient "cow disease". 
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you cut it as we have said above, and treat it until it heals. 
de erratique	of wandering 
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the pertus is small; and it is by nature at birth, or by accident from illness that has come to be; or it is by excess of flesh, or by subtle vapor or species, and it is made complete in the womb, or on the sides, or below, or wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps having flowers; and the knowledge of this is by looking at the belly. 
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swellings are close and apparent, on either side or to the right.  
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is by subtle vapor, and it is close to the two leaves, do this quickly: put your two index fingers together, and have the woman on her back, spread her legs; then stretch the two leaves as much as possible, so that the subtle vapor is gone, and the swellings are removed; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and put it on the spot, and make the woman lie with a man every day, so that he cannot sleep.  
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the bone is hard and thick, it is fitting that you cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf. 
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is from a sharp weapon, suspend it to the oncine and cut it; have medicines that staunch blood, such as alum, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with egg yolk; then apply a bandage of flax wide enough so the wound cannot close; and so it shall be for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen; then it shall be cured by other cures until it is healed. 
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a sharp weapon comes in the flesh, it is fitting to cut according to this manner, except if it is a boil or ulcerated abscess. 
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an ulcerated abscess that is in the flesh, one should not touch it with fire. 
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids 
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which without a court usually are accustomed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become swollen; and we have said in the division the resemblances to others and signs, and I will say here those who receive a cure. 
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and swelling when they are ripe in the anus, and they do not appear to touch, unless cured by iron. 
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those which are at the mouth of the anus, which one can feel, are those which one can cure. 
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore it befits that you put the woman in a cold house, then extend the swelling with forceps, and cut off its roots, then sprinkle medicines restraining blood upon it, such as alum and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water; and if bleeding comes, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rind and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour and mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster upon her back.  
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it goes out, it is good. 
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, have cupping glasses applied to the back and breasts without pricking; then take flax, moisten it with plantain juice or elder juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the area. 
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is at rest, treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and the one called “albathir” is red, and resembles a rough head, so it must be covered as I have said for the thelul; then treat it until it is healed. 
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the marrow 
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come in the marrow, such as ulcers and putrid abscesses and herpes and swellings and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases which I have mentioned in the division.  
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I say in this treatise the hot abscess which comes in the marsh, which is not the abscesses that boil; and if you wish to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is angry at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. 
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not hurry to pierce it, but let it mature until the pain is eased; and then make the patient sit on a stool, and put two small stools where he can lean, and support himself on his back and bring his feet together close to the leg; and let his thighs be spread, and place his arms below his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; then give him to turn towards the right side, and prepare the instrument with which one works the mouth of the abscess, of which the form will come later; and it is necessary that when you see this instrument prepared, you insert the point first in order to know the depth of the abscess, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the abscess with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt him; and it is necessary that he put the tip of the instrument on top, and hold the instrument.  
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened and it is gently pressed by hand, if it seems necessary to cover the head, apply a poultice of spatumile leaves; and when the bowels are emptied, put softened tents in rose oil or green oil into the wound; place the tent firmly from the edge of the wound to the margin of the abscess, and then on the margin and on the nearby skin apply clean linen moistened in water in which ivy or mallow have been boiled. Then after two days treat it with appropriate ointment until it is healed; and never lift the abscess and the wound by a clyster of water and honey, and then of water or long-boiled lily roots and aristoloche; then return to the ointment. 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound grows into the abscess, you must be careful not to cauterize it with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division. 
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth 
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is first necessary for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if she sees the woman pressing down, and desiring to smell the air: then hasten the child with force so that it comes out; then you will know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue is under her head, and the placenta with it; and when you see these signs, it is appropriate to press lightly on her abdomen, so that the child comes out quickly; for when it descends upon its head, the placenta follows with it, and the woman is cleansed of her superfluities by good cleansing; and what comes otherwise does not come naturally.  
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it sometimes comes upon its feet, and the body or the shoulders and the hands come out with force, or it comes upon its stomach, or often it is converted by chance out of its neck, and by other bad figures; it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must help her. 
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes onto her head through natural birth, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of her is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, where women hold her; and boil oil or fenugreek, and then pour the bowl between her thighs with the small spatula whose shape is this: 
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the second membrane, and press on her fingernail until the moisture which is inside runs out; and press on the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you should give the woman an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil; then make her drink and sneeze from condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child is delivered.  
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out further, then you should reset them gently bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a stool, and raise her feet up high; then overturn the stool to the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall when overturned; and if the hands still cannot enter and the child is dead, then cut the hands with the knife which is previously mentioned, and extract the child, and reset it equally. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the issue of the child upon its feet 
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes upon its feet, if it is crooked, you must straighten it upwards; and then turn it a little at a time until it is even; then take it by the feet and extend it a little at a time. 
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up to its thighs, if he is ordered to grasp, and makes him sneeze on purpose; if the jump is strong, God willing. 
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as strong as we have said, then turn it a little at a time until it is according to the natural form.  
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is light. 
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come strong as we have said, take a mixture of hollyhock, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and smear with this ointment, then make her sit in tepid water up to below the ribs; and when she is softened below, give her a collar of myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and pull out her mouth and nose, and take her belly lightly, for the child jumps now. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the delivery of the child onto its knees 
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if it puts its hands on its body little by little; then let it be swaddled onto its neck, and let its feet hang down, and let it lie on its back on the bed; and fold its hands little by little, and then take its hands onto its belly, and remove the cushions from underneath, as long as it is revealed downwards; and if the child does not jump, take its feet and move them upwards, then move its belly upwards, then push in its hands; and pull the child little by little; and instruct the woman to hold herself as long as the child rises. 
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the delivery of the child who comes forth with one hand hanging down  
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	it is necessary to proceed to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, let the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, let her lie on the bed and straighten her legs; then apply the muscilage that I have mentioned; and if she does not deliver, let her sit on a chair, and then try to bring back the hand; and pull the child according to its natural form, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to hold herself as long as the child rises. 
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child upon his neck and have spread his hands and his face turned toward the back of his mother 
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is fitting that the midwife holds her hand and then turns it little by little, and lifts it lightly; and when it is equal, she puts on the natural muscle mixture of elder and oil as we have said, then commands her to move it a little at a time; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to hold herself upright, and make her sneeze. 
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for all the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes strong in this manner for all the afterbirth, grasp the afterbirth at your finger, as long as the moisture is emptied; and if the infant leans upon his face and upon his neck, grasp it from the elbow so that it is not retained and the infant dies; then push the infant inside as long as you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to hold herself still: then draw it lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the exit of twins 
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born at once; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens. 
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	What is strange and does not live is rarely named; I know that they are multiplied and separated by the placenta which divides them, which is joined to the belly; and sometimes they also issue naturally as one under another, as we have said. 
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue crookedly, the cure is as we have said, and let the midwife be skillful, and do quickly and lightly what she does; and do as it is worthwhile for salvation.  
de plusors enfans	of several children 
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or several up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is fitting that the midwife knows all this, for by chance similar things happen; so do according to what is fitting.  
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child 
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman who has lost her child in the womb, as I said in the division, and no fluid comes out, and you are forced to work with your hands; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound constitution and has no accident or fear of death. It is necessary for the woman to be placed on her back with her hips inclined downwards and her legs raised. And let the attendant hold her by the waist, whether she is tied to the bed so that she does not be treated in a downward direction during the removal of the child. Then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oil mixed with marshmallow and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these mixtures. Then gently insert them into the woman's womb. Be careful where you insert the ointments so that they are suitable for this purpose; take care that if the child appears, it will descend on its head. Insert the ointments into her eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the chin or in the armpit or near the ribs. If the descent is on the feet, then put them on the breastbone and lower ribs. And it is necessary to hold the ointment with your right hand and place the curve between the fingers of your left hand, and insert it gently with all your hand. Insert the ointment into any of these places that we have mentioned, until you reach the void thing. And this is the shape of the ointment:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then place it against the other pincers, or a third if you need them, so that the extraction is equal; and then stretch them equally by moving them back and forth to make it come out, and let the pincers have teeth to hold it, as its form is like this: 
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, smear the wound with some of its two oils, and put them in that part, and pull out the other part; and if none remains, place these pincers or higher up, and do this until it all comes out. 
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other and he cannot bring it back due to tightness, it is necessary that you wrap it up on a cloth until it all comes out; then cut at the jointure of the palm or with a knife, and thus you must do the same for the other hand, and for both feet. 
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is narrow in the outlet, or if it has a sharp point, then you must put the pointed spatula between your fingers and break the point and extract it; or cut it with an instrument called "almidach," from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapters that follow this one; and thus do the same if the child has a large head naturally; and then draw the bones together with forceps, and if the head jumps out and is removed by force, it must be split until the moisture which is in the lower part comes out; and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture flows. 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, the attraction is light, and the straightening at the mouth of the womb is easy. 
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is three in the belly or breast, it is fitting that you draw it out with a drape wrapped around the hand; and make the belly or breast, as long as the moisture which is there runs; and if the other members are removed, and the head remains, then put your hand well greased from the marris, and draw it up to the mouth of the marris; then you put one or two ounces and pull hard; and if the mouth of the marris is contracted by a hot abscess which has come, it is not fitting to work on it, but it is fitting to administer moist and fatty things; and apply poultices, and those in acute softening and moistening. 
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it equal, then apply what we have said in the living child; and if one does not have power, then pull it hard by pieces, and do not leave anything of the afterbirth. 
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, if he administers what we have said in abscesses that come in the marsh; and if bleeding occurs, it should be applied with a tight bandage, and he administers other remedies. 
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb one child had been dead, then another was conceived on top of it, and the other died too. 
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time an abscess came to her in the buttock, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began with great discharge. 
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to heal her, and I thought for a long time, and could not close the wound. 
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and out came a bone, and after a few days another. 
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed, for the belly has no bones. 
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought these were bones of a dead child. 
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and found bones within it, as long as the woman was in a better condition; and I left the woman for a long time like this, and there remained then only a little bit of swelling from the place; and I have not recounted this chapter except because, when masters find something foreign, they should know how to help. 
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the marrow to its place 
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here afterwards comes the form of the presser, with which one presses books; and at two turns are two heads of two lines. 
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be more delicate than those of the restrictor, and should be made of ebony or boxwood; and its mouth should be of wood two finger-widths wide, and the edge of the branches one finger-width, and a palm and a half long; and between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of this same wood which are fastened on the one side and the other, a half-palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the marrow to open it when one turns the two horns. 
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, of more delicate and lighter appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood wood, according to the likeness of tongs; and it should have two jaws with two adjustments, as you see, a palm in length, and two fingers wide; and when you see the woman wanting to open her vulva for the instrument, make her sit on a bed, with her feet dangling and her legs open. Then insert the two adjustments joined together into the vulva, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all assembled, and there are many of its kinds; and when the master has prepared them, the quicker the work, and the higher the esteem for their quantity. 
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair of the instrument that you do not have prepared, for its necessity is inexcusable. 
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the placenta is retained at childbirth, it is fitting that you instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze on purpose, and remove your hands from her mouth and nose; and if it comes out this way, it is well. 
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot and make a hole or cover, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in a pot in water over the fire; then put one end of a cane or tube into the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the womb, and hold it there until the vapors enter the womb; then make her sneeze, as we have said.  
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint leaps quickly. 
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and is not strong, order the patient to wet her left hand in sesame oil or marshmallow poultice, and then put it into the opening, and seek the second joint; and when she has found it, grasp it and extend it little by little straight so that the marrow does not tear out at extraction; but you must move it lightly to the right and left, and then pull; it will come and loosen. 
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the opening of the marrow is constricted, we have said the treatment is sneezing and fumigation of herbs; and if it is not from all that we have said, be careful not to pull back; but it is necessary for whoever is at the opening of the marrow, that you tie him to the thigh of the woman, then give him an enema of tetrafarmacon ointment; if he will bear it and return it, and he will come strong; but nevertheless, when he returns, there comes bad odor to the stomach and head, and harms the patient. 
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So it is fitting, then, for fumigations to be suitable for this: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of watercress and dried figs. 
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for retention of flowers and the secondine is this: 
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it resembles a cane, and one puts the subtle point in the vagina, and the broad ends are put over the fire; and let the fumigations be upon the coals, until it is consumed, and then begin another. 
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the bottom  
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have their bottom pierced, but rather it is blocked by a delicate membrane: so it is fitting for the midwife to pierce that membrane with her needle and not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and she should guard the opening so that it is not touched; then she puts linen moistened in wine and oil on it and then cures it with ointment until it is healed. 
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will remain in place, then put or insert a cane of lead, and leave it for three days, and let it be removed when the infant wants to go into the chamber. 
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this dislocation comes from the healing of a wound or an abscess; so you must cover that healing. If it is cured, as we have said of the cane of lead. 
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the fundament  
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come below the fundament are swellings and growths that come from below the fundament, or in the space between the two parts; if there is one fistula or more. And when this swelling is old, it works, and still produces moisture which brings forth white pus or subtle blood, and sometimes these fistulas persist; they are recognized by those who see them by bowel movements or flatulence when the patient defecates, and sometimes a drop of pus comes out. 
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that extend to the bladder and to the middle of the penis; and they reach the junction of the thigh and to the knee. 
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one recognizes a fistula that perforates the base and one that does not; and it is that you insert your index finger or thumb into the base, and insert a fine needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity. 
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, insert a tent of fine linen or a horsehair until you feel the tent or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and nothing comes out in the form of discharge, flatulence, or worms, as we have said: know that it does not perforate; if you hasten to cure it. 
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula penetrates to the bladder or to the urethra, the urine will spurt out and cannot be healed by medicine. 
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it pierces as far as the joint of the thigh, then the tent comes to the place; if there is no tortuosity and the invention of pain around, then let it go and do not apply medicine or ointment; and in these fistulas there is nothing firmer than labor, and vanity of foolish imaginations that interfere. 
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In that which is not penetrating and not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he raises his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs inclined towards his belly; then put in a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes.  
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you must insert your index finger, and if you feel that the tent has pierced it; and whether uncovered or where you feel with your finger the synovial membrane or flesh, then you know that it is penetrating; if it does not work at all, then it cannot be healed. 
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	We say nonetheless that one can heal some well, but this rarely happens; and the help we do is to heat a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula as it is said before; and put all hot in the fistula until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, until you know those bad humors are burned, which are like a bird's feather; and then cure with softened tents in butter until those humors are gone, then cure with ointment anointing flesh and welding. 
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, it is good. 
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this cannot be healed otherwise; and if the tent enters but does not pierce as far as the bottom which is at the foundation, and there is a thick covering of flesh or pus between your two fingers and the tent, and you see the fistula behind this covering near the heart; then cut from the beginning of the fistula and put it forward before the tent, and then cauterize, until it reaches the head of the tent; and the tent will be freed and will fall away; then destroy those bad humors that look like a bird's feather, and leave none. 
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood flows freely between you and the work, cauterize it with fire or medicine. 
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cauteries bring together two good things: namely, the burning of the flesh that is added, and the stoppage of blood and drying of moisture; then treat the softened wounds with butter or chopped cheese, as long as the burns are in the wound; then treat the wound with ointments containing hard roasted charcoal, and these are dry medicines. 
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return. 
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way to the base of the foundation and is distant from the body, it should be pushed up to the anus or foundation, and inquire about this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent and between them is cloth or silk or flesh, or it is close to piercing, there should be no other way but that of trust and hope through the administration of one of three methods: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut it down to the bottom, or if you can put tents in and treat it as first; do not go too far toward the bottom, lest you cut the ligament that holds the foundation, and let the excretions come forth against your will; then treat it as we have said. By chance it may be healed, or remove this covering and cleanse it after it is cut away from the foundation, either by tent or other pointed instrument. Then cleanse this spoiled flesh that is in the wound as much as you can. Then consider restoring the wound and keeping the fistula in the part beyond the foundation; which would be a lighter thing for the patient. 
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And there are never fistulas according to this manner; and when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is near or touching the foundation below the skin above, then take a pierced tent at its head according to this form: 
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put the twisted thread in II, and put the tent on all the thread in the fistula as far as its head. 
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is persistent in the margin of the foundation inside, then remove the thread from that hole, so that you put your finger or the foundation; and grasp the head of the thread, and bring the two sides together, and pull them apart from each other, and leave it for one or two days; and restrain it no more times, until the threads catch those cars which are between them, and squeak; then heal the wound until it is closed and healed. 
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too much constricted. 
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to make a bandage for the setting so tight, and then the cure, as we have said, until it is healed. 
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spathula which makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and dull on the other, for that reason we do not make a cut as we should not make it, as you see here. 
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are according to two manners: either they are inside the fundament, just like a grain of resin, and there are some small and some large, and they often bleed, and there is one or several, and they protrude from the fundament and at the head of the fundament; but those that protrude have little moisture, and still bleed a little clear fluid or a little blood, and they have the color of flesh.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is fitting that you administer the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread and put it into a needle, then draw the thread over and make the needle pierce through the other side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle; and if it is too wide, pull the thread tight, then tie a knot on the thread, and remove the needle, and do this for all the others. Leave one for correcting excess blood, then put a softened cloth moistened in rose oil or cerate on top, and command the patient to rest; and then leave it until they have healed, and when they are healed, cure them with ointment and other cures, until they are healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	on the drying of linen or a foundation 
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is drying of flax in the intestines, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is of no use. 
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you remove the bark with the point of a spatula or your nail so that it does not become damp; then dress it until it is healed as it should be; and if it cannot heal, start the shaving again more strongly than before, until it heals a lot and is stripped; then dress it until it is healed. 
dou fremit	Where it trembles 
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formication is a small, false appearance against the body, and it goes very much in perfection; and one never finds cold, and one feels it also like the trembling of death, and it comes to all the body, and more to the hands than anywhere else. 
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure for it is that you take a cane from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and put that cane on the formication, so that it circles the formication all around; then turn your hand to all the cane until you grasp all around the formication, and put it in perfection, and uproot the formication from its roots. 
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, make one of iron or steel according to this form, and let it be thin underneath and wide on top. 
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce, but hold it tight and press hard. And if you see it, cauterize the tremor as it is in front or according to the chapter on cautery. 
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of a clyster 
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes one makes a clyster of silver or artichoke, or iron melted or hammered; and sometimes one makes these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered. 
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then that are administered in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.  
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of a small and large clyster is wide on top, where the belly is tied according to this manner: 
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there is a separation where the abdomen is tied, as you see, and the flesh is pierced within; and it has on one side II holes, and on the other I; and let the abdomen be where one puts medicines from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and be pierced all around with small holes, and have between each hole I space apart, then put into these holes I strong thread of raw silk twisted in X or some similar fashion, and assemble the abdomen as it is a goat; and when the medicine is inside, if you tie it to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then give an enema; and this is the shape of the circle: 
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or yolk of an egg, or something similar, then put it in gently; then squeeze the ministers with his two hands together until he is all emptied, then remove the enema, and have the patient lift his legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, let him strain as much as he can; and if he sleeps a whole night afterwards, it is of greater help. 
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize it for a stomach ailment of loosening, and the medicine hastens to go in, then repeat it until it is healed. 
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, or an abscess, then the enema should be as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin is extracted: 
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments of hands and of medicine, according to its fulfillment. 
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places or parts where the wounds are made, and of what they are made. 
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the impact of a stone, and the thrust of a sword or knife, or of a lance or gun or arrow, or similar things; or they are made according to the places in the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the breast, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with simple wounds of the head, for remembrance will come in its chapter. 
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you are careful whether it is from a stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt a hot abscess: if you make it heal quickly from the cephalic vein itself if a little blood comes from the wound, and let it heal on the contrary side of the injured part; and forbid the patient to eat wine and fatty foods. 
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not want to heal, let his food be reduced, and do not drink wine, nor eat any meat; and put on the wound, if a hot abscess comes, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in astringent wine; and if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if the fire has moved it, put on some ointments, until it is healed. 
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut or similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by bandages, then sew them together as I will say for wounds in the belly with stitches. 
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is uncovered to the bone and gaping, and does not hold together but only by a thread, sew it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat hearty meats, such as stewed beans and cooked wheat, as well as fowl and similar things. 
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rotten flesh, and it does not reach the bone, sew up all the rotted part, and cut it away, then treat it; and if there is an artery or vein in the wound that bleeds freely, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it loose, tie it with thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it. 
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy; it is that you put this powder on them so that they heal as the fire has moved them. 
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind the powder subtly, and apply it to the wound, and remove it only when it has healed well and joined with all its blood; and then bind it well, and leave it unbound if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with quicklime alone when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the fire has moved the wound.  
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has moved the wound, immediately apply this powder to it; but put on some digested ointments or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it flows well; then continue other cures until it is healed.  
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with delicate forceps; and I will tell you about skull fractures later. 
de la plaie dou col	From the wound of the neck  
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes at the neck and it is simple, it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut. 
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and put nothing restrictive on it, for it will harm the nerves and cause them to retreat; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be under it, such as warm boiled chamomile flowers mixed with rose oil, and boiled comfrey also in lukewarm water, and other miner's stones according to this manner, and moist ointments. 
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed. 
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and raised and full of pus, pierce them lower; and if an artery is cut and blood flows, bind it and cauterize it; and if the spine of the throat is cut or the heart, and the conduit that carries the flesh is preserved, sew the heart onto the spine of the throat and do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural shape; then remove it carefully and leave it for a few days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove all that you can, and those that you cannot get, leave them until the wound rots and is freed and smoothed out its exit; and if the wound is fresh, apply powder onto the powder that I have mentioned. 
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter. 
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a spear or knife wound 
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a blow from a spear or knife and the wound is deep, see if the wound exhales putrefaction as the patient breathes: then know that the wound is mortal. And if it is not deep and fresh with all its blood, do not put powder in it the first hour nor bind it because of the blood which will not stop flowing completely, and return to the heart and kill the patient; but apply a drawing ointment and bind it twice a day. And if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out moisture and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days or four or more. If there is no spasm, nor tremor, nor pain in the heart, nor dislocations of the joints; and when you see these good signs, then know that the wound is saved. 
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it then with tents and other treatments as long as it is healing; and if it cannot heal, then know that there is a fistula; if the treatment is done as it should be. 
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, whether on the front, back, or side, then treat it as we have said before; if it is large, suture it; if it is small, use powder; and if it has penetrated into the bone and broken pieces, wash out the wound and treat the fractures if they are clean; and if they are not clean, let the wound rot so that the extraction will be easier; and for other wounds on other members, judgment is as we have said. 
dou derrompement dou ventre	for rupture of the belly 
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Ruptures of the belly are large, medium, and small; from a large wound, sometimes the intestines or nerves of the intestines protrude, allowing entry for others; and suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a smaller wound is worse than a larger one because it is harder to put the intestines back in if they are not warmed one by one; because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold and do not go back in as easily; therefore, a medium-sized wound is better because the intestines can be more easily returned to their place compared to others. And know that rupture of the belly occurs in four ways: the two common sutures occur in suturing the belly, and the sutures for other wounds on the body and the other two specific sutures are common with other wounds; but they are all cleaner with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and explain it.  
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestines is outside, and it is easy to put back in place, this can be done in one of two ways: either because of the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold. 
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in the following way: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or you can cook in lukewarm water squinant and cypress and spikenard, and raise the intestines until the swelling is removed; and never do this using restraining bandages, but leave it loose so as to reduce the swelling. 
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestines with water or broth where almonds have been cooked, for this makes entry easier; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; the first dressing should be looser than the size of the wound, so that we do not cut except in cases of great necessity; and this is the instrument for cutting: cut inward at a curve and not outward, and look at this shape: 
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out, if you can put it back in its natural form in its own place, then do so, for this is worthwhile. 
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the part below the belly, it is fitting that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, put his head and chest higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture from the belly is in one of the two sides, arrange it so that the injured side is higher than the other; and thus you should administer what I say in large and small wounds. 
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, put what seems appropriate to you, then have in your hands a minister who holds the whole rupture with his hand, and bring together the lips; and this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you take one needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound a space of two finger widths, and put in a needle where there is strong thread; and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the fascia which is below the skin within, as far as you make it pierce that part, and bring together the two edges of the fascia together with the four. Then strain a double thread around the needle in two parts, then assemble the two edges of the wound evenly, then leave a space of two finger widths, and put in another needle; then tie the thread as you did for the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need needles, until the whole wound is restrained; and let the needles be medium-sized, between subtle and large, because subtle needles cut through all the flesh, and those that are too large cannot enter well: therefore it is fitting that they are medium-sized; and do not put in the needles too far from the flesh and the skin, lest they cut and open the wound before the suture; then cut the edges of the needles so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and place tents or cloths on the edges of the needles to hold them, and leave them until the wound is healed; and this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices with one needle or two. The second stitch is common, and it is that you bring together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the fascia together on one needle where there is a medium-strong thread; and when you have pierced all these edges together, pull the needle back to where you started, in the way one sews linen cloths; and put a space between each stitch the thickness of half a finger width. This stitch heals the man well, and I stitched a wound on a man's belly or stomach which was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a handbreadth wide, and the intestines protruded two palms wide, and the wound was in the middle of the belly. 
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up until the 15th day, and I treated it, and it was healed. 
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And those who saw him thought he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with any ointment, because I was in a place where there was none, nor any medicine; and I put clean cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it was healed. 
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing: take the needle and put it through the outer part to the inner; when it has pierced straight through, take the head of the thread or cord where you put in the needle, and make it pierce through from the other side from the inside out; and the understanding of this suture is that you sew just as furriers sew furs, and you leave once the thread on one side, and pick it up again on the other, until the entire suture is complete.  
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of suturing, which Galen properly calls, is as follows: some assemble the two parts together naturally and join one end of the sinew to the other end in this way: put a needle or the end of a thread close by, and pierce only that place, leaving both ends of the sinew; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside part to the inside, with both ends of the sinew; then pierce each one from the outside part to the inside, in two other ends of the sinew which are on the other side. And this is the gentler manner of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this word, and some testify to it, that one must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread; and one must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew straps; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more grievous than in other places of the belly. 
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of a wound is such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it, then put back to air the intestines, and the cost; then put on powdered charcoal, and if the fire has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound swells; and stitch the thread, and let the sifac and the mirach be soldered; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, then put on, as soon as it begins to swell, old cotton, and stir it twice a day until it is healed. 
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need other medicine in several positions except when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will make commonality with the principal members, it is fitting that you moisten linen lightly in tempered oil, or in rose oil, and put it around the limbs, and under the armpits; and if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, then give enemas of warm red wine, and the same if the putrefaction comes up to the intestine; and pierce it within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones. 
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the planting of the veins that are in it, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves. 
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the vermiform appendix comes out of the wound, put it back in as soon as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has become green or black, you must tie the place that is black so that blood does not flow into it, because there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the ligatures, and put the two ends hanging down from the part below the wound until the vermiform appendix comes out, and the wound heals. 
de la routure dou boueil	of a rupture of the eyeball 
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, one can restore it in some men, for I saw a man who was wounded in the belly by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was excretion and flatulence; I treated it according to what I could, and did not cease to refine it until it was healed, and the edges were joined. 
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it sutured, I doubted that the patient would have pain in his belly; and he did not have any pain, but remained in better condition, and ate and drank; and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in this manner: take tweezers with large heads, then gather the edges of the wound, and when the tweezers have opened its mouth, put them on the two edges so that they tighten their mouths together; and then cut off the head, and this will hold so that it cannot be undone, then put another tweezer afterward in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed; and sew the wound. 
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	These chiefs burn in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can bind the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of a beast, in this manner: take the head of this intestinal thread that is well-fleshed out, and then tie to the head of this thread a fine linen thread twisted together, then put the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and readjust it at the rupture; and this manner of suturing with tweezers is no other than according to the way of trust and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the colon intestines, there is nothing but subtlety. 
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from a fistula or wherever it may be 
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it becomes old, is universally called "fistula," and the same when it is raised and goes inward. 
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	A fistula is, according to its greenness, a hard and white nodule where no pain is felt, and it is also raised like the feather of a bird; sometimes it has a clear opening inward, and sometimes thick; sometimes a little, and sometimes quite enough;  And as I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only because of one of nine causes: namely, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or because of its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the edges, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or because there is too much pus; or because the wound is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality; or because the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a type of pestilence; or because of the property in the region where digestion is late and healing, and it swells by nature; or because there are veins or bones. And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is fitting that I make you know the cure of a fistula which is made by hand work. 
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if they extend to the principal property of the member, and similar things.  
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are hard to heal, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come up to the place I have said, and you are sure of the cure, and you see it known, if you take a tent of iron or linen, if the fistula is straight, so make it; and if the fistula is twisted, make it with a subtle tent of lead, for lead bends around the twisting; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well explore it by tents, then cauterize it through one of the openings, for moisture will pass from one opening to another, and it will cleanse it. Then cut the fistula freely at your power so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and remove all superfluity, and ask the patient carefully about the pain he feels when pressing with his hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove all the corruption and bad humors that are within; and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep and straight, then it is fitting that you cut deeply as much as you can, then put softened tents soaked in medicine in it, and push them to the bottom of the fistula, so that the medicine dissolves the superfluity which remains at the bottom; and then apply ointments that promote healthy flesh until it heals; and if it does not heal by this, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, cut it away.  
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not bother you or the main limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed and there is decay and blackness, cut away until all the decay is removed, then treat things that promote flesh healing until it is healed; and if it is not healed and returns to its former state, know that you are not going far enough: so uncover and scrape until you reach the bottom and remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus healed, it is well. 
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; there is nothing else to do but leave it to nature; and if there is a small bone corrupted and you can pull it out with forceps, extract it with an instrument suitable for this; and if there are many bones, extract them all, leaving none behind; and if moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear, cut through the moisture and flesh and free the bones.  
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put something promoting decay on the wound and leave it until the pus is rotten around the bones, and then they will be removed more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, only raise the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a large part that is corrupted and comes up to the marrow of the bone, you must sew and cover everything up to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed. 
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man of about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the humors went to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and he had no reason to open it; but the healers, in their folly, worked on it so much that they opened the abscess, and they corroded a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came many holes that all flowed pus and moisture from the body. And many healers treated him for about two years, and he had no knowledge of the art of hands, until I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating it, and what was flowing through the holes to a great extent; and the young man's flesh became red, and he had a citrine color. 
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I put a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and I found that some came against each other from all sides of the leg. 
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then and cut into one of the holes until I uncovered part of the bone, and I found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption was coming up to the bone inside; I removed what appeared to me of the corrupted bone and thought that there was no other corruption, except for that which I removed; and I began to restore the wound with medicines that boiled for a long time, but could not solder it; and then I began again and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing into the bone, and I removed it, and then tried to solder the place; but I could not until I cut around a palm of the bone, and pierced it through its entire length, and then restored it with medicines; and it was healed and soldered quickly, and there was no need to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for the fear of death that I had of him. 
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation often bled, but it was healed entirely, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, and was of good disposition and had neither harm nor any contrary at all, either coming or going. 
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any place of the body, then it must be treated in this manner: take a linen thread and bind it to the head of the bone that appears, and command someone to stretch it upward; and put another woolen thread thicker than the first thread and tie it upon the flesh that is above the bone, and stretch the head so that you draw down the corrupted flesh below, and uncover the flesh upon the place where you wish to cauterize, so that the lye does not burn the flesh; and put a coal or a wooden board below the bone to prevent the burning of the corrupted flesh; and it must be treated as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and treated again another time. 
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not appear, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh. 
dou feu	of fire 
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The flesh rots either from within or from without; and when you have medicine that corrodes by the cure of medicines, and it does not profit, then it is necessary to cut off that member up to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes death, or from malice, which is greater, from the defect of the member; and the signs are that the member becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, the corrosion goes from member to member, and takes over the whole body; if you hesitate to cut off, and if it is from the sting of some venomous beasts, such as a scorpion of the sea and viper and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the arm, then cut it off, and do not give it space to come up to the hand. 
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, then cut it off at the joint so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, cut it off at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy except the amount of its virtue; and do the same when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, cut it off after the other joint; and if it comes to the foot, cut off the whole foot; and if it rises into the leg, cut it off at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is nothing else to do but to leave the patient to die; and the manner of cutting or sewing up the member is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister one of the ties down, and another minister the other tie up, and you sever the flesh which is between the two ties at a span wide, so that the bone is exposed; then cut or sew, and put a linen cloth on each side so that the sewing does not touch the healthy place, and causes the patient another injury and abscess. 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you are working, cauterize the area quickly, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his left foot: he had a blackness that looked like a burn from fire, and this corrosion first came on the back of his left foot, spreading until it covered the whole foot; when the man saw the corrosion, he quickly decided to cut off his foot, and was healed; and long afterwards the corrosion returned to the back of his hand, and he came to me, and I put things that repel on him after cleansing the body, but could not stop the corrosions; and he asked me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of repelling the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the man's strength was weak; and he despaired entirely, and returned to his land, and quickly decided to cut off his hand, and was healed; and I do not tell this story except so that others may do the same, if they need to. 
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess comes in fleshy places and stays so long that it gathers a great deal of pus; and then it bursts and the pus flows out, and the place remains empty, like a vessel; and the skin that is above is as delicate as linen cloth, and does not run down to the bone or to the nerve.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you believe that the flesh is burning, and the corruption is not complete, and the flesh is thick like leather, then cure it with a clyster thus: look whether the breast is large, and the bowel which comes from it has a foul odor, then give a clyster of Egyptian medicine which is made as follows: take alum, oil, and litharge equally, and put them to cook in a vessel over fire until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey; then take some of this according to your need, and make it into a liquid with water and honey, and give the clyster to the breast, and extract the pus; leave the medicine in for two hours, then remove it by squeezing; do this many times until the breast is cleansed, and the pus is removed; and never give a clyster of ash water when this medicine is not present, but take vine wood ashes, pour water on them, then strain it, and give the clyster with this, as long as you know that the breast is well cleansed; and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then give a clyster of water and honey where there is a bit of powdered litharge; or you can give a clyster of honey and mead wine, so that the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the flesh grow; and when you have done this and believe that the breast is well cleansed, then give a clyster that produces flesh in it, and take diachylon plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you can give a clyster of any medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken of their properties or treatise on ointments; and if the opening of the breast is small and the cannula of the clyster cannot enter, widen it a little with an iron instrument, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment until it is widened; and if the wound is too large, sew it up and leave only one place where the clyster can enter; and if the opening that discharges pus is above, then move it lower down than it is. 
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowels are in perfect condition, do not let them fester with char; and if you cannot cover the breast below as you see it, arrange it in such a way that the bowels run to the lowest place they are. 
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast swells with undigested food after many days, know that the breast does not clear. 
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons persist for a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches. 
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men in whom the healing of wounds is delayed, and some who do the opposite; and if undigested food swells in the breast after many days, know that the breast does not clear; and if the breast is slow to clear and is prolonged, apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as diachylon ointment, for there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine; take diachylon ointment and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance; then cook it and use it; and this same makes thickened honey better when diachylon ointment is not present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it on the honey when it is off the fire; and then in glue I wrap it and spread it on the breast, and sometimes I administer long aristolochia and roots of white lily, which are also like flour of beans and centaury; and use them either simply or compounded: grind them and make powder, and put them on the honey that I have mentioned, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged and not cured by this cure, then know that corruption is perfect and makes an impression in the bone, or hard limbs, or joints; then treat the cure as a fistula, as we have said before. 
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the finger 
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Paronychia is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger or toe, or by chance it arises in other places; and when it is envied and one does not take heed, then it comes to a large abscess, and runs and discharges pus as much as it runs to the root of the nail, and by chance it runs all the way through; and it corrodes even to the bone, so that there comes a foul-smelling pain, and the flesh of the place is wide, and the color is dark red. 
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit, then it is fitting that you cut away all the superfluity that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward.  
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is sound; and if the nail presses on the flesh, and begins to grow in, and the wound occurs, then it is fitting that you put a wedge under the nail that does not touch the flesh, and lift it up, and cut away this flesh subtly and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines upon the remaining flesh to remove all of it; then treat it with ointments until it is healed. 
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut and treat it thoroughly, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal; and if you see the bone corrupting, cut it in one of the ways described previously, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is hard, swollen, and he feels great pain, then you must first heal it; then cut the nail with a sharp spatula, cutting across above it, and beware that the cut does not reach the flesh below the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, put something on it that soothes. 
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the deafness of the hand 
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The bone that grows in the hands of some men by chance is all fleshy, and sometimes it has part where it has bones, and sometimes it has a nail, and none others are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in some ways of the two bones. 
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those born without any marrow in the bone do not move, and those born at the joint of the bone may move; the size of one who is fleshy is light, in this manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula. 
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those born at the root of the joint are difficult to heal; if you hold them, you must cut. 
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those born or who have no marrow at all, you must first cut the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for it, then treat it until it is healed. 
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joining that comes from the bones together comes by birth, or by the joining of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.  
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You must cut that joining so that the bones rejoin according to their natural shapes; then put between two tents or cloths softened in rose oil so they do not join again; or you put between two pieces of soft lead, as long as its parts are joined, as it is appropriate.  
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If swelling comes to any of his limbs with the palm, then cover that swelling as it should be done. 
des vils	with warts 
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large thick swollen full of melancholic superfluities, which come in many members of the body; and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others. 
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore it is necessary for you to give him sometimes purging with colocynth, and then the juice of basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with iron is done in two ways: one is to cauterize them and draw out the black blood; and the other way is to tie off the vein and burn it completely. 
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The phlebotomy is done in this manner: first raise the leg with hot water very strongly, so that the thick blood becomes thin, then bind the patient's leg from above the thigh down to the part below the knee; then cauterize the vein in one place or two or three places with a wide cut, then loosen and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one side to the other, as much as the strength of the patient can bear; and then bind it up and order him to abstain from meats containing black bile; and begin again the evacuation and the healing when the veins are full and harm the patient. 
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The raising of the arrow is according to this method: take the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs then shave it and put it in a bath, and apply hot water to the leg until it becomes red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, warm it by the fire and then cut the skin at the vein's length from the top of the knee, or in the lower part below the ankle; then loosen the skin with an incision, and flay the vein on all sides until it appears when touched; and one sees it red and black and when it enters into the skin it seems like a white cord; then put the arrow beneath, as long as it is raised from the skin and then tie it lightly to an incision, then cut it in another place above III times; then flay the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with the arrow, as you did, and tie it at another incision as you did first; then cut another size or several if you need them, then lift it, and tie it to the toe's joint, then draw and lift it up to the second size; then pull it out from size to size until it is all free, then tie it; and if you cannot draw and raise it, insert a needle at the whole strong thread doubled, tie it, and draw it; and insert it below the arrow and turn your hand back and forth on both sides until it comes out; and be careful that it does not cut, for if it cuts, one cannot draw or lift it and it harms the patient; and when you have drawn all of it out, put wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the place of the wound; and treat it until it is healed. 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not cut it; and treat it as we have said before. 
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein must be curved and not sharp so that it does not cut the vein; and it is of a large curve because if it were slender, it would cut the vein but it must be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:  
de la voinne civile	of the civilian vein 
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow and in earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it may grow elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the rot that comes from under the skin, as snakes and worms come within the body, embedded between the skin and flesh. 
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes color, and begins to come out forcefully, like the root of a plant. 
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the head opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of linen from three and a half to ten fingers long, tie it off, and leave the linen hanging on the leg; and every time it sticks out at the end, wrap it around the linen, and tie it off; and if it is too long, cut off a part, and wrap up the rest, and do not cut it off at its root as long as it has all come out; for if you cut it off, it will go back into the flesh and cause an abscess and rot or pus and evil disease; so for this reason, it is necessary that it be treated bit by bit until the very end, and nothing remains of it or any flesh; and there are times when this vein, when it is treated, is ten palms long, or even twenty; and one man came to me whose was twenty palms long; and when you cut it off, it spurts out one ray or hole, and pierce it through to the bottom so that everything comes out; and let the matter which is inside be emptied, and apply to the place medicines that prevent putrefaction any day, then treat it as abscesses. 
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never at this vein with less than four rain (drops), and the same when it opens in the joint of the foot or leg, there comes much pus, and from which it leaps rain; cure it then as we have said before. 
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of worms that are born between skin and flesh 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This illness is called in our land "beef disease," because it often happens to oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it well from limb to limb, as long as it tears the skin where it goes, and leaps far; and it arises from putrefaction of certain humors, as come worms and serpents and lampreys and ascarides or belly; and one doubts its harm, for when it goes through the body and mounts to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it heal and drain, one cannot cut except when it goes; so it is necessary that you tie the place above and below with a strong tight band, then cut on it and draw out the pus, and if the worm is completely embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it runs to the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the eye, remove the eyebrow underneath it, then cut on it and draw out the pus; and it is necessary to use the patient for cleansing of the body with soluble medicines for bad rotten humors, and beware of meats causing putrefaction. 
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness 
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called in our land "vacating," and it is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you. 
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm; and a little while after, I saw it rise as like a worm on her shoulder, more quickly than anything else, as like living silver when it cuts from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and stuck in her shoulder, and then a little while after ran through all her body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that it was turning around her body again, just as I saw. 
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered greatly how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness in this manner. 
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had seen many who had felt pain move from one place to another, but I had never seen it as I saw it in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and therefore this constrained windiness appeared; and it does not appear according to this reason in those who are fleshy, and who have moist bodies and filled veins. 
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see curing this disease, and the patient feels this pain, if it appears to you as we have said, bind it above and below quickly, and then cauterize on top until this windiness constrained at the place is forced out; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it in your eyes, so cure it with those that expel windiness, such as fetid pills, and serpent pills, and similar others. 
des saiettes	of arrows 
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their appearances and according to the places in bodies where they fall.  
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that there are some which have large points, and small ones, and barbed ones, and fletched ones; and some which have two angles, and some which have wings, and some which have pieces; and those which fall in any limb fall according to two manners: either in a principal member such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.  
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When the head is in any place of these limbs and the sign of death which I will tell you later appears to you: then it is necessary that you beware of extracting this arrow for death comes afterwards in many situations; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded perfectly, then treat it and cure the wound. 
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow is lodged and pierces the bone, and the dura mater which is above the brain swells, is when there is darkness and stupor and greenness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it occurs without pus from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps he loses speech and voice; and there comes moisture white looking like pus from the wound, and burning also like fire from a chariot; and if these signs appear to you, then keep away from treatment and treat the arrow if it is not embedded. 
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of a stroke when it strikes the heart is that it is near the left breast, and also feels as though it were fixed in something hard, not empty; and by chance the stroke moves just like a pulse, and there comes black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then know without doubt that death approaches. 
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that has not gone all the way through is that without any foam, pus comes from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs heavily and wants cold air. 
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow strikes in the covering of the bladder, it is below the ribs; and there comes great anguish and great pain and sighing; and all the limbs of the shoulders move. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow strikes the stomach, it may happen that undigested food comes from the wound. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow lodges in the gut, and there is no sign of it passing through the intestines, there is no hope for a cure or extraction of the arrow. 
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow lodges in the bladder, and the urine comes out with force, and the patient feels intense pain: know that the wound is mortal. 
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and shoulder blade and spine of the back and forearm and thigh and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various positions. 
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me so that you do otherwise. 
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow fell or lodged near the root of his nose: I tried it, and drew it out from the other side below the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any harm. 
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And draw out with one game an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye beneath the skin below, and the arrow was filled, and could only reach its point towards the fire, and it was an arrow as large as a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears; the game was cured, and no evil accident befell him. 
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arab arrow with ears; I shaved the beard, and manipulated it so skillfully that I drew it out, and the Christian was cured. 
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I drew an arrow from a man, which had fallen into his belly, and thought he would die; and then after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow and splinted it, and drew it out forcefully, and he did not suffer any ill effects.  
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man who has an arrow lodged in his back or chest, and the wound has healed over it; and the arrow remains inside him and does not change its natural position, and he experiences no harm in any of his natural functions. 
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you see another man who has an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound has healed over it; and it remains thus causing great pain; and many other similar cases. 
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated an arrow wound for the king's nephew, which was lodged between his nostrils and inclined towards the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded. I was called to treat him three days after it had been lodged.  
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow. 
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I probed it carefully with a subtle instrument, and did not feel any resistance; and he felt numbness and pain below his right ear. 
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the point of an arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put on the plaster for four days and sewed up the wound properly and kept the patient long time until he felt the arrow one day inside his flesh and told me so. 
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put on the wound medicine sharp and corrosive for four days until it opened, and I probed and felt the head of the arrow moving in its place; then I added to the opening of the wound by that sharp medicine until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me; and after passing well the limits around four months, then enlarged so the wound that I put in the forceps, and moved it from one side and the other, but could not get it out; then I did not cease to refine and contrive various ways and instruments until I took it one day with forceps well made, according to its form which will be seen at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it, and restored the wound. 
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the master judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; I restored it then, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed. 
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, because books cannot contain everything; but wise masters compare much with a very small thing, and with what is present and lacking, they find nine works, and nine instruments, for removing foreign objects that occur in this art. 
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come out of the limbs where they are lodged except according to two manners: either through the place where they entered, or through another part; and the one which comes out further through the place where it entered is an arrow entering into flesh, and this happens very rarely now. 
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, let it stay until the flesh around it is rotten and the exit is widened; and also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for several days, and move it every day; and then it will come out. And if it does not come out, pierce around it with a thin awl, until the flesh around it is enlarged, and then remove it. 
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the skull, and goes as far as one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient: do not remove it, but leave it until it becomes equal after several days, for if the arrow reaches the sinus, it is death. 
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not reach the sinus, and the patient remains for several days without any bad accidents, then begin the removal. 
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very stuck like that and cannot come out by force, then administer bandages around it, as I have told you; then treat the area until it is healed. 
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in a place in the body so that it cannot be seen, probe for it with your whole finger; and if you feel it, remove it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins, enlarge the wound until it is big enough; and remove the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on the arrow to which it clings, cut the flesh that is stuck around it in two places so that you can move it, then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out; be careful not to break the arrow so that you could pull it out more easily.  
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the surrounding flesh is rotten, then treat it, for the extraction will be easier. 
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood opposes you, then apply what we have said about treating it in its chapter; and beware of cutting a nerve or vein, and try to draw out the arrow as best you can, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and position the patient as they were when the arrow fell upon them, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show you. 
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	An arrow that has entered from another side, where you perceive nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in a place where one can see or feel it apparently: cut then until the forceps can grasp it, and then extract it; if it jumps out now. 
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round and round until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then draw it out. 
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now and then begin the extraction again until it comes out forcefully; and if it were from an arrow, push it all the way through; and if it were bone, and you see that forceful pushing is needed, use a tool with a pointed end, so that the point of the arrow enters the groove of the tool; and then push forcefully, and if the arrow is barbed, push the tool with its point entering inward, to make the extraction easier. 
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is poisoned, it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate. 
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow sticks in the flesh or the chest or the belly or the bladder or the ribs, and it is close by, and you can cover it up, then do so; and beware of covering a vein and a nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if necessary; and care for it until it is healed. 
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps with which one treats arrows resembles the beak of a bird, and see here for its shape:  
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow. 
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pushing end is also like the feather of a bird, to push on the point of the arrow, as here is its shape: 
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the forceps for pushing and pulling is this: 
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins in the body 
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins in which one can bleed, of which there are sixteen on the head: to know, two arteries that are behind the ears, called the "two herbch"; and two arteries which are at the two temples appearing; and two veins which are at the two corners of the two eyes, which are called "aspirers"; and a vein located in the middle of the forehead; and a vein on the top of the head; and two cords that are at the neck; and two veins which are above the lips over the mouth, these being the veins called "augeherich"; and two veins below the tongue. 
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and common people call it the "head vein"; and the middle one is called the "fascia," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilica, and common people call it the "heart vein"; and the basilica is on the right side, and common people call it the "belly vein," and it is above the fossa, and it is the one from which blood is drawn, which appears distinctly above the pouch.  
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvation vein is the one that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the bend of the pouch on the left side, and the second saphenous vein is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those. 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The cutting of the veins that are after the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines; and the qualities of the bloodletting, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's collar with a screw, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two hanging strands from the head: hold them to your thumb, and where you feel the pulse below your thumb, that is the sign to cut; then take the lancet, and put it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand along the whole vein upwards, and cut both the skin and the vein well two lengths across, and let blood out as much as you see; then bind and tie, until it is healed; and I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book. 
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for old migraines, and those that are habitual, and accustomed ophthalmia, and for the body of sharp tears at the eyes; and the quality of the bleeding is as I say: and it is that the patient tightens his neck, so that the two veins appear openly; and he feels the thumb under his finger, and then squeezes with a grip; then lifts the heart above the vein at the top with his index finger, and puts the lancet below, and lifts the vein above, and cuts it, as you have done in the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need; then untie the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then bind it with a bandage, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of them and their cutting and their extraction, at the beginning of the book. 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bloodletting of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the bloodletting of the cephalic for old facial illnesses, and migraines, and redness; and its quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose form is this: 
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see; then untie the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is healed and never again open it with a wide flame.  
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not fitting that the flame be too strong; and bloodletting across, for the bone is nearby, and by chance breaks the flame when it is subtle. 
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Bloodletting of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts helps for eye ailments, and itching, and redness, and oriel in the eye, and facial illnesses; and the quality of their bloodletting is that the patient twists his neck with any ligature, as before; then bleed, and whether the bleeding is across, a prick a length of a flame a prick wide, for there is no flesh.  
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, it may break by chance; then make a run of blood, as much as you need, and then tie it with cotton, and tie it well. 
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bloodletting from the vein of the nose is good for ague, and for strong fevers, and for diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that comes to the face, even when it is old; and the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient pinches his neck, then strains his nose with your left hand, and takes a long subtle flame, and puts it between the lip in the space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow; do not go too far into perfection, and make the blood flow according to your need, then tie it up for one night, because it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame: 
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bloodletting of two veins helps with the tightening of the groin, and at the beginning of melancholy, and for many diseases, and for scabies, and for corroding, and for herpes, and for estimenses; and the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient stretches his neck under one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then bleed the vein for a long time broadly, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as is needed; then redo it in the other vein, then untie the cord, and loosen all the veins moderately, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave him until morning, so that the wound may heal. 
de la sainie des leivres	Of the bloodletting of the veins 
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bloodletting of the veins above the lips helps with boils in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and nosebleeds and toothache. 
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the vein is such that it makes the patient sit in front of you, and remove their collar as I have said; then turn back the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them are small black veins: therefore take one and the other, and if you do not know them, and are in doubt, take the largest of each side, and do the same for the two veins which are above and below, because it is the same manner. 
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the vein below the tongue 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The vein below the tongue helps after the cephalic vein, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and eye diseases, and mouth diseases; and the quality of the phlebotomist is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on each side a black vein: therefore cut one and the other, and do not go too deep, because below are the arteries. 
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins from which we commonly bleed are bled in two ways: either by pricking with a wide-bladed lancet or with a delicate olive-shaped one, as thin as a cutting needle, and called "anesil"; and they are wide and delicate according to the width and narrowness of the veins. 
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the wide lancet is very renowned, and it is as wide as you see: 
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary for opening the raised veins full of thick blood that appears, and which contain thick and cloudy blood; and this is the shape of the olive-shaped lancet: 
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding the delicate veins, where there is subtle citric blood. 
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The bleeding of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps illnesses that are below the throat, and at the neck, and at the chest, and at the belly; and it is fitting for the bleeder that he bleed moderately, and that he beware of the artery that is below. 
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it cuts the artery, and bleeding comes, then it must be cauterized as I have said; and the flame should not be piercing, but cutting like a knife. 
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the vein does not open clearly, then you must remove it and change to another; or if you want no blood from it, then you place a vein in its place on the arm: it opens clearly; and cut it with a knife blade as we have said. 
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the place of the vein, then it is fitting that you remove the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place with ink, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with a knife blade; and be careful not to strike the artery when you see the place swell, for that is an artery: avoid it then. 
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protruding upwards just like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery: hurry then, and place your finger on it lengthwise, then remove your finger if the blood stops flowing; for many times this happens; if it bleeds, bind the arm and leave it as such, and do not let the patient move it; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed. 
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stopped and it comes to you, and medicine is not present to you, then bind the artery so that it closes, for the head of the artery will retract; and stop the blood. 
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of elder bark, and split it, and take one half and tie it on well until the next day; if the blood stops, that is good; if not, then treat it as we have said with powders that stop blood flow; and the stopping should be done gently in several positions because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the bandage on the arm. 
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein of the middle arm aids so much that it draws blood from above the head and below the body, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said; and it behoves the healer to be cautious for the nerve which is beneath, and if he points too sharply, and finds the nerve, it swells and the healing is spoiled, and perhaps it cannot heal; and this nerve appears many times, and if it does not appear in some men because of its subtlety, then you must heal it with an instrument without anesthesia; and avoid the nerve as best you can. 
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then he should make it long. 
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The vein of the cephalic aids so that it draws blood from the head and helps these; and it behoves to heal with a pointed olivewood or myrtlewood instrument, for it is the safest of all veins, because there is neither nerve nor artery beneath. 
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, it is necessary to find the lightest place, and do not be upset if one must try the first time, and begin again; and by chance, some men's limbs swell when one tries the first time, but this does not matter. 
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the incision is according to your thought. 
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing that you must know about bleeding is that it is not administered except to maintain health and to avoid future diseases; and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins which are: the cephalic, basilic, and median cubital; and it should be done at the beginning of spring in youth, and in autumn and winter after eating when signs of repletion appear; and it should be done on the first day or the third, after two hours or three from the day. 
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bloodletting that is administered to the sick has no determined hour, but only when need is in the day or the night, at all hours and at all times; and it is not fitting to bleed children until fourteen years old, nor a woman carrying a fetus before the fourth month until the seventh.  
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Nor should one bleed those who are old and have passed sixty years. 
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever manner it may be, it is fitting that they cleanse their bowels with a light clyster, if they have retained much phlegm, so that the veins do not draw from the bowels harmful superfluities injurious to the principal members; nor should one who is too full of meats bleed, nor one who is drunk, as long as they are inebriated, nor those suffering from dropsy; and one should avoid bleeding after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, frequent intercourse with a woman, or labor, watching, fasting, and those whose virtue has been depleted by something from the arm or body. Then, if the blood is thick, thin it with foods and drinks and medicines if you have them; then take a bath, if nothing forbids it, to thin the blood, and bleed from the vein of the left wrist near the third hour, as we have said. And refrain on that day from work, exertion, luxury, and similar things; be calm and joyous, and let the bleeder stand higher than the one being bled, and rub the arm two or three times, then loosen the ligature moderately, for if it is too tight or loose, blood will not flow. Then rub the spot with your hands until the veins swell and you feel them; then moisten the blade with a drop of old oil, then place the thumb of your left hand under the spot where you wish to bleed, so that the vein does not move when cut.  
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flee as quickly as cords in a stringed instrument, and some of these are full of windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it withdraws from the flame and cannot open the vein, and so is it with this; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, therefore it is necessary that the bloodletters be aware in these matters. 
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; if not, one begins again a little below that place or above hastily, if the veins are not swollen. 
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are swollen and the patient is afraid, leave them for one or two days and do not bind the arm: perhaps abscesses will come; do not enter a bath, then begin the bloodletting again if it pleases him; and if the puncture is small, or the vein is thin, subtly cut it and you doubt that as much blood as you see will not come out, apply all the flame directly to that puncture itself; and work quickly, so that the veins are swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small. 
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place swollen, do not begin the lancing again, and put a poultice of oil upon it, for it draws out the blood from the body, and is softened in this place by the oil; and thus administer the oil poultice in every vein that you lance to stop the flow of blood; and this same does triacle and wine when it is put on the place; if too subtle the blood spreads and parts when it is too large. 
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, even when it has not been lanced more than this time when the opening of the vein is small, hurry and put upon the place a sponge moistened in hot water and leave it for an hour; and you must do this after the blood issues from the vein, and if it remains at the place after some days without any blackness or greenness, do not harm it; and if you see, put on some aloes or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, costmary, or something similar.  
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there appears an abscess and swelling at the vein of the basilary artery; put then your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of your hand, that is the bad swelling. 
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore be careful that you do not put anything of what we have said on it, for by chance you may cut the artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed. 
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And give each blood according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood. 
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it flow out until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down. 
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for those who are full and strong, and need bloodletting, that a wider incision be made, and the flames be wide; and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and they should be bled often in small amounts, and one should bleed them by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of bleeding is safe from the flow of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is worth more than a long or wide incision.  
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body lacks blood, it is fitting to give softened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is feverish, draw blood three or four times. And if he is of a cold complexion, before the bleeding give softened bread in thickened syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup. 
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during the bleeding, after a large amount of blood is let, it is fitting that he inhale broth of flesh and subtle scented syrup, and use the other things we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for evacuating the veins. 
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to bleed his arm again, and bleed another time, it is fitting that when he is weakened by a great bleeding, that he should bleed a little at a time, according to the quantity of his continuing strength. 
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to bandage his arm after the first cauterization, and he has strong flesh, should cauterize seven hours after the first cauterization, or after the ninth hour. 
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to cauterize another area, should do so on the second day or the third. 
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body that has already been heated, and it brings fever; so it is necessary to draw a great quantity, and widen the opening as much as it will let out pus; then when you have fulfilled all the conditions of cauterization, place your hand on his pulse while he is being cauterized, so that death does not come in place of pus, and this happens many times when the cauterizer is negligent; and it is not fitting when you see the arm being loosened, and making blood issue a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly upon it; nor if it is crooked, should he extend his arm hastily, for that would be bad; but let him leave it until it has been cauterized the second time; or you point the tip of the flame, so long as the blood which is frozen at the opening of the vein comes out freely, and place a small piece of linen sharpened to a point, and press lightly upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess is calmed. 
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there is a need to draw blood a second time, do so in the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm. 
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein near the elbow is healthier to draw from than the vein at the temple because it is more substantial.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of bloodletting is this: the patient puts their hand in warm water until the forearm is red; then it is tied moderately so that the vein appears well, and then the bloodletting is done crosswise, not lengthwise or wide; and the opening should be wide, and the bloodletting should be done very close to the joint of the hand, and if none comes out, put the hand back in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if it is summer, do not put the hand back in warm water again, for it is used more in winter than in summer; and the bloodletting of this vein is safer than all other veins because there is no artery or nerve. 
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The sinew of the salvation of the right hand is worth against all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: strain the hand, and plunge it in hot water, as long as the vein becomes swollen, if you see it; and if the sinew is across, and if you cut it altogether, it does not matter; and do not go too deep, for the nerves are beneath all naked of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the sinew is frozen in the wound, and cannot come out. 
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn off as much blood as needed, put oil and wax on the vein to heal quickly, and do this for every vein.  
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sinew in the left hand is good against the illness of the mouse, and do everything as I told you about the right. 
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The venom of the viper is good for all illnesses that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and of the thighs and old legs, and similar illnesses. 
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its venom is such that the sick person puts their foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it bursts, and binds above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there are many veins; therefore choose a wider vein, or one at the ankle, which is better. 
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you choose it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and let the venom flow as in cutting, and let the flames be extinguished. 
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the venom cannot come out, put the foot back in hot water and let the vein drain well. 
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the sinews fail the first time, start again the second time a little higher, because the flesh is salty; and do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same to the sinew of the other foot equally. 
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle strong, and its sinew is worth the pain of the hip, when it is for hot blood. 
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its sinew is such that the patient enters or bathes, and squeezes above the ankle four times in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, draw the sinew in all the ways you can, and across; and it is worth drawing until you tire, because the flesh is underneath, and it is very full in most men. 
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, draw any vein of his that opens or the back of both feet, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and draw as much blood as you see, and then untie the ligature, and put cotton on top and remove it; it is now healed. 
des sainies de ventouse	from cupping glasses 
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horn, or of glass, or of wood; and cupping is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking. 
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is done without pricking is done in two ways: either with heat, or without heat; and cupping which is done by pricking and extraction of blood is done in fourteen places on the body, of which one is all along the top of the head; and another around the neck; and two others on both sides of the neck; and a cupping glass under the chin; and a cupping glass on each shoulder; and a cupping glass on the buttocks; and cupping glasses down both arms; and cupping glasses down both legs; and cupping glasses on both ankles; and this cupping does not draw blood, except for small veins which are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken anyone as much as one does by bleeding a vein; and it is not fitting that it be administered, either with heat or without heat, in any disease which comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied. 
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of illness it is required to cup, or by custom, we will administer them each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between; for there are some who when they need to be cupped, have a heavy head; and there are some who find repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness in their eyes; and there are some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swelling of the tongue, and spit blood; and there are some who faint, and see by night blood and sadness and death and similar things. 
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and immediately it is the middle of the month, we order them not to be cupped after three hours of the day. 
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The remedy of the leech helps with the headache... which comes to them, and it is not fitting that this be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this cupping is in place of the remedy of the cephalic vein, and it is not fitting that he who has a cold complexion use it, or who has diarrhea, for this does them great harm; and therefore it is not fitting that the elderly use it, nor those with head colds.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it often become stiff, and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass a bit lower due to the risk of stiffness. 
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Cupping on the neck is in place of the sinews of the head and the basilisk vein, and for this reason it is good for constriction of the breast, and a fissure in the canal of the diaphragm, and all things, and repletion; and it must be applied lightly, for if it holds too tightly, it will cause stiffness or stomach and heart ailments. 
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Cupping on the second ribs of the neck is good for headaches, ophthalmia and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of teeth, and it is in place of the sinew of the basilisk vein; and you must instruct the patient to express his hand while placing it, so that he does not press on the artery, and cause a flow of blood.  
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	Cupping below the chin is good for mouth disease, and gum decay, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it is placed on the two lips. 
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Cupping on the shoulders is good for illness that comes from heat and swelling. 
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Cupping on the elbows is as good as three veins in the arms, for it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the healer not to make too strong a suction, for the flesh is thin there, and under it are nerves and arteries. 
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping that is on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids in the bottom, and for illnesses below, and it is fitting that the cupping be large, and be made of horn, so that it can draw well; and by chance, if it were delicate, it would break; and it would make large wounds. 
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	If the cupping glasses on the legs bleed freely, for they draw blood from all over the body, and are good for old pains of the joints, and of the bladder, and soften swellings; and are placed at the two shins, and the two ankles, but they weaken the body after long use, and bring pallor in many constitutions. 
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to put on a cupping glass is that you first put it empty, and suck temperately, and apply it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and you see the redness of the blood; then remove it, and replace the cupping glasses, and take heed in the constitution of bodies, for there are some who have soft flesh, and clear pores: so it is fitting to apply it once only, and it is fitting to make wide wounds, and a deep prick; and suck gently. 
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice; the first time to thin the way of the thick blood. 
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only strike once. 
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, we start often; and if the blood is thick, we strike deeply enough so that the heart is pierced only slightly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have many pores, that you moisten the cups with oil which is stimulating and dissolving: if it is summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is winter, with watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or other similar ones. 
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluity is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of anise, and the like. 
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one whom we are healing has delicate flesh and large pores, it is not fitting to put any oil on, but rather wash after the ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of gourd, or water of porcelain, or other like. 
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, let them rise with water of ash, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and the like things.  
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large superfluities let them rise with old wine, or water of vinegar, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or others like; and it is not fitting to heal with a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the ventosation, and it is fitting that he wash himself, when he is about to be cupped and when he has been cupped.  
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware that he who heals is choleric, and if the flesh is too hot and inflamed; it is fitting that he takes cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce in season, and similar things; and eats little, and meat of a young pig, and moist meats. 
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion should take syrup of honey, and moderately spiced wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat piglets and small birds and pigeons; and on the day that he will have himself cupped, he should drink more than he eats; and it is fitting to give some men sometimes triacle or musk before or after cupping, to strengthen the principal limbs; and let the flesh be subtle, but it does not suit those who are hot to drink it. 
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Cupping glasses that are put without cutting are those that are put on the liver, and on the thighs, and gout, and on the belly and buttocks and loins and hip; for these limbs do not suffer to be cut, and we only do it to draw blood from limb to limb, such as we put on the breasts when a newborn is unwell; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, such as we put cupping glasses on the belly and buttocks to soften the limb; and to remove pain, when there is opilation or stone, its attractive virtue may by chance remove the opilation, or loosen the stone from its place; and so it does when we put it on the liver and thighs when there is retained windiness; and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in diseases of pleurisy; and in this way one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs suitable for it have been cooked. 
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping glass applied with fire is thus: 
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two widths and half a palm in diameter, and it has on its side near the middle one small hole, as for inserting a needle, and it should be of iron, smooth in front so that it does not scratch the patient when placed upon the limb; and it has in the middle a crossbar of iron or wood, for placing a lighted candle, and there are both large and small ones according to the illnesses and the age of those who use them; for cupping glasses for children are different than those for old people, and those for thin people are different than those for fat people. 
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must apply this cupping glass to the limb thus: take the candlewick of wax or linen thread, and put it through the cupping glass through the crossbar that is in the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass so that it does not burn the patient; and then put it on the limb, with its two ends over the hole that we have mentioned, so that when you want to see if the vapor goes, remove the cupping glass; and take the linen thread as before, and start again often, if you need. 
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping glass which is administered for pleurisy, in all acute conditions, it has neither stalk nor perforation and is not applied unless it is full of water, and it is placed upon the limb only; and this is its form: 
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Cupping glasses are not applied unless in limbs where one cannot place cupping glasses because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in these parts devoid of flesh, such as veins or noses, and other similar ones; and the quality of the user is such that when you find cupping glasses which are in fresh sweet water without rust, you take them; and put them one night in fresh water, until they become familiar, and have nothing inside; then let them be cleansed with a vein and a cupping glass, then rub the limb so that it becomes red, and place the cupping glasses on top of it; and when they are full and stick, if it is a place where one can put a cupping glass, then put it on, because this is worth much afterwards. 
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this is not the case, lift it gently first and then sharply, very well, and then inhale deeply. And if the veins are too close to the body's flesh, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and put it on top until the veins shrink; and if the veins are multiplied, put crushed vitriol or alum and similar things on top until they shrink; then you put half the peeled beans on the spot and leave them there until they burn at the spot, which will stop it now; and if you need more, take other veins. 
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the veins do not want to be taken, rub the area with fresh blood, or insert a needle into it until the vein emerges, and then put them on top; as soon as they feel the blood, they will burn; and when you see that they are falling off, sprinkle a pinch of powdered aloes and salt, or ashes, and they will fall off now. 
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures 
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations. 
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the folly of men is to think that they have seen everything in this chapter, for they have never seen any of the old books, nor read a single letter; and because of this, the science is foreign in our land, for I have never found any good one; and I do not know anything except through the science of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in these two chapters before.  
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is fitting then that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of speech and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and he remains on truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others. 
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is fitting that you hurry to heal the sick person on one side and the other, if nothing hinders him, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age; or if his time is very short, or too cold; and forbid cold foods, that is to say cold meats, and flesh of fowl and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill oneself too much with foods which fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess, nor spreading of matter in the limb; if the sick person returns to his former government that he used. 
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with meats that produce great nourishment, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in broth, rice, and pies, and cow's stomach, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. 
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with good nourishment the muscles are recovered and the break heals sooner. 
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well rejoined or soldered according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but do not worry, set the broken bone with strong bandages that hold it tight and join the limb together, until it is strengthened as it was before; and do not move it at all from its place, and for this reason, it is necessary to nourish it with large meats, as we have said.  
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways. 
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. 
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to splintering, and another in sharpening, like the point of a pen for writing. 
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small crack all the way through.  
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each manner has its own treatment and instrument for restoration according to what the memory brings back to its place; and a fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the limb is twisted and clearly seen upon touching; it also sounds under pressure from the hand; and when there is no twisting nor sound upon touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; but there may well be twisting, or a crack, or a small fracture.  
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not fitting that you move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come afterward, and then extract it now subtly. 
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that for a fracture which goes awry, and are the two parts separated, it is fitting now to put them back together equally, just as abscesses come to life; and if abscesses come hot, leave them for a day, until the abscess is appeased; then put it in line with what you can lightly and wisely move, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of those where there are pieces; then extract it, as it is fitting afterward. 
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone has two broken parts, whether it is hand or foot, or in your hand it is a small limb, or with two cords, or one cord and in your hand; and set the limb according to its natural shape so that when the parts of the broken limb are freed, then reset by all means the additions in their places as you can, and make sure that through your work there comes neither injury nor pain to the patient; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.  
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: if it straightens nicely, and do not hold it too tightly, do not press as those who cause an abscess and contraction of the limb by their work, as we have often seen. 
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, chastise the patient well so that he does not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and ensure well that the limb is so secure that he does not feel any pain. 
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels any pain, it is not in place, and you must put it in a position where he feels no pain; and make sure that it is placed straight so that crookedness does not come when it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you. 
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in size and shape. 
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and wrists and similar ones; it is fitting to wrap them with soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as thighs and legs; it is fitting to wrap them with a wide and strong bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the whole large limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no mark; then tie around splints of light wood, three turns or four according to the limb, and restrain your hand one span along the whole bandage, then go above the fracture and restrain it less, so that the fracture then moves a span away from the fracture; and soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy place, then take the other bandage and turn around again on the fractured place; then return to the part below the fracture, and restrain it moderately, not too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first chapter above; then put between the bandages splints of linen or cloths, until they are all equal, then tie everything together with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling. 
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something soothing on the hot abscess, and that removes the swelling, and leave it like that for several days; then strain it with your splints, and they should be half the width of a cane sharpened at one end, or from wood used to make wedges, or from palm leaves, and be according to this figure: 
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as is appropriate for the size of the limb, whether small or large; then strain it with the splints as you did in the first place, then tie a thread on top evenly, as in the first place on the fracture; narrower on one end, looser on the other; and it is necessary that the threads be medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some works by fools who make their bandages with twisted linen thread, this is a great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and it is not right that there should be less than two fingers' space between each splint. 
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is bruised by the head of the bone after tightening in their joints, then put bandages of linen or wool fleece beneath them so that they do not bleed. 
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture and the heart is broken, I will tell its cure hereafter. 
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not suit to set all the broken limbs on the first day.  
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it does not suit to set the bones forcefully before five or seven days, or more according to your judgment of the hot abscesses that appear; and see here the manner of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that stays at the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and put this mixture, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster restoring the fracture in many positions, and likewise for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.  
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three bay leaves and ladani and enula and asafetida and gum arabic and mugwort, each ten drachmas; myrrh and aloes, each five drachmas; alchechil nine drachmas; and make powder, and mix them with the white of an egg. If the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and it is worth more to many men. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plaster that is worth for torsion: take mugwort and vismalve, each ten drachmas; myrrh and aloes, each nine drachmas; acace six drachmas; Armenian bole ten drachmas, and grind well, and confect with water or white of egg, and administer. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and soothes the pain arising, and uses it to cut the bone, and the fracture: take new wool, and moisten it in lye and boiled oil, and put on the place. 
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good for calming a hot abscess, and properly removes the pains. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to make a plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and common poppy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make a plaster for the restoration of a broken bone and to soften the remainder of an abscess. 
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take marshmallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, of each one part; and grind them, and mix with wine, and if the member is inflamed, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to make a plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes for the restoration of the limb. 
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take marshmallow root, flaxseed, elecampane, melilot, and sanicle, and violet flowers and chamomile flowers, of all an equal part; and grind them, and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest. 
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore strength except for cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else besides, and he says it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard. 
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen says that one should put on a broken limb, to restore it, dry things a bit warm, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense and similar things, as we have said. 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of poultice that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and horsehair chopped up, or bird feathers, and agrimony, and grind them equally, and make a poultice and bind it. 
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then untie it a bit afterward, and take care that the patient feels no pain, and that the bone does not move from its place; if so, do not untie it for several days. And if pain comes to the area, or itching, or discomfort or swelling, then hasten, and untie it, and remove the poultice now; and take a light cloth, and a damp sea sponge, and plunge it in water, and lift the area, until the itching stops and the pain is eased; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry wool soaked in water or rose oil on top, and bind it overnight, until you are sure of a warm abscess; and ease the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then start again the gentle binding, and a bit of poultice, and do not strain it as hard as before; and continue gently until it is healed. 
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess has drained and is red, painful, and swollen, and all the pus has been removed, and you need plaster and bandages, if it starts again as you did at first, equally so. 
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, do not untie it except after III days or IIII or V or VII; and never leave it for XX days, according to what you see, as long as the fracture heals, and the adjustment of the flesh approaches above; then restrain it more than at first, and thicken its flesh, as I have said before; and if you see the place dry more than necessary, know that no nourishment can come there; apply then a bandage soaked in hot water every time you untie it, and this be every third day, and leave a hole at the wound; by this work therefore, you cut off nourishment to the limb, and quickly amend what the foolish surgeon has done, who leaves the limb twisted: this is bad, and it is dangerous work, and I see nothing else but to let go and work straight.  
des diverses manieres de brisure	of diverse kinds of breaks 
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many kinds of breaks and diverse figures, and the causes are predetermined; for there are breaks that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck bone shatters all the bone up to the tissue which is below the bone, as a hatchet or club does; and for this reason this manner of break is called "haichure." 
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword strikes the bone above without piercing it, and this manner of break is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two breaks is large or small. 
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is embedded percussion, or fissure or neck bone from a stone, or from falling on a stone, or other similar things. 
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating break, which approaches up to the tissue which is below the bone, or it is upon the bone, and this wound is either large or small. 
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound is rejoined to the bone as fine as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by a similar thing, and causes the piece of bone to enter inwards, and the edges are chewed up like smiths do when they strike upon anvils; if the stone enters within. 
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those who have soft or moist bones, such as the skull of a child; and it happens in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are detached like tiles; and I will speak of them in their place. 
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all kinds of fractures by the traction upon them, and the inquisition into the wounds, and by the corrupted flesh which is upon them. 
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	A similar hair is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs gently upon it, if the fracture appears black. 
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, pay attention to the accidents of the patient, and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting bile, and loss of understanding, and spasm, and pallor, and fever ague, and the eyes coming out strong and red, and other similar things in many dispositions, then it cannot be healed without doubt. 
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a worrying accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment. 
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it is fitting to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the time that you can. 
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth under the bone becomes corrupted, and accidents come which we have said. 
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the web that covers the brain, it is fitting that you split the split part thus: and take hold of the head of the patient firmly, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more often than you can, and if discharge of blood comes at uncovering the bone, or an abscess rises, help it with what is fitting, and fill the place with cloths softened in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the risen abscess is calmed, and be sure of discharge of blood; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two manners of work: one manner if you cut at a narrow cut in front, and this is the form: 
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I make another cut larger than the first. 
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have a number of different sized blades, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are made of hardened iron; and in work lightly so that you do not bruise the head. 
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you administer cuts with trephines, not too deeply so that they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the skull, and the point must have a margin or a circle above it, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have several of them, so that each one comes in its place depending on the type of bone, so that you have trephines for all types; and this is the form of the three types of trephines: 
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place the trephine on the bone and turn it between your hands until you know the bone is pierced; then put the trephine elsewhere a bit afterward, and do this all around, then cut with scissors the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain nor the dura mater. 
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone and removed it, it is fitting that you leave the tool which remained from the bone to all the other instruments similar to an incisor, but it is fitting that it be finer and more subtle than the other incisor; and if any of the small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with the instruments; then treat the wound with tents and dressings as we have said. 
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of working is that which Galien says, which is safer and he praises it greatly, and this is his word. 
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is fitting that you uncover a part of the bone where the fracture appears most open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you place under the head of this lenticular incisor, which has this shape: 
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is sharp on two sides, so that the cutting edge is toward the bone; then strike with a small mallet on it, so that you gently chip away at the bone all around, and be well aware of the cloth which is underneath; if it touches the bone, remove the bone lightly, for one can remove it safely without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate as far as the cloth, and the bone is cut only on top, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to scrape away that roughness, and remove the flakes with a delicate razor, of which you must have various sizes, in order to administer the most suitable one, according to the work and the shape of the fracture. 
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you begin with large razors, and then use more delicate ones, and do not cease doing so until it is well done. 
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other capillary cuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer according to its direction; and this is something that is not answered to one who has put his study in this art. 
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the syfac is uncovered, it is necessary that you take a linen bandage, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another bandage doubled into two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on top of the first bandage; and do this as lightly as you can so that you do not weigh down the syfac, then administer another bandage on top, and do not tighten it too hard, only so that it holds the wound; and leave it like this for one or two days, until the abscess has calmed down, then untie it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, incense powder, aristoloche, and similar things; and make a powder of these things and put them on the wound, and then administer cleansing medicines without biting, and ensure that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave any ointment there, nor allow pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the cloth covering the brain, it will corrode and spread, and will cause great harm to the patient; for when something biting is put on the syfac, it irritates it. 
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt. 
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackness does not come except because of the medicine that was put on it, so that its virtue may have effect, then it is fitting that you take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and in glue one cloth, and place it on the ulcer; then cure it in the manner that is fitting until it is healed. 
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, for they are two bones; and that below is cartilaginous, and does not break, only if it is forced to bend or twist, and then heals. 
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is fitting that you put your little finger or thumb on the nose, and place the break inside with your index finger, and in the pouch by pressing, until the nose returns according to its natural shape; and do this lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work. 
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the knee, and the bone cannot come back into place, then you must put it equal to the head of a nail, a large point. 
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is in two parts, you must do it otherwise and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscesses have calmed down, then apply bandages of linen cloths to the head of the knee, if the fracture is in one part. 
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind it on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the holes of the knee. 
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some healers say that one should moisten the bandages with butter and change them each day. 
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they are softened with a mixture of egg yolk and mill powder; then leave the bandage until the bone is strong and the cartilage hardened. 
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes put goose feathers in place of bandages, and if the sheet is wrapped around it, and the fracture is held, and the patient blows on it among; now do what you see. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the nose while you are working on it, put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or a piece of diachylon.  
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess does not come, put plaster on top, made of sesame flour and frankincense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put it on light bandages, and do not tie the nose; and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, extract it with suitable instruments for this purpose, then sew up the wound, and treat it with things that promote healing and joining together, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose; and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with bandages, and put splints of linen, until it is healed. 
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone 
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured below and there is no external wound, and the break is only slight and not broken in two, but merely indented, if the practitioner recognizes it lightly. 
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then put your index finger of the right hand, and gently push the fracture inward, and adjust it with the other hand externally, and make it equal. 
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer extension in two parts, so that it becomes equal. 
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement of the teeth occurs, or fracture, then bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and then put cerate on the fractured jawbone and put two cloths over it; and put a large well-made star on the cloth, or a piece of leather equal in length and width according to the jawbone, and tie it above the muscles as you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light foods. 
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, unbind it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and put a plaster on it, made from powder from the mill with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the cerote; and put light wool on top of the plaster. And if the plasters dry out and the patient's condition does not change, leave them as long as they are healed; many times they are healed in three weeks.  
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if boils come, treat them as we have said many times. 
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, see that no piece of bone is removed; use suitable instruments for this. 
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with a knife according to your need. 
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, if the wound is large, sew it up and put on suitable plasters for it to generate flesh until it is healed. 
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps breaks several times before the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: either it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.  
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is when the break is without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the forceps is broken; and the other extends the neck toward the part; then put the break evenly at your command, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor unevenness. 
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round sphere of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder, and make it thick according to your need; stretch and lift the force, and pull the sphere with your hand so that you align the fracture as it should be. 
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the bone out further because it comes in too tight, it is necessary that the patient lie often on his back and put a medium pillow under the shoulder, and push the ministers' shoulder down until the bone of the humerus is lifted. 
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then straighten the fracture according to your judgment, and if you find it broken, it is necessary that you split it up; and draw the pieces lightly together, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, apply it to one of the incisors that you have; but put this instrument under the humerus to keep it in place: 
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it resembles a spoon, and is not grooved, and is as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and it has two heads, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, as is the break in the wound that you have made when you have treated the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, if the wound is small, or if you doubt a hot abscess, then apply the wound with cloths and bandages according to its quantity. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, soak the cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on. 
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cuts, is that you put on the bone the plaster made from flour from the mill and egg yolk, and put light wadding on top, and put a splint under the armpit, if you need it; then take a very large bandage a palm wide, then put the cloth double on the wadding and the plaster; then take a thin stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and put the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage up the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the unhealthy armpit; and loosen from each side, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture properly, and you see clearly that the stick does not move on the broken bone, then leave it for a day, and when the ligatures become slack, tighten them; and let the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under his armpit when he sleeps, to raise the shoulder joint upwards; this will lighten the fracture by the relief of the shoulder, or you can tie his arm to his neck, and do not untie it unless bad accidents occur, until twenty days have passed; then renew the plaster, if you see that he needs it, and remove it and leave it like that until he is restored; and it is restored at most in twenty-eight days, and less for some men. 
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the breaking of the shoulder 
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It sometimes happens that the shoulder is broken or dislocated, and it is not known except by touch; if you arrange it according to the shape of the break, and set it according to its natural form in all the ways that you can; then put on the place powder from the mill with plenty of egg, and light bandages, and put a double cloth over it; then put on a broad and subtle splint, a little larger than the shoulder, and if under the splint there is any swelling anywhere on the shoulder, use linen bandages so that the splint lies evenly; and then bind it all together with a large and firm bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the binding every day; and whenever it loosens, unbind it and put the splint equal again if it has gone out of place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in twenty days or twenty-five; and when this number is fulfilled, untie it, and be sure, for it is not a bone that is put back lightly. 
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone sticks out in front, and not below the heart, then lift it up, and the bone-setter, and do what we have said about breaking the strength of the breastbone to soothe a hot abscess. 
de la brisure dou pis	Of the breaking of the thigh  
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The thigh is rarely broken in the middle, but it happens seldom; but it often breaks at the top. 
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it slopes downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and a lack of breath, and all at once, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the hair vessels in the broken bone, and one can feel it well. 
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on his back, and he puts a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides with his hands, and subtly puts them equal in all the ways that he can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then he puts on plasters and bandages over the thin plaster of salt, or another light herb, and wraps it in a cloth, and ties it over the broken bone so that it does not move; and he turns the bandage around the back, and loosens it carefully, and checks each hour the binding, and if it softens, he loosens it; and if it is necessary to untie it, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then he hastens and unties it, and removes the plaster, and attends to what has come in a manner of cures; then he remolds the plaster, and removes it until it is healed.  
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of the ribs 
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of ribs only comes from behind in their thick part, and especially inward, and they only break because they are slippery, and the patient feels it well on inquiry at two places. 
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is such that you put the break straight, as it should be.  
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on a plaster and bind it with a splint if you need to. 
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break of the ribs is inward sloping, then the patient feels great pain and pressure as well as pleurisy because the bone points the lining; and he breathes with difficulty and vomits a large amount of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients have put forth great effort on it.  
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the break outward. 
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, so that a hot abscess does not come, unless it has already come. 
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, heal it.  
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that one puts cupping glasses on the place to suck out phlegm, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cupping glass does not draw superfluities to the place due to weakness. 
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one should cover the place with linen moistened in hot oil, and put bandages between the ribs to apply equal pressure around, then it is cured by a treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.  
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone pointing through the cloth, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut open above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put something under the instrument to protect the spinal cord; and then one must carve the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew the two edges of the wound if it is large, and cure it with plasters until it is healed. 
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, put it on cloths moistened in rose oil and apply it to the place; and treat the place as is necessary for an abscess, and let it lie frequently on its side where it should be until it heals. 
de la brisure dou col	Of the fracture of the neck 
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a fracture comes to the bones of the neck, and so it happens that he bends; and also in the spine of the back.  
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, observe if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.  
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that he is mortally wounded in several ways, and if he moves them and feels well when they are pulled and pricked, know that the junction of the bone is safe, and that the patient will be cured, if care is given to him.  
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if it is healthy or not, see if its feet are softened, and if the accidents which are in its hands, and on its back comes windiness and discharge without will; and when one has turned it onto its stomach, there comes discharge without will. 
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is turned on his back and wishes to sit up, he cannot. 
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal; if one does not labor in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, the thing is lighter. 
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you consider if there is a heated abscess, then put rose oil or egg yolk oil on the spine until it is soothed; then apply a comforting and drying plaster, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed. 
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is broken, it is necessary to cover it with the heart; and remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat it with ointment containing char, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", put your left hand under the piece, and place it even with the other hand at your power, then apply plaster and bandage on top, if you need it; then remove it, and if there are any broken bones, do so again, and remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed. 
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone 
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It sometimes happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it does happen, it will only cause a slight diminution at the head; and make it long, and decline to the buttock, and the patient will experience pain in the area, and numbness, and swelling where it is broken. 
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above it, as long as you are above the fracture; and know which is the fracture and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the head, then put it equal to the fracture, as long as it is in its natural shape. 
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it slopes inward, then have the patient lie on their stomach, so that the restoration of that fracture appears to you. 
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have put it equal, apply a plaster, then place a splint of wood or horn on top, and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and apply pressure below the ribs, as long as the ligature is equal. 
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if boils come, do not touch them until the boils are calmed, and apply what we have said before; and then return to the restoration and hold it as it should be, unless there is any bad incident; and this is the way. 
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breaking of the shoulder 
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, so you must restore it according to one of two methods: one of which is that you take a splint plain of medium thickness, according to this form: 
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends with two ties, and raise them up, and place the patient upon a seat; then lay the broken arm upon the splint, as far as the armpit, and make a curve in the splint, and then lean it upon some heavy object or have an assistant extend it downward; then put your hands on the fracture so they are even together, until the fracture returns as it should. 
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one lays the patient upon his back, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two assistants that one should hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other should hold below at all the ligatures, and extend each to their part. 
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, extract the ligature below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the assistants to their respective parts. 
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put one ligature halfway below the armpit, and the other towards the elbow, below the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the elbow, it is necessary to put the ligature lightly, without effort, as long as the fracture is aligned on the arm, and on the elbow; then align the fracture as it should be, and extract it, if abscesses do not form. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses do form, do not extract it until 7 days, and put soaked linen in water and rose oil on it, until the abscesses are soothed; then extract it, and the manner of extracting it is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder support, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the sheet, and extract on the shoulder support, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moved. 
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use splints, and put on the fracture a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two finger-widths of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three finger-widths on each side; then strain upon the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter upon the fracture, more strongly and less widely. 
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the settling of the splints and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt a boil will form hot, leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at the bandage every three days, so that itching does not swell or come to the place, or that numbness does not come to the limb because it is too tight. 
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said. 
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents come, do not untie it except after III days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion full of equal wool, and look every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or that the ligaments are not softened; if it heals by the virtue of medicine, and give him the meat we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the meat is at first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick. 
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be kept in place for forty days altogether; and then one should untie it and administer baths and remedies for dressings to straighten the place. 
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is ugly and constricted, it will remain untied for one day or two months. 
de la brisure du bras	Of the breaking of the arm  
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "fosciles," of which one is small, and it is the one that enters the pouch; and the other is large, and it is the one below, towards the little finger; by chance, only the large foscile breaks, or the small one, and by chance both together. 
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together. 
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small foscile that is broken, then you must gently extend it a little, and set it equal. 
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is a large muscle, then it is necessary to restrain more strongly; and spread it on a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the minister's arm below his hand, or to the lien, and another minister above.  
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the sights equal, according to its best form. 
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any detached that you cannot grasp with the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint as we have said before. 
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a singular chapter; so take the cure.  
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration there arise boils, then glue a plaster made from rose oil and white wax, not too hard nor too soft; and bind the plaster on top subtly, until the boils subside. 
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the wax plaster, and apply a poultice of powdered mill with plenty of egg yolk; then place the splints, and let the splint at the fracture be stronger and a bit wider than the others; and know that it must have six splints or arms in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or two; and pull more tightly above the fracture than elsewhere, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages over the fracture be soft and damp, not hard nor rough; and let the thread with which it is tied be linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.  
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And examine the limb and the ligament after a few days. 
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accidents come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you bathe the limb with hot water, until the itching is soothed; and let the limb not be tightly bound at rest. 
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin the bandaging again, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones are loosened, and similar things, so direct it. 
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you are careful that the blood supply cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you loosen it a bit and leave it so for a few days until the circulation returns, and then remove it.  
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said happen to the patient, do not unbandage it until 20 days. 
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Where there is entorsion, then he can put his hands on his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and relaxation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and perhaps in XX days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues. 
de la brisure de la main	Of the breaking of the hand 
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and as we have two come many breaks, and there comes but weeping many times. 
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it behooves that the sick person sit upright, and sits straight in front of him equally; then puts his hand on the cloth extended, and extends the ministering bones broken, and sets them equal to the mire, so long as they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in one linen sheet.  
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the middle of the sole of the foot, make a sphere of rags, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken foot; then strain it with a long bandage, and let the star be of wool as large as the palm of the hand, and strain it as it should be. 
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is below, it behoves you to put a star above and another below on the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and seal the tie between the two. 
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, set it equal as it should be; and bind it with the palm, and if you see fit, put a small straight star to raise the fracture, so that it does not move; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index finger or one of the others, set it equal and tie it with the healthy finger that follows; or tie them all together in a I shape, holding it tight, or put a star on it, as you would on the thumb; and be careful in restoration and the arrangement of hot abscesses, and help those who come to them, as I have said. 
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh 
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see this well when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration consists in tying one ligature above the break, and another below. 
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends their ligature to their respective portion equally; and this is when the break is between the bones. 
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the thigh, one of the ligatures should be towards the hip, and the other ligatures below the break.  
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is close to the knee, then the ligatures should be near the knee, and the extension below; then put the splints against the bone equally with both hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and bandages, provided abscesses do not appear.  
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down then return to your work and your care; the ligature is made in this way. 
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is fitting that you wrap it on the fracture with a bandage doubled two or three times, and leave the excess, then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the thigh, and put one long thread between the thigh and the leg below the knee, and bring the end of the thread above; then turn the bandage on the leg and on the thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then insert eight layers of cloth between the leg and the thigh to equalize the pressure, then begin to tie three or four twists on the fracture; and when you go above the fracture, tighten less; then take the two ends of the thread that you have put between the leg and the thigh, and tie them to the three splints that are above, then go back down to the end of the thread until you reach the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like that, until no abscess or swelling or other similar thing appears. 
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, and the bone is dislocated, and repositioned as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are caught, then you should remove them if possible; and if not possible, then you should cut open the area, and extract forcefully; and treat as we have said, until it is healed. 
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no matter how broken the thigh is so that one puts splints on it, as in the shoulder or arm; nevertheless, in this restoration done thus does not inconvenience the patient. 
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in 10 days, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions. 
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the space below the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the space below the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times. 
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, unless it is just a crack or a hole, and occurs at any wound, whether the wound is seen or unseen, this will be fine. 
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is done by putting together what is broken to its due place as much as it can be assembled; then apply the plaster and put a round splint if you need it, and remove it as necessary, then observe all the arrangements we have mentioned for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and other similar things. Apply to each accident what suits it until it is healed. 
de la brisure de la jambe	of a leg fracture 
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" and the other is called "foscile"; and all fractures occur as in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as for the arm, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, the leg will be twisted in all directions. 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, do so beforehand. 
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bones are broken, there is great pain, and it is seen well; and turn below. 
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension and set it equal, and tie the splints equally; but however, if the break is bad and there are many pieces, the extension should be less and lighter; and adjust according to your skill. 
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have accomplished all your work, take two bandages of beech wood that can support the leg on one side and the other, and they should be as long as the leg from the knee down; then wrap them in two layers both above and below, and tie them in the middle as well, and with this binding, the leg cannot lean to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one should administer bandages shorter than the length of the leg, and if they are beech wood, they are put on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done so at the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg to see if there is a hot abscess or another accident; and cure it until it is healed. 
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the breaking of bones at the foot 
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there does not come a break, but the bones of the foot sometimes come to a break and some must be set, and there is no strength except for assurance in several positions. 
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see these bones rise upon one another, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if they wanted to walk, and then place your foot on theirs, where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places; then apply a plaster and bandages above, and place under the belly of the foot a small board two fingers thick, then straighten the foot, and after you have wrapped it in cloths, and other things as needed. 
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated. 
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the toes broken, then restore them as we have said for the toes of the hand; then put on the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a finger wider, then put under the foot that board which I have mentioned, and bind it firmly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put on each toe a splint according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the board under the foot; and let it be lying on the top of the board below the belly of the foot, so that he holds it well. 
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and treat each case as it is fitting. 
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the wrist 
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, have her sit enlarged, then incline her to the side of her back, and let her be held from behind; then fill the woman's nature with cotton, as large as I can put it in; then raise the woman, and loosen her back little by little, and then the cotton will jump out, as far as it comes to the entrance of her nature, and the bone will return with the cotton; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or so: the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of a lamb, tie a cane to its opening, and put the whole bladder into her nature; then blow into the cane until the bladder is inflated inside: her nature will restore the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for several days, until it is healed. 
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the arm of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said about the bone of the hip; and these fractures are not hidden from one who applies his study and practice and understands my book. 
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture indicates to us in several ways the right path for restoration: understand then. 
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	For the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's neck and insert the penis into it; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or so wrapped up, and it will be healed quickly. 
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound 
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, just as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings we have mentioned testify to this.  
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, if you have no other remedy, then begin to restore the fracture in the same hour or day, so that no abscess comes. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess does come, leave the restoration until a new day, until the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will bring about bad accidents. 
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is apparent above the heart uncovered, it is fitting that you put it in place lightly with your hands, with little extension. 
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not appear to you to put it in place with your hands, then have this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight lengths, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary that it be sharpened so that it impinges three or four, according to what one needs in each cure of a fracture; and let it be round and have a large point so that it does not bend at compression on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp in front and thick from the middle forward, like this: 
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," for which reason it is necessary that the curved head be placed on top of the exposed bone; and the end at once, as much as it returns, and be equalized one against the other. 
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then it is necessary that you cut the head of the bone as much as the instruments have power. 
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, then cut with an instrument suitable for this, either an incisor or a saw, according to your ability; then scrape away what remains in the bone of sharpness and small splinters. 
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. 
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do so that it is in its place, then moisten the cloth in black stiptic wine, and cleanly if it is in summer; and do not put any cerate or anything else on the wound where there is oil, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the break; and many times foolish barbers have done this, and have brought death or corrosion upon the patient; and let the binding be gentler and softer than other fractures. 
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, it is not right to put splints on it; but wrap around, instead of splints, hard cloths, and tie them. 
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the dressing on the wound is swollen, remove what you have put on it all together and apply a healing ointment, such as Tetrapharmacon and similar ones. 
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is healed and sound. 
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be bandaged in such a way that the swelling goes down slightly. 
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day passes and it cannot heal but the swelling returns, know that there are small bone fragments; therefore, it is necessary to reopen the wound with a tent and remove all these loose fragments which cause this pain. 
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the site, or another manner of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it according to what he said in this chapter before.  
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not pull it at all, for many times death comes, but leave it until it decays; perhaps it will fall out by itself after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it. 
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Burns that come from soldering.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They come many times after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps it cannot make the limbs perform their natural actions. 
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore if it is fresh: if you administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with egg white or with oil; and put them on the swelling in compresses, and bind it well, and do not untie it for any days; and then untie it, and begin another, until the swelling is removed; or you bind it on a well-made piece of lead; for the property of lead is that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut it off above, and make the superfluity apparent; or you scrape it with a razor until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.  
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a weak limb after healing 
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and the limb remains weak and thin, it happens for many reasons: one is because it was bound too tightly and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages and nourishment could not come to the limb; or because of too much movement, or movements that are too large, not done at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak. 
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and soften his body, as long as the blood multiplies within him; and give him baths, joy, and leisure; then put pitch on the limb so that the pitch draws great nourishment to it, and often apply a hot compress, until nourishment reaches the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	a crooked limb after health 
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many foolish ones have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and it brings great evils, and by chance death; nonetheless, if the dislocations and the tortures are fresh, it is fitting that they be softened with hot water, or softening herbs be cooked, such as leaves of mallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and make a softening plaster, such as daikon well made, and take the mucilage of mallow, and mix it with grease of goose or oil of sesame, and make plaster upon it; or you take fat figs, and crush them with bran of rye, and similar medicines that soften the swelling. 
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the dislocation removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands. 
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let movement be administered to the limb every hour. 
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the crookedness is old and hardened, as stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it should be cut up to the bone, with a subtle sharp instrument lightly; and put caution and study into the cure. 
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations 
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. 
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When a dislocation comes to someone, if it is necessary now to bring it back to its original position.  
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the place swells, and by chance if one puts it back in its place; therefore, it is not necessary to move it when it is swollen: many times it brings on spasms and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, make the patient healthy, then leave it alone until the abscess boils are appeased; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then soften it lightly, and treat each member as the cure comes into its place.  
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head to the feet. 
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It can happen that the jaws are dislocated together, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are a little moved from their places, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down towards the ground, and cut the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and he wraps his tongue with speech. 
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by several arrangements. 
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete, you must reset it quickly, and do not delay; and in such a way that the assistants hold the head of the patient, and put the index finger of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other hand should be free, to put it equal; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws, and move them in all directions. 
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he looks at the eye equally, as long as it returns to its place. 
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if returning it is difficult, even when the two jawbones are together, then apply hot ashes and oil, as long as they soften them slightly; do not delay in returning it, as we have said. 
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are returned equally, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, put soft cloths soaked in cerate made of rose oil and wax on top, then tie it lightly with soft bandages; let the patient sleep on their back, with their cheeks resting between two pillows, so that they do not move it to the right or left, nor strain to chew, but take light food, as long as the pains are gone, and the jaws are joined; and then eat what they want lightly, and do not bother to open their mouth to eat and drink, as long as the jaw is well joined and healed. 
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not returned to their positions, then fever and habitual headaches may occur, and possibly loosening of the bowels, and possibly vomiting pure bile. 
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and many times people have died within nine days who experienced this. 
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot be dislocated from within the continuity of the hip and thighbone, and it is dislocated sometimes downwards, and one feels it well. 
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on their back and extends their arms; and then presses the place with the hollow of their hand, and it will return; then put on a plaster and bandage it, and remove it; and the head which is towards the hip cannot be dislocated; if it does, and if it dislocates sometimes, then reset it in its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage it, and remove it; and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed; and likewise, the head of the shoulder is brought back when it is displaced from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder 
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the armpit below; and the second is at the part of the breast; and by chance it dislocates above, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and often times it dislocates below towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, because for them it is dislocated quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it is dislocated with difficulty, and goes back with difficulty. 
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And it sometimes happens that some men have a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this. 
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore it is fitting that you examine it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.  
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that a dislocation has occurred when the shoulder is pulled towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest diversity between them; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the armpit on the humerus the head of the shoulder, just as if it were a bone; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its place, nor move in any way; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, unless it is hidden, for you will find it clearly at the humerus; and this kind of dislocation is not very difficult to reset, when it is new, or if the child is sick. 
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the practitioner lifts the patient's hand upward, then puts his thumbs under the armpit, and lifts the joint forcefully upwards to its place; and the practitioner lifts the hand, and extends it upward, then puts it downward. It will come back quickly.  
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in a few days afterward, then it is fitting that the patient be bathed in hot water; and let him be given a mollifying and soothing ointment, such as a decoction of altaea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be applied; then let the patient be laid on his back, and put under the shoulder a cloth of wool equal, not too soft nor too hard, then put the patient's heel upon the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and pull the hand of the patient; and another minister hold the head of the patient so that it does not move down; this shoulder will return at once, and if you see that the resetting is according to this manner: and it is fitting that you make a man be present who is larger than the patient; and he shall stand straight toward the side, and put his shoulder under the shoulder of the patient, and lift the shoulder upward so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient downward towards the belly. 
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he may hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return now. 
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the resetting is also done in another way: and it is that one puts a long burning coal in the ground, whose head be as round as a pistol, and not too thick nor too thin; then it is put under the patient, but let him have cloths soaked with water above him, and the patient be standing on the long end of the wood; then his hand is extended down on the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a coal of two arms in length and four fingers wide, which has a round head for moving under the shoulder according to this form:  
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie cloths under the head of the wood so that the wood does not burn the patient, then put it under the shoulder of the patient; and extend his arm on top of the wood, and tie the shoulder onto the wood, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on the rung of a wide ladder, and let his hand be extended down, and leave his body hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.  
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, no matter the way, it behooves you to put under the shoulder a sphere of equal wool, then apply the plaster prepared with powder from a mill, with incense and egg yolk, upon the whole shoulder and bind it, then strain it under the shoulder gently, and return the bandage upon the plaster, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus. 
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it behooves him to rest a little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then rest more afterwards for five or seven days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed. 
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is forced out of place due to moisture that has come upon it, or for another reason, it behooves you to administer cauteries at three points, as it is set forth in the chapter on cauteries. 
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place. 
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocation which is towards the buttock and the breasts or behind, is made by a push and stretching of the hands, and it is administered to another place; and heal as long as it is sound. 
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes pain to the limb, and slowness in movement, let the patient bathe many times, until that pain is relieved, and returns to its first nature. 
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder blade.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder blade is dislocated at points, and at points returns; and if it is dislocated from all sides, even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back in place, because one sees it well and feels it well; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick cautery with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. 
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joining is raised and cannot bend the arm nor touch his shoulder at all. 
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you soften it in such a way that abscesses may come, for if abscesses were to come, it would be harmful to bring it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back entirely, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance death may come. 
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration, if it is such that it can be brought back, is done by extending his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands so that they see according to the cautery, up and down, and push the joint at his knuckles together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.  
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he bends his hand to his hand, and strong from the root of the palm or the cost which is dislocated. 
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and let the one who administers extend the arm, and hold it so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide; and when he looks at the joint, join his hand to it, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint straight, until it returns; and when it is in place, put dry plaster on it with yolk of egg, and bind it straight, and hold the arm against the neck of the patient, and leave it for several days, then untie it. 
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not quite right, start again with the plaster and bandage, and leave it like this for several days, until it is firmly set; then untie it. 
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the joint is reset and it moves, bathe and rub it well, and press until it is eased; or you put a greasy sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it and let him enter a bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint temperately, then put the wool back on, and then enter a bath again; and do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you see that it returns to its position. 
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand 
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is lighter than the other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the flesh is swollen, or there comes a hot abscess. 
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the return is such that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the ministers' hand, and look at it to make it equal, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes as much as it returns. Nevertheless, you must see if it is well in place; then put the sick person's back of their hand on a table for extension and return.  
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, put the sick person's back of their hand on the table, and have them put their hand on that appearance of the joint. 
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is good; but if not, apply soothing plasters to the abscess and leave it alone without restarting. 
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the joint will remain twisted; and do not harm the patient further than to let his hand become weak, and unable to grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; if there is no other remedy but to extract it with a cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else will work. 
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for 5 days, then untie it and leave it as is.  
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then apply hot water and rub it until it is healed. 
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the shoulders of the hand 
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the shoulder of the hand is dislocated on every side, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the belly; then set the shoulder and push the dislocation towards your pouches as much as it will go back, then support the head of the shoulder and bend it towards the part where it is separated; and leave it for two days, then put it straight that day; and bind it at night, as we have said, and unbind it during the day, and make it move, and bind it again at night; and do this often until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated on the other side. 
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back 
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient. 
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the excretions leap forth without volition, and he cannot hold them, and many times some limb is softened, either both thighs or both arms or one. And many times the shoulder blade moves in four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez"; the cure is that you observe whether the gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no cure nor healing at all. 
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, the ancient ways of healing spoke in great words, in which there is not much profit in all; but I have shortened it according to my intention and have formed instruments in various ways. 
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling that comes to the breast beforehand, nothing is felt; and also that which comes straight on both sides, and one cannot cure except that which properly comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in an equal place, and have a strain underneath him so that he does not bleed; then put one ember at the head into the earth round, and the other at the feet, and tie a strap under the patient's buttocks, and the other at the haunches, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers know the straps, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two embers; and they are well fastened, the ember as we have said, and the minister put his palms on the spine round, until it returns. 
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board of three arm's lengths long and put it under the wall, and let the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the wall, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the minister's feet on the other end of the board, and press well until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it on the tourniquet that turns in the hand. 
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you place two fires at the head of the patient's body, one arm's length from the feet, and between each fire, above and below, a palm's space in length; and have in each fire a hole where the wheel runs, and let the fires be firmly in the earth so they do not move; and between each two fires have another fire turning, with which the wheels turn, and have in the two turnings two small fires of a palm's length to turn the wheel; and then tie the rope that is among the axles to the wheel towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other wheel, and each of the assistants turns his wheel for all the rope, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said. 
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is straightened, apply a drying plaster with plenty of egg, and then bandages, and then an splint made from a tablet three fingers long, which covers the place of the gibbosity and the part of the vertebrae that is healthy; then tie it with a rope as we have said, and use the patient with subtle nourishment until he is healed; and if anything comes up at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines along with the splint mentioned above; and sometimes administer a piece of lead, and sometimes an appearance arises in the back vertebrae of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation; it is the bone that appears, for which one should not have any presumption: for it might bring death. 
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocatons of the hip 
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come loose by dislocations, not like the other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and it is more often dislocated inside, and seldom dislocated in front or behind. 
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the recognition of this dislocation inside is that when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee appears more open than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee towards the fire; and there is often swelling of a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one in whom it comes out outside is that this accident is the opposite of those in front. 
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one who has it beforehand are these: if his leg is well aligned according to its build; however, he cannot bend his knee even halfway without pain, and if you want to make him walk, he cannot go forward, and he withholds his urine, and his groin swells, and when he walks, he passes on his heel. 
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has it behind are these: he cannot extend his knee or bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and his groin is softened, and the head of his thigh is located below the ribs. 
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The resetting of this kind of dislocation is such that you consider whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, if there is no cure; and it is not fitting for him to have confidence. 
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And as for those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four kinds of dislocations, hasten to return the joint, and extend it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and needs no other treatment. 
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister, and hold the leg firmly with both hands or with a band tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand over it in such a way that he puts his hands under his armpits, then he binds it with a strong bandage on the thigh; and another holds the head of the bandage; and they extend up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging. 
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is well. 
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, it is necessary to put care into its resemblance When the dislocation is in the hip, it is necessary that you turn the patient onto his healthy side, then place the bandage on the root of the thigh, and the place which is below the angle, then extend the bandage upward toward the angle, and toward the groin; then have another minister take hold of his arms, and embrace the thick part of the sick thigh, and extend it outward: it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others. 
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong cord above on the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the afflicted leg be extended two hands longer than the others; then let it be hung from the top of a pole, and let it be two arms' length above the ground; then command your assistant to embrace the head of the thigh, and let another assistant hang with the patient, who embraces the calf, for the joint will now return quickly. 
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is below, let the patient lie down as we have said for one who has stiffness, and tighten the cord on the afflicted leg properly, and on the foot also; then put two embers, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert one ember between the thighs of the patient in the shape of a “V”; and place cloths moistened with water around it so that it does not burn the patient, then let each assistant stretch towards him, and the one who is looking should put his hand equally to the dislocation. 
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good. 
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put it on a table and press it together as we have said in the matter of dislocation, and lay the patient on his sound side. 
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, it is fitting to extend the sick leg quickly, and according as I have said; and put the patient's mind on being on the sore angle, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward toward the knee. 
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is backward, it is not fitting to extend the sick leg downward, nor lift it from the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated backward, as we have said about lying on both hips; and he should be on his face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint at the table; and it will be right when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then adjust the thighs, and put on a plaster, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for three days or four, then unbind him, and put on the plaster again; and if you see that they are even, bind it as before, and leave it for three days; then unbind him, and let him walk gently until his limb is comfortable. 
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the knee 
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated according to three manners: that is to say, inwards and outwards, and behind; and it does not dislocate forwards. 
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not bend at his thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all such is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and draw between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee together; and another minister extends his foot, as long as the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he bends his leg at his thigh easily; and apply a plaster on it, and make air the leg at the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three days or four, then unbind it; and let the patient not trouble himself with walking, as long as the limb is strengthened. 
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at all, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed. 
de la dislocation dou talon	of a dislocation of the heel 
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes loosened, and sometimes dislocated entirely, both inside and out. 
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen and taut in front of the part where it is dislocated; if resetting is easy, the foot should be gently extended with one's hands when it is only loosened. 
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated entirely, you should have the patient sit upright and hold his leg firmly by the thigh, above the ankle; then pull the foot toward you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upward, and thrust the foot upward nicely; and do this twice, as we have said, by thrusting and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, begin the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, have the patient lie on his back on the ground and fix a strong stick firmly in the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around it so that he does not bruise the patient; then one assistant holds the thigh and another assistant extends the foot with his hands or with a ligature tied onto the ankle; then each assistant extends equally, and the stick is now placed between the patient's thighs to hold him down when extending; then apply the mirror equal to the dislocation with your hands and have another assistant hold the sound leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly. 
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is set in place, apply the plaster and bandages on top and bind them firmly, tying the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind so that the bindings are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the bindings loosen, rebind them. Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before this time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again. 
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, it behoves you to soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed. 
des dois	from the two 
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the shoulders are dislocated, they must be carefully extended without effort, and this is an easy thing to do. 
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or foot, you must have the patient sit on a flat surface or table straight upright, and put your foot on what appears of those joints, then press your foot firmly until it returns; and when it is even and nothing appears, place under the sole of the foot a two-legged table, then bind it firmly and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest until it is healed. 
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and of dislocation together 
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and you want to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it long, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow, do not dare; and use at the beginning soothing things for hot abscesses, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscesses come alive; and when the limb is in place, then administer soothing things for hot abscesses, and treat the wound as it should be, with drying ointments; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are broken off, remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth more according to your Creator, and for the safety of your soul and your body. 
Amen	Amen 
