O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	I, my very dear son, have completed this book for you, which is the end of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have finished it by its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I will complete this for you with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is entirely unknown everywhere, the science and craft are perishing and decaying, and nothing remains of it from foreign lands except for small descriptions of the ancients that the hands have corrupted.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this (cause), errors and vanities have come, and intentions are closed and wisdom is driven away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the cautery instruments, and other tools of the work accompanied by the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good master of hand is found in our times, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes it should be summoned in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of limbs, and their shapes and joints and separations thereof, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and marrow and the number of bones, and the movement and the resting places and the veins moving and the stationary ones, and the location of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for that reason Hippocrates says that the hand without work is empty, and even in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned matters, let him take care not to err and not to operate on humans; thus, I have seen many times more of those who engage in this science and abandon their science and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because I saw a foolish man who took out one abscess of scrofula from a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another man who removed a stone from an old man's side, and the stone was large; he carried with it a piece of his bladder, and the man died within four days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut it he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And there was another physician who treated one of our land's duke who had his leg broken, and with the breaking, he had a wound; and these physicians in ignorance set the break over the wound using strong force, and did not leave any splint on the wound, leaving it thus in one piece; and he commanded that it should not be separated; and it remained like this until the leg swelled completely and the feet came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was summoned to come to him, and I hurried to come and separate the leg; and when I separated it, he was relieved and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the corruption had already been set or the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop moving through the member until the entire member was completely destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And it is necessary for another person to flatten an abscess and then burn it through the evil of his power.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure of black bile, it should not be touched with iron if it cannot be completely removed from that place where the corruption is.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: surgery where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 Because it is necessary that you take care of yourself, so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you. Take up arms in defense, and treat your patients lightly yet firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind despairing diseases of grave sickness; and remove your arms from those things that cause doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can depart from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of harmful diseases, lest you be called a foolish person.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterization and the cauterization of medicine for fever, and they are ordered from head to feet; and concerning the forms of instruments, and the irons for cauterization, and everything that is necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about blisters and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and they are ordered and concerning the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are ordered from head to feet, and concerning the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, remembering the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	The quality of the aid, and the harm, is the longest and most subtle words and secret responses; and many of the wise spoke about it, and agreed upon it; but they did not reveal their words easily, for I shall repeat it.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, whether it be two complexions: namely the hot complexion with matter, and the dry complexion with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry constitution, some say that fire cautery is of great aid; and others say the opposite: that fire cautery has no value for disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to cure hot diseases with heat or dryness; and he who says otherwise says that fire provides great aid for hot and dry diseases that come from human bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of a man and his moisture according to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it sometimes through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, do not interfere unless it is the one who has proven it and who knows by long experience the chapter on cauterization, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their occurrences and the duration of time; we have no fear from other complexions, especially in cold and wet diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all men should conform and agree to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery together with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not go beyond the member that is burned, and it does no harm to another member unless named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Hot medical treatments cause illness in one body part as they move from one to another; and by chance, they kill the sick person with fire because of its greatness and the goodness of its substance, if there is not an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this for you through experiment and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is true about things; and because of this, I apologize for the length of the word, since I do not like to deprive you of the secret that is revealed by fire, and the quality of the work, how it combats diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time the cauteries should be done and chose companions.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is suitable in all times, because the harm happening below is prevented by the help of the cautery; and indeed, if the cauteries are for necessary pain before and immediately when a greater evil cannot come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think of it, dear child, as the foolish do; for the sickness that is healed by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not only medicine that changes the complexion, dries the humors that cause pain, and is more effective than medicine due to its speed of action, and the virtue of its work and dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And sometimes the sickness comes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its power; and in it are gathered the superfluities by the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the rear of medicine, and that is to see; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth more than medicine afterwards, but their intentions are false, and cauterizations are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any sickness, and they are ineffective, then we administer caution, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is appropriate to know that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not only according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, and they did not say otherwise except for the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance; and they said that the tips of cauteries do not produce pus, but this is not true because I have tested it, and found that it is true in some men; and golden cauteries are more effective than iron ones, as they claim.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And although you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold and when it has cooled down; and if heated too much, it becomes red-hot; and thus there is enough hindrance in this.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use fire cautery, which we have found appropriate for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered you this chapter about the head from the neck to the feet, because the path will be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for both moist and dry conditions on the skull, and it is used to treat a disease known as "soda," as well as various humors that descend from the head into the eyes, ears, and cause many dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and also for all diseases caused by coldness, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine, cleansing the head four times or twice, according to what the virtues and age and the accustomed state of the sick person can tolerate; and then you shall make him lie down on his back after cleansing the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit crosswise between your hands, place his hands on a soft surface; after placing the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your fingers will meet, it will bleed, then heat the cautery called "olivare", which is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the bone marked with ink, and draw and pull your hand back and forth, gradually turning; then remove your hand immediately if you see the bone protruding even slightly; and if you do not see it, continue heating the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; after that take a little piece of silk, put it in warm, soft cotton, and place it on the bone, leaving it for three days; afterwards place soft wool over it; leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And as the ancients said, when the wound remains open longer, it drains more; and for this reason, if it heals faster.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And said one of them that the fire cautery should be left until part of the bone is burned, and then heal the one who was burned from the bone, and it should be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the others said that the fire cautery should be left for so long until it sinks into the bone as deep as one vertebra which women put in their vagina because the humors issue out quickly; and then the wound should be kept open for a long time; afterwards, it should be cured and closed.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauteries do not seem good to me in all things, except for some men where there is fear; and I think I should leave it; because the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have witnessed in other members; and even when the head of the sick man is weak by nature, the first appearance of cautery seems more healing and beneficial to me, and from this use I work together for salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of ancient pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the whole head has chronic and lasting pain, it is necessary for the sick to use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purges of the head and oils and plasters; and if they make a cautery as we have said before, it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the shoulder of the patient is strong and not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Perform cautery on top of each corner of the head up to the bone, as previously mentioned, and perform one cautery called "vasselz"; it is in this place where bellows are placed; hold your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels more intense pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauterizations of the corners should be finer than those used for the midline of the head, and here is their shape:
dou cautere dou chief	on the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes in part of the head and the disease spreads to the eye, and the head is purged by various medicines, and other treatments as I have said in the division of diseases have been done; but nothing helps: then cauteries are applied according to two ways, namely with medicine that burns and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with medicine that burns (is) that you take a hot stone, remove its bark and cover one end with two pieces of cloth, then place the temple where the pain is, in such a way that you can place the hot stone under the skin; and when it has been placed, hold it well and leave it for twelve hours; then release it and treat the area with onion juice, leaving the wound for two or three days; then put cotton soaked in butter over it.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with onion until it is healed; and if you see that you do something with certain burning medicines that I have written or tenth part treat on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The fire cautery is such as this.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cauterization tool in the shape of this [mold/form].
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the tip is shaped like a small claw with about an inch of curvature, and it has a small appearance in the middle; place it on the painful spot, hold your hand and press the iron slightly, until half of the thickness of the iron is burned; remove your hand so that the artery does not burn, and draw out an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting cotton on wound dressing, place it on the spot for four days; then put damp cotton in vinegar, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed; if you wish to cauterize this abscess using the iron called "cultellare," at the tip, be careful not to strike the artery in this abscess that is not ancient.
de emigraine	From migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When treating migraine, as we have said in the division of diseases and it does not benefit, and you see that fire cautery as mentioned earlier in medicine and iron does not help; then you must heat the cautere called "cultellare" until it is white; and place yourself on the side of a line half a finger's length long, and strike once with your hand, and hold so as not to cover the artery and do not reach the bone; and guard against the jaw that closes when eating, and nerves have no gaze at the closed mouth and spasm does not come upon the patient, and guard against loss of blood from the artery when it is cut or has been cut with great fear, especially for those who are unaware, and are neither educated nor experienced; leave the work in progress; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be done in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that this cautery does not help the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize it in the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you find, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain of cold ears
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear brings pain from cold and medicines soluble and other treatments mentioned in the division have been applied but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the point is made all around the sick ear, or around the two places where the pain remains in both, and move away slightly from the root of the ear after you have marked its location; and have 10 points around each ear; after treating the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Cautery treatment should not be used except for those moving from inflammation, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make a cautery at similar conditions that come from scabs and nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When treating this condition of mouth torment moving from inflammation and purges from the head and gargarism, it is not sufficient, so you must cauterize the patient with four cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little distance from the temple, and the third in the jaw; put the cautery on the healthy part and make the cautery towards the upper part of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a fist; leave the cautery for as long as half the hair is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it resembles the appearance of a surgeon's instrument we have mentioned, but it is somewhat more subtle, and the blades should be slightly larger; after treating the area as I have previously said, let it heal when it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then administer four cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, one at the base of the head, and one in the area called "navel" as we have previously stated, and the final cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	diarrhea (from Latin lithargyrios, meaning "stone-like")
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, give the patient large years and round pills made from cerebrum; afterwards, anoint the head of the patient entirely, and place the plaster of mustard seed (sinapi) on the occiput which is written or treated as a plaster; and this is the method of cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy in this way, it is good; and if not, perform four cauterizations on the head from neck to collarbone, with two inches of space between each cautery; and treat as usual, and if you see it healing, apply one cautery at the midline; and if necessary, apply two others on the two horns, and treat until it is healthy; and let the cautery called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is required that the head be cleaned for years and as we have said before; after that, the head of the patient should be shaved, then make a fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and 1 at the back and 3 on the spine of the neck; and if more is needed, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, make 4 fire cauterizations on the spine of the back; let it be until the most painful spot is burned, then lift your hand; after that cure it until it is healthy, and let the cautery which is called "olivare" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for the phlegmatic one, and it is first necessary to clean the brain for years and other treatments as we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from thinking about taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, give them a gargle and chew soft foods frequently with good meats; afterwards, place the head in the middle, and apply 1 cautery as we have said before, and 1 cautery on the fontanelle, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and enduring, apply cauteries as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be with olive oil as I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, apply a subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, the superfluidities or corrupted and putrid humors produce thick phlegm, then apply cauteries with such cauterizations as we have said to those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the excesses are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give them to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what was stated earlier in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the head of the sick person, make a linen bandage well made, just like a circle, and place it around the head; cross the patient, and hold them firmly from all sides; then apply the liniment, which is made from old butter; heat the linen gently to a suitable temperature, so that it can be pressed on the person without causing discomfort; after emptying the circle from inside around the head, let it cool; and do this to the sick person once a week with good governance, until they are well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or, if you wish to cauterize it, make points all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This method of cauterizing reduces the brain greatly; and then place wet, soft cotton on it in butter and linseed oil.
de l’awe des eulz	Of the eyes (lit. of the hairs)
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes (lit. hairs) come first according to the signs that I have said in the division, then start and give the patient something cleansing for the head, and guard it from all moisture, and let it sweat or bathe many times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterward, command him to recline his head, and make a fire cautery on the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples where the affliction of the eyes is in both or in one; and burn all the veins and arteries that are under the skull, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and watch for bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with your power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incising the cautery how to stretch it; and sometimes, a cautery or hot iron is made between the two bones.
dou cors des larmes	for the removal of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and habitual and are above the veins, or from the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees that it is due to cold, flu-like excesses, then he applies the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the work to the eyes: one cautery in the forehead, two cauterizes on the temples, and two cauterizes or hot irons between the two bones; and if necessary, cauterize skillfully above the eyelid with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The body weeps tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, but it does not help, then give the patient three hot-coated cuccumis; after these, let him drink strong wine and make a cautery or oil cautery; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" over the two sores, one under the hair; take care not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize this cautery which is called "olive oil.
de coi ci est li forme:	 Of this matter are the forms:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And make two cauteries on the two sores as long as the sores themselves are; and do not leave the hand off it until the third part of the paper is burned, as I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hair of the eyes is converted to tears and pricks the eye, and then cauteries are performed in two ways: either by fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a clean place; afterward on paper, draw a figure like that of the fennel seed pod, and begin with the sign to shave the hairs. Then put cotton moistened with egg white and musk oil on the eye, then heat the cautery in this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the figure that you have marked little by little many times, let the coagulated blood be burned at that spot; and the signs of the healing of the work are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs lifted to the point of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for 3 days, then put soft cotton drenched in butter so that the burn is removed; afterwards, treat with ointment until it heals.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs grow, and the paper is softened again start the cautery on that same spot as you did before; and if the hairs are bent, cauterize until the paper returns to its natural position, and they become even, and do not prick the hairs with oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and quicklime, each one ounce, grind them together well; and make it quickly so it does not cool, then spread it on the parchment as you did with the myrtle leaf, and place the hairs on the paper; if the patient is suffering from only one oil, you should work in one, and if both oils are involved; put cotton dipped in egg white beneath the oil; and let the sick person's head be in your healthy hand and show the medicine to them, and press a little and move it all each time the patient feels pain from the medicine as they feel it like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have made it [the patient] stay still for a long time, give him medicine to his body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 When the bite has passed, lift up the limb, and check if the paper is raised as it was raised by the constriction of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is not, reset with medicine on the limb or if there was no effect of medicine in your work, until your works are even and the eyes set; then put damp cotton cloth over the wound so that the burn blisters will heal, after cure the limb with ointment called "diaphenis" and others until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not stick to the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And if the paper (bandage) becomes soft afterwards and the hairs prick in the oil, repeat the medicine on that part which was softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; afterward cure it until it is healed; and this is the shape of the comfrey leaf.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, according to this it should be your guidance; do not deviate from the right path for the one who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When curing a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cures are not helpful, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and the assistant should hold his head between their hands so it does not move or shift; then put a piece of cotton soaked in egg white or linen cloth soaked in oil on the fistula; after that, heat the cautery which is pointed at the fistula; and make sure the tip of the cautery is shaped like the head of a quill pen, with the cautery itself; if you see, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it should also look like a tent; but in any case, this shape is more useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, draw out the pus and dry it; and if it is closed, open it, and draw out the puss forcefully; afterwards place the hot cautery on it, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the neck near the oil, so your hands do not make a mistake; and place the cautery in the oil fat and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you perform the cautery right up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, repeat the cautery again and wait three days; then put damp cotton on it in butter, and care for the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is still not healed, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king shall do as it comes in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And here is a method of cauterization for fistula that none of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Cut the fistula open, then put the camphor-subtle in the opening.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make the quantity of a .З. of plug; and hold your hand or firmly fixed, and the patient should not move at all, until the plug melted reaches its oil; and it is necessary that you put above the oil on the patient cotton soaked in egg yolk or oil: the plug will guide the wound's healing, and the healthy part heals marvelously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 If the fistula is healed by the cauterization as we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, it is necessary to administer purgatives to the nose and return the fistula to the body of the nose as required in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cavities in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often cavities occur in lips, which are called "hairs," and similarly in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When treating these cavities as mentioned in the previous section and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery spatula according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it immediately into these cavities until it reaches the bottom, then treat the area with cerote (cerote is not defined in this text but could be a medicinal substance) until it heals.
de l’aposteme de la goule	From the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	If the abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the eye, or palate, or roots of the teeth, after it has become purulent and swollen and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the previous sections, but it does not help; then you must have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; after emptying or piercing the fistula, hold your hand until the iron becomes cool at its point; and do it once or twice, after curing what has been said in treatment, until it is healed; and if it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, you must find the cause and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	toothache
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't work, then place the head of the patient in your lap; after heating the cautery to the desired temperature, place a cane on the tooth; put the hot cautery inside promptly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth; afterwards, remove your hand and continue with the cautery as you wish; afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salt water and keep it there for an hour, then rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the moving teeth are held firm and the softened gums are kept restricted, and the corrupt moisture dries out.
de la dolor des dens	of the tooth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the tooth comes from cold or wetness, and medical cures are of no use, then it is necessary to use cautery according to two methods: cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter is as follows: take butter from a cow, and heat the end of an iron or copper spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a cloth, wet it with warm butter and apply it quickly to the painful tooth and hold it until it becomes cooled; repeat this process as often as necessary for its virtue to reach the root of the tooth. If you find that the linen and cotton are wet in cold butter, apply the hot iron to the tooth until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The cauterization with fire is such that you take a rod of iron or brass, thick enough that the heat does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heating the cauterization tool, the form will come as follows and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterization cools down; do this frequently, because the pain will be removed that day itself or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in haste for this fire-cautery, and then draw it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a fire-cautery for the head you wish to treat, and in accordance with your ability; this is the shape of the cane:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When scrofula is due to cold dampness and does not respond to medication, then heat the cautery as described below, make two openings for smoke to exit from the other side; place the heated cautery on the abscess where it is needed until it reaches the root of the abscess; if the abscess is small, the size of the cautery should be adjusted accordingly and leave it in place for three days; apply moistened cotton soaked in butter until the abscess is drained; afterwards, cure the affected area with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the arm:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When the cold conquers through the veins of the arm and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient must first be bled with soluble medicines; afterwards, cauterize at the root of the neck, and take care not to come up to the throat, but only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then do another cauterization at the joint of the neck with the base of the spine and let it be a clavicle-type cauterization, as we have already described the shape before; and heal the place until it is healed.
de la toust	When moisture conquers over the channels of the throat (toust), and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should be purged first with soluble medicines; afterwards do cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go up to the throat, but a little. Afterwards do .i. other cautery at the jointure of the neck to the head of the spine (col au chief de l'espinee), and let the cauteries which is called "clavile" have the shape as before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When the disease of the throat and illness are due to moisture that is cold, and the patient does not have fever or heat, and the disease is old, then let two cauteries be done on the forceps in visible places; and one other cautery on the most painful spot between the breasts; and let the cauteries which is called "clavile" have the shape as said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see, do cauterization by pricking all over the cauterizer that is called "points" of which the shape is already described in the ear disease; and let the points be up to 30 or a little more around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After treating the joint as previously stated, let the cautery be of three lengths according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And since the cauterizations are lighter because you do them in pairs of two.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Place the patient on his back and on his side; after that, press the lower part of the breast with the hollow of your left hand; if the joint is dislocated internally, then heat the iron (cautery) shaped as two nerves which are at this place.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the breast for as long as it pierces the ribcage, and the figure of the iron (cautery) comes with four cauteries; and this is made with the cautery that has two nerves, because the figures of cauterization are called cauteries; and these nerves are according to the subtlety of a tendon, and this is the shape of the cautery that has two nerves.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is twisted around this nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting on the cautery and crushing it with oil, let the patient rest and keep the limbs still for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 If it is dislocated upwards, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery rod or many cauteries while pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is set back in place, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When there are coldness and much moisture in the stomach that harms its constitution, and the catarrh multiplies for him, and in the usual methods of treatment it does not help; therefore the patient should lie on his back, extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 Afterwards, do the following: III fire cauterizations under the armpit by the size of a thumb, on all the cauterization with a sharp point; and two cauterizations outside the two sides so that the shape of the cauterizations is at three angles, and have this much space between one and another that they are not joined together when they throw pus; and let the cauterizations be so deep that they pierce the two parts of the armpit, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without deviation:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you wish to cauterize a large cautery in the stomach according to this form, and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pointing and pressing on the stomach at this point according to the size that you see fit; then cauterize all around the cautery called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the wound that we had before, let it heal when it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 For the liver, pain occurs from cold, moisture and large ventosity, if it is forced out of its natural composition by superfluidity; and the patient is treated as we have said in the divisions, but it does not benefit him. The patient should be made to lie on his backside; and three cauteries are to be applied according to this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, opposite the hypogastric muscles where the sides of the body come together; and there should be space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger. The cauteries should be long enough for the body, but not too much pressure should be applied with the hand to all the cautery; and only the middle part is to be burned, and the patient is to lie straight on his feet; if he cannot, he should lie down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And if your intention is so, cauterize these cauteries with the scalpel, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn too much, for you will scorch the entire body; and let it not reach boiling point, for the scalpels are very subtle there, and the wise one can see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the liver flesh or the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, the patient feels crazy pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this treatment goes beyond the muscles, then it is necessary that the patient lies down on his head; and then press firmly at the site where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a plowshare, as follows:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And cauterize the fire cautery as long as the skin is burned, and bring it up to the edge of the wound, so that it can be completely exposed; afterwards, treat according to the treatment for abscesses until it heals; and this cautery should not be used by anyone except one who has studied medicine for a long time, because many times these diseases have been corrected.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he can operate boldly, but I think it is better to wait a little longer.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said that one should apply plaster cauteries to the bladder using the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, dry it, make it as big and as long as your thumb; moisten it in oil, heat it over fire, and cauterize one cautery between the groin and neck, two small cauteries slightly descending in the part below the beard; two more near the fifth costal cartilage and the sixth, declining a bit behind a little; one at the anus, one above the stomach, one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the anus, far from the cautery between the shoulders; do not press your hand, but do it openhandedly, as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And some old men said that no man should use fire cautery like a razor, and they heat it up and put it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; then the pain disappears, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mice, that is as we have said in the division of cures and it does not help at all, then apply three ways of cautery, all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 There are several ways to perform the cautery, linking according to the length of the tumor, as described in the liver cautery we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on his back; another way of performing the cautery is to heat the cautery with two nerves, as shown in the shoulder dislocation; and remove the cavity that is near the tumor, or the incision where the patient's pain comes from, and raise the elevations you are removing the cavity according to the body cavity, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After placing the two nerves inflamed, burn them until they are pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four openings; if you see, cauterize all the openings with three cauteries.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After treatment when he has had pus for long time, and it is worth applying the other remedies mentioned before.
de ydropisie	The translation for this line would be "of hydropisia." Hydropisia refers to a medical condition in which there is excessive accumulation of water or fluid in the body tissues, specifically in the abdominal cavity.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cautery is not effective against dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When the cure according to the methods we have said in divisions does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the anus, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back near the spine, and one at the site of the pain; and let the cauterization be close to the edge of the wound.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the fire cautery cool for a long time to expel pus, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and the two intentions will be together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the clavicle as shown before; and that for the back is olive-shaped, as it has been previously described.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling on the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the feet are swollen in the person who is dropsical, and they are filled with what is called citrine, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and hold your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not go too deep, otherwise the citrine would be forceful; and make sure the cautery is in this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making .2 (two) cauteries in each leg with the tip of the knife; let the cauteries be long, one under the thigh in front and the other outside the leg; leave the cauteries over the wound to heal for a while until the water subsides; then take care of the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	swelling
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and retentive properties that are in the stomach and intestines are obstructed, it cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, do this: make one large cautery on the stomach according to what was mentioned earlier about the cautionary for the stomach, apply a circulating caution; and four subtle cauteries around the navel, each one a subtle clavicle cautery, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, apply cautery on the joint, one cautery on each joint, and two small cauteries on the stomach in addition to the large one, because the cure is beneficial where there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure for hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When the hemorrhoids are deep-rooted, either one or more, and they are old and filled with thick, cold, corrupt humors, and have been treated as described in divisions, and it does not help if you do cauteries: III on the spine of the back, that which is completely turned out from almecdate (?) hole by hole in a triangular shape, and the cautery should be under the belly; if you think the stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and the face swells, then the face is given a large cautery on the stomach as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with the entire cautery clavicle; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After healing the joint when it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the charnositeit which is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply the cautery to althelul, heat up the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it completely on top of the althelul being cut; and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, thus cutting the vein; do this once or twice, and if there is much althelul, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards, use the healing balm until it heals completely; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the alchatim, it will provide more aid.
de plaie mal curee	from an improperly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	If the patient cannot bear incision or opening, which we will explain in its place, this disease comes that can only be healed by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 If any abscess comes, and it is swollen, rotten, and corrupted with moisture, you should probe the whole cavity with a subtle needle, and ensure that you know exactly how deep the hole goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After cleaning the fire cautery which resembles a razor, put it in the abscess according to the depth that the cavity has gone, and continue the cautery until the body burns and is corrupted, once, or II or III times, depending on the amount of pus needed; beware of burning the nerve which is inside, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the abscess goes to the body of the bladder or intestine, beware of these places and do not perform this operation outside of a charnel house, thinking that it is not serious; after healing the joint when it is healthy, if the joint is sutured and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the joint is healed entirely; and if the matter has not been removed, know that the joint is broken and the bone corrupted in this way, as one of those which we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	on the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of cold comes to the kidneys and with large swelling, and it does not take in women, then you must perform cautery on both sides of the kidneys using the cautery claw that we have mentioned earlier; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be four cauteries in a row, and it will provide more significant aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold or moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery in the area outside of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on each side, and both should be as long as the knuckle; and make one cautery outside the back, or two if needed; and let the cauterization be clavicle-shaped according to the previously mentioned form.
de la marris	of the anus
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the anus is cold and moist, and cannot conceive, and the flowers (semen) are corrupted and their term ends late; and when they come, it causes great pain: then it must be done to him four cauteries around the buttocks, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back; and let the cauterization be clavicle-shaped, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hernia
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous hernias descend into the belly of the hernia, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and the location of the hernia can be seen visually in the area of protrusion; if so, you must cauterize the patient over the belly of the hernia with a cautery resembling a circle and sign before the hernia, as it turns, so that the hernia is within the circle; and if the cauterizing is like those who have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not available to you, make four large olive-oil cauterizes, and make sure the cauteries are as deep as all the others; and cure it until it heals.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hernia
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the swelling of the hernia, and it is due to coldness and moisture; the patient is treated as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not work, and the disease is ancient: therefore you must purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 Afterwards, perform the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: namely, burning together with medications, and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Cauterization with fire is according to many methods, one of which is as follows: you cauterize on the boil of the hernia in three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make it deep and wide, and have space between each cautery the size of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes cauterization is done in the middle on the top of the hernia's head, because there are four of them according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if you cauterize the cautery of the circular shape which we have mentioned earlier in dislocation of the shoulder; but do it in such a manner that the circles encompass the entire shoulder, and all the edges of the cavity are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when the pain remains in the lower back, and does not reach as far as the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 If it reaches as far as the thigh and leg, then II cautery is done where the patient says the pain is located, and the cautery is four fingers above the ankle, to the left side a little; and let the cautery be a surgical one, and let the thickness of the coagulum be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two feet or close to it, then cauterize where he feels the pain three or four inches from the cautery which is called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if you know that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with a cutlery or circular cauterizer, and take great care in all your cauteries not to burn the nerves and large arteries, and avoid causing greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I myself have seen many who have performed a fire cautery on the heel of the foot, and they let it become swollen completely, both the leg and the feet, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a belly solution where death occurred.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, perform a fire cautery on one and the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the wise men in fire cautery of the hunchback say that it should be done as follows: make the iron like a nail of a finger or slightly smaller and between the ribs or from one rib to another of the width of a nut of an inch; and let the iron be crossed over two parts, and they should resemble nooses, and there should be a hunchback of iron well made; this is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Let it be heated until it is completely red and scalded with hot irons, then place it on the sick person's hipboast (a term used to denote the iliac crest) and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with a hot iron and let it rest for 4 days; then apply an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly due to the fear of its sight, and few do so who employ it; however, this is one of the good cauteries which can endure it, and where it is used.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The hot cautery instrument in medicine is made by placing a handle between the crossbars inside, with a long arm of iron or steel on one side, and two such arms on the other, spaced as wide as two fingers; they should be open above and below, joining together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing the handle of the iron on the patient lying on his side, place your hand above the handle of the iron; then pour the hot round circle of coals heated in the fire pot between the two circles of the iron and leave it for an hour, allowing the patient to endure the heat and burning from them.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it burns like a bite and as the bite heals, take your hand with the instrument and lift the swelling gently, leave it for three days; apply butter so that the black scab falls off; leave it for three more days until the pus comes out; this will be the final help after the ointment treatment until it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, do the same instrument as you did in the swelling but gently, this is the way of hot water; and I have written it or treated it regarding the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take alkali and hot live coal, as much of one as of the other, grind them together and put in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 If there is a small opening in the skin except that the tip of a splinter can enter; place another heavy pot on top of it, and put alum, salt, and sweet oil above the powder so that you can easily pick up the powder with your hand; leave it like this until it dries down and becomes sticky or the pot is weighed down, then take all that stickiness, and pour it onto salt and alum as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 Then it will become hot and be administered in the movement of medical work and in the application of other member's cauterizations, for it works like fire, and if other medicines are applied to the anus, such as wax, honey, almond oil, salt with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galen tells us of a cure in which a man was cured from pain in the back and sciatic vein, and he praised it much, and said that no other cure was made for it, and that he became healthy once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as indicated below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he says that you take green and dry litharge powder and grind it with a little fat, then apply it to the back, to the thigh and to the leg where the pain is, and hold it; leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 Then make him enter or bathe until his body is slightly warmed, and have him lie down, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use such fire cautery as medicine unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is burned with goat's fat, it helps much; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take linen and anoint it with old oil, and put it on the furrow that is between the little toe of the foot and the one called the cubital fossa.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 Afterwards take dry goat's fat, heat it on fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the linen, leaving it in this state; then do it again in the same way, without stopping to do so until you think by your senses that it reaches the hainche, and that the pain is ceased; and this method of cautery is called "cautery of goat's fat.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either by falling or impact or excessive evacuation, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these resemble cauteries unless for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is required after this that the patient is emptied of fetid pills or similar things, which are placed on the back where the pain is, three lines signed with ink, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the power and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be made according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you see, make four cauteries or four at the middle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow anus when they defecate, and fear; and you will find it in the lower spine of the back and in its appearance which comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 The cautery causes each part of the spine to enlarge.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointing two or three lines, and let the tips be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the joint until it is healthy, according to what we have said, beware not to administer the cautery in a lump that might be within a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain in the joints is due to moisture that spreads to every member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which people call "podagra" properly, and when it is from cold causes and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this way: make the mould for the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary to prick the abdomen, then the entire cautery is applied like "the point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pains come down to the knees and other joints, which often happens, then apply cautery on each knee with three or four cauteries of olive oil on each side; and if more is needed, do more, but hold your hand away as long as the thickness of the coal remains.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to the genitals and back, administer the fire cautery as we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains are in the hands, do points around the wrist; and if there remains no pain at the fingers, do points on every joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come down to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and consider medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you take good care of him and purge pus, he will be saved with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of the sifac
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When hernia comes in anger, and the bulge descends towards the groin and this is new, it should be noted that when you wish to cure it, it must not eat anything that day; and it should use things which ease the stomach, so that the feces descend from the stomach. After doing so, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to pull his arm as far as possible towards the affected side, and then take hold of the bulge with both hands, and press firmly over the hernia above the bone of the little finger, and at a certain sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in the shape specified below:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it is white and gives off a smell.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then gather the bowels to their place; and the attendant marks his hand so they do not return; then open the thighs of the patient, and put the belt and servant on the thighs, and another on the affected side where he binds the hands; then place the cautery over the mark on your entire hand, hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not hit it the first time, try again until you reach the bone; be careful that the bowel does not rise when you perform the cautery; so as not to burn it; and so that the patient does not die or suffer further harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 The cauteries for children should be fine-tuned according to their size, and those of grown men according to their measure; after three days cure the wound caused by the cautery with butter until the blister is gone; then cure it with other remedies until it heals, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days while the wound heals properly; and it is necessary that his dressings be left long enough so that pus does not come out when he gets up to go to the chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after forty days, when he wants to get up, a well-made bandage should be provided for him and it should last another forty days; he should have good rest, so that he does not work too much or overeat and drink too much, and speak too loudly; and if he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And here I shall tell you about the treatment of amputation in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the wound from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When boils appear in other bellies and you see that they no longer grow, do the fire cautery according to their size, and burn the third of the belly; after that cure it as we have said; and none of the ancients said that it should be cauterized at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 However, mark first the location of the beginning and make a line above the boil, and another below it, and then place your hand on the entire cautery handle.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the initial cauterizations are lighter and more mobile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any limb, either from falling or being injured, and that pain lasts for a long time, and the medicines used do not help, it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery called "poins", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its nature and location of twisting and of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If the first cautery is healthy, that's good; but if it doesn't heal, repeat another cautery on the same one, for it is customary that it should change in the member nearby, so you must perform the cauteries until the patient heals.
de meselerie	To mix or compound (medicines)
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The illness is sometimes helped by cautery with great help, and the same applies to those who come from the rotting of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 Can you see the patient being cauterized? Take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we said in the division, and does not spread nor remain, and you doubt that corruption will affect the entire patient, then perform V cauteries on the head: take the head in hand, and the other towards the forehead to the end of the hair; and II on the two horns, and I behind the nape; and leave your hand until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the scabs come out, so that the vapors of the large humors can exit; and cauterize on the mice according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixture is scattered everywhere, it clearly perishes, then you must cauterize with the cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery on the nape of the neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the crotch and another opposite it, and two on each shoulder; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the ankles, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; beware of the nerves that are near the last calcant, do not burn them; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more you perform the fire cautery, the more aid it provides, and it benefits the patient; and know that the sick do not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy do, for this reason because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And the cautery should be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the manners of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the shoulder with flour and honey and other remedies until it is purified.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When swelling appears in any member and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters but is not purified, then you perform cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cautery be a little hole made into the thick part of the skin; then cure it with liniments until it is purified.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And sometimes a cautery is made on the hand, foot, and back, at the nerve exit that makes the member numb, and so if the flesh is removed; however, no one should interfere with it unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of swabs (or bandages)
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" occurs and the medical devices have no effect on it, then cauterize with a shallow cautery of a certain size according to the thickness of the skin, until the blister is removed and its color changes; then cure with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from colon and almonds, of each one part; and mix everything together, tie it up with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	They cure scrofula (scrofula is a term for a chronic skin disease, often associated with tuberculosis) through cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a boil appears at the beginning, and you wish to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that resembles a circle around the boil.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 However, the wise say that a cautery should also be made in the middle of the boil; however, this does not seem good to me, because I fear it may ulcerate and corrupt, and I have seen this happen once; a more proper thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circule," as we have said regarding cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	The inflammation which cannot move
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati," which is slow to heal or due to the excess it causes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (meaning very old) and has little blood, or due to the delay; and you see it hasten to heal: then cauterize it with many small cauteries around, pricking it; afterwards, let it be.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 When it will hasten to heal. (Continuing from the previous translation)
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced through entirely with the fire cautery, heat the cautery as follows:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" while the cauteries have pierced through the core, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them outside to such an extent that the course of the pus is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After curing completely when he is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	treatment with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another kind of disease is called "corrosion," and it is nothing other than a rot of the member, because it consumes limbs as fire dries up dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease in a place that can be treated with caution along with fire, then heat the cauteries small and large according to where the disease is; after cauterizing all around until you reach all the corruption and nothing remains of it, so that everything corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days and put on the affected areas soft powder made with oil until burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the treatment of ointments causing heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if you see after three days that healthy char has not appeared, it is good; and if not, renew the cautery on the corruptible part of the lesion.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this cautery has sometimes been cured by hot medicines instead of fire cautery; however, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for hot medicines in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The hairs which come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often, through the foot, a disease called "clog" arises according to our understanding, which is a large thing that bites at the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cauteries for this disease are in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 This is to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 The cautery of fire is to heat the iron as thin as a feather of a vulture, and it must be made of good iron that can pierce through all sides and have subtle margins; after that, put everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it comes out of the hole; and leave it like this for three days until it begins to purge pus; then make a plaster with wild herbs crushed with oil, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will be cut off and uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the joint with a soothing ointment until it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 And if it has been turned outward by the body and occurs often in hands and feet, you must apply hot cautery; it is to be done thus: take a cane of iron or copper, or a feather from a bird's quill, and place it on the nail and the affected area, that is to say, remove the warts; then place the cane so it presses all around, then put a bit of hot ashes there, hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot ashes penetrated deep to the root; and let the patient endure a bit of the biting of the hot ashes for an hour; then leave it, and it will be uprooted with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 Similarly, do as you did before, until you scorch all those within the body; then heal the burns that cause pain.
li cure dou trembler	The cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	For some who tremble from cold or nerves, or from quartan fever, or something else, it is necessary that you make four or five cauteries on the spine of the back, one between each spine; and one at the shin, and one on the stomach with olive oil cautery; this will stop the trembling, and the healthiness will depart from the illness.
des pustules puans	of putrid boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes, boils or putrid pustules appear on the body due to corrupt large matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 Firstly, when they appear, it is necessary to make a fire cautery on each head of the pustule: a thin cautery made from myrtle wood, so that the point is immersed in fire, or from the long root of aristolochia, or from the cautery lenticular.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And sometimes the cauterization is done at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluous matter from which they come is removed, and they become healed; however, it must be done after blood evacuation.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great discharges of blood from the cut artery at the wound that comes out to the exterior, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and similar things; it is a very grave thing to let it drain out.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in all cases, when it happens, quickly put your finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very firmly until the blood is stopped from flowing out; then take smaller and larger olive oil cauteries and heat them all to red; then take .i., whether large or small depending on the wound and the location in which the artery is located, and place the cautery on that vein where you have your finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood is stopped from flowing.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a jump occurs when you place your finger on the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take quickly another one of the cauteries that are near the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing one after the other until the vein is completely sealed; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is exposed, and avoid any other harm coming to the patient; and know that when blood stops flowing from the artery, it cannot be properly restrained if it is not through one of the four methods that we have mentioned: either by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to stop blood; and tie and hold it accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever applies tight bandages or places hot substances on it, or similar things, will not benefit if the above method does not help.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has no remedy or medicine present, then you should place your finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out until it is held in place above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but the cold moisture should be often applied that is very cold so that the blood remains congealed and thickened and held in place; and proceed with the investigation of the one in need of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have already told you in the first chapter about all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or hot medicine, and we discussed their origins, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I placed that chapter on the head down to the feet, and I will continue in this chapter in the same way so that those things which are more easily found can be understood.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you to not undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many ways of people come in the treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 there come those who are so afflicted with their illness that they die quickly due to the madness brought by their disease, and from the great wickedness of it; and these should be feared.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And there are those who give you their word and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the disease is treacherous.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 You should not easily consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more trust in your honor than your desire, and do not recklessly believe, but wisely of those from whom you are certain and have taken advice; and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation is achieved; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dearest son, may our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Moreover, I have organized this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have previously discussed from head to feet, because you will find it easier to understand those things that you may need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease often comes to children during childbirth, and sometimes it happens for reasons unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and for all those I have seen, death was swift; therefore, it seems to me that it is worthwhile to seek out remedies in various treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw an infant whose head was swollen with water, and it grew larger each day until it could no longer support it; and the moisture gathered under the bone above the siphatic, between the brain and the bone; and the procedure is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make an incision in the head a wide opening; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture can flow out; and here is the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscesses are larger, make two incisions in the form of a cross, as follows:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the signs that I show, the incisions where the head parts are open, and when you press it from inside with your hand, it does not respond; then you should make four incisions in the head as follows:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision, remove all moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 And after stretching the incisions with linen cloths and powders, apply vinegar and oil, leave it like that for five days; then release it, and treat the wound with cauterization and ointments, let the swelling subside gradually, and give the patient dry meat without moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to observe where the abscess is largest, and assemble the pus; because sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, cut where the abscess opens, and collect the pus, and make an incision accordingly as you can; but be careful not to cover the artery; and let blood flow out so that the patient may die in a proper manner from the loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheum
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "catarrh" affects any of the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old, and the medicine's cure does not help at all, then the last cure is the cautery with which two arteries will be touched.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Therefore, when you wish to cover it (the wound), the patient should lean back; afterwards, rub the area with a rough cloth on his neck until the arteries become visible; then hold the patient's neck with a rough cloth; look where the veins are located, and the left and right ones will be found behind the ears; then mark both sides with a sharp spatula of two fingers wide, cutting through to the bone, and this should be done by the side of the neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see (it), push the spatula beneath the artery and strike it from above, cutting as deeply as two fingers' width.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is cut, it jumps out without ceasing continuously upward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And if the arteries do not open by themselves, it is necessary that you measure the space of three fingers' width, then dig carefully and go up to the bone; and what amount of blood needs to be taken out is 6 cubic centimeters, and in case there may be a little more or less depending on what the patient can tolerate, and the filling of the artery; then observe the wound: if it remains over the bone without swelling, then the cautery that was applied does not reach it, then hold the wound closed and bind, and apply ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	From migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the old migraine comes with a sharp catarrh, due to moisture in the eyes and heat in the temples and ancient forsenee and similar things, and it is treated with medicines and cures, but none of them help, we should cut open the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient should bend down the hair on his temples, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well due to its beating, and can be found easily except in some cold men; and if it is found, the patient should pull out the neck of the artery with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and wet the place with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then gently peel back the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it up to the pulleys, and carefully separate the threads that are on both sides of it; and if the artery is fine, turn it at the point of the scissors, then take a piece from that side according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not cut, it will not heal at all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Then draw out the blood from the vein for six inches, and if the artery is large, you should tie it with a double strong silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound of the incision, and there is continuous flow of blood; then chop off the excess between the two cords at that hour itself, and if you see, then cauterize the cautery with the knife to the bone until the shoulders are chopped; this work is performed when the patient does not have fever and he has a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauteries are helpful for ending moisters: because it is of greater aid to moisters.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	1. In the extraction of arteries, one should fill the area with old cotton and place well-made tweezers on top; and when you pull them apart, heal it with dry medicines that cause heat, and with tweezers, until it is healed; and if there is no incision in the artery as you work, hastily cover it with cautery, or use vitriol and hold your hand on it to stop the bleeding; and if you don't have that available, place your finger on the area until it stops bleeding, and freeze the area with cold water frequently, and hold it as needed; and the more tender and lighter in the extraction of the artery is, the more you should cauterize the vein of this sharp cautery, but the incision should be thick to keep its heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have one fingerbreadth of space between the two blades, and then when you have signed both leagues, and heat the iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two leagues; and they should be spaced apart because the cautery is not welded to the entire thing throughout; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	Tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes run down the veins that are above the head of the fire, and no medicine cure helps it, and you see the patient wrinkle his face and feel feverish like shivers; and if they are tender and moist so that the hair on the scalp falls out, and the eyebrows are scalded and burned by the tears, this requires this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And they called it the "contused cure" in ancient times, and you should do this to the patient who has this illness, shave his hair from the forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to the length of the forehead; one cut as if it were passing through the forehead from above downwards until the nose, and the other two as the costal bones on either side of the paper, and be careful not to cut the arteries located on either side of the costal bones; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the lower jaw, and each wound should be the size of three fingers joined together; prepare a piece of sponge and much of cloth to wick away the blood, then insert the sharp spatula as described in this figure:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is above the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the cartilage that is between the two cuts along the bone, then do the other side from the middle incision to the second one, and then pull out this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	insert the instrument called "culter" (which is pointed on one side and soft, not pointed, and its shape is:)
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And cut the bone obliquely towards the skin according to your knowledge, and the bone is soft towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the mid-incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And shave all the hairs that descend from the head towards the incision until the incision is continuous up to the edge of the skin, and then do the other side in the mid-incision; and then equalize the blood and press the wound slightly, and press firmly on the bone for the blood taken; then put a piece of thick cotton in each incision, and put wet bandages soaked in vinegar and oil and asafetida, and ensure that no pus comes out; on the third day remove the sutures, and apply a large amount of fresh mustard paste, then treat with basil oil and other ointments for wound healing until it heals.
dou reume des eulz	the removal of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When a person comes with an acute catarrh, you usually see soft and small eyes, and the vision is dimmed, and burned paper particles; hairs fall out, and the head throbs in pain, and the patient coughs; then know by these signs that those substances and this catarrh do not come from anywhere else but from many veins, and the remedy for it, if there is one, is to cure the veins.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And you shall tell the patient to bend his head back, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another wide one in the cheek.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 Begin from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; once the bone is exposed, suck all the blood onto a sponge, then put cotton soaked in old linen between the lips of the cut and bind it with bandages soaked in wine and oil, taking care not to cause an abscess to form; once it is removed, you must rub the bone until char starts to grow, then treat it with things that promote the growth of flesh.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and make a plaster with it; administer it to these wounds to encourage char growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear stoppage (stopping/blockage of the ears)
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, beasts, stones or similar things such as iron; seeds, such as peas, beans, and lentils; or flowing substances like water and oils and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls into the ear stone or another thing that does not fit into the ear, does not lie in the ear, place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see a stone, distil a little purple oil or camphor oil and then apply extraction; have the person cough from the shoulders, and stop their nostrils when coughing comes, and place pieces of fabric or wool around the ear; and hold it above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Often farting occurs with this treatment; if it does not occur, extract the wind with fine tweezers in this manner:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it farts with tweezers, that's good; if not, bring extraction with a fine thin hook; and if it does not fart with this, make a cane of beeswax and push the head of the cane or the hole of the ear forcefully, and stop the area around the cane with molten wax so that air cannot enter with the cane; then pull it out carefully, as often times it will fart in this way; and if it does not fart in this manner, take glue from where you get it, put it on any instrument that is sharp for this purpose, put some cotton around it; then press the glue against the stone or whatever it may be and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not jump out of all these things that we have said, then you must hurry to cut the ear before abscess pus comes and spasms; and the method of cutting is that you first anesthetize the patient with the cephalic vein, and draw blood according to the measure of its power, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear where the fat or the meat hangs; and let the cut be like a moon, until you reach the bone, then break it as best as you can, and suck quickly with your mouth; and the cure lasts until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is pus that is swelling, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer one thin, subtle sponge according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 make an incision of that grains.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not do this if you think the grains are moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with fine tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is even.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In water that falls into the ear, the patient should use warm gargles of first remedies, and fill the ear with large cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let him lie on that same ear itself where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it jumps out because of that, it's good. (This line refers to the cotton in the ear staying in place.)
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If it does not jump out, take many small and light pebbles according to the size of your finger, and heat them slightly in fire; then let the patient take one or more of his fingers and place it into the ear on that side, and press with a stone from the other side on the stone in the ear; and do not stop making stones strike stones until the water completely escapes, and so jumps out entirely; and if you see, take a cord, and push one of the fingers into the ear, and the other end grasp fire as much as the cord gets burned; then change the cords with others until the water completely escapes, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of animals, if it is small like fleas and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large that can be felt, introduce tweezers for extraction; and it is easier to remove whatever is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the removal of parasitic worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and use distillation methods, and the cure does not help; if you observe no worms, take a piece of this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And insert the thin end into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient is experiencing, then press firmly on the entire jawbone; do this repeatedly until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 If they do not obey and come out, stop the jaw with cotton as I said in the previous section; if they do not swell further as we have mentioned, administer distillations that the ancients have tested for expelling worms, and you will find their methods or instructions for preparing distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this tool, the shape is as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	Let it be made with silver or tin narrowly to a small opening, and above wide for distillation; and for pressing the distillate into one instrument of tin well made for this purpose, take one scraper and wrap around its point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you choose from your medicines into the cane, and let it be in the ear; then push the scraper into the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or turned over in the ear; and the patient should smell the scent inside, and the distillate should be heated with a small flame as if you were distilling it in the ear; but make sure it's not too cold, for the medicine will not be effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear stoppage (stopping/blockage of the ears)
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any ear defects; and this same thing happens in men due to an injury of the ear, or pus born within the ear, and this injury sometimes goes all the way into the ear, if one cannot see it; and sometimes it only affects one side of the ear, and one can clearly see it.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, if it goes all the way into the ear and cannot be seen, it is grave treatment in many conditions, and in that case you must put the diseased ear in the sun and look inside: if you see the pus appearing, then open it with this spatula as shown here:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be careful to make it sharp both in front and behind so that it does not pierce the ear; if the pus is from pus or flesh of the ear, then hold the tweezers subtly and gently remove it until all the pus is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the tumor has invaded fully into the ear, take a sharp, thin scissors and heat it slightly in fire, then insert it into the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If you feel the tumor that causes the patient discomfort in the ear, make a small incision carefully, taking care not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a bandage according to the size of the wound and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Keep the dressing moist with rose water and powdered vitriol for each day until the wound is healed. If you see the ear swell up, it is necessary to remove the dressing and replace it with another moistened dressing made of rose oil and beeswax until the swelling goes down; then treat it until it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other treatments to stop the bleeding which are either cauterization or distillation treatments.
de la char des papieres	Of the flesh of paper (meaning "skin")
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is a remedy for hair that comes from the skin when it is moist and dry; you should stretch them with tongs and tweezers, and strike at their roots with a spatula; then apply powdered vitriol to the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it cannot be plucked out (the hair), then cauterize with the subtle cautery of lentil seeds, and cauterizing after incision is useful; and many times they heal, because nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, the roots burn away and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the hail (meaning "hardened lumps under the skin")
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Often in the paper there come certain things that seem to be hard and durable in shape, and because of this it is called "papery tumor," and it is a large assembly of moisture in the paper above and below; the treatment is such: watch carefully if the papery tumor becomes soft from both sides, and it is an easy thing to know; then make a wide opening, then scrape off each part gently, then take the tweezers, and squeeze.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot cover it with something and pierce a little bit of paper without causing any harm to the patient, do nothing; if the wound is large, gather it together with stitches and let it heal as long as it heals; if it is small, do not use force because the ointment restores it soon and causes pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	If the grandine descends inside the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, grasp the grandine with pliers and crush it and press from both sides; if the paper is pushed back by the incision, do not worry; when the grandine is crushed, apply saltwater oil and care for the area that causes harm until the patient heals.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 The ointment is spread on the paper cloths above them, and this happens more often with children than with adults, and it causes much pain to their eyes, and they have catarrh in the mornings, and cannot bear the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; therefore, they lie down on their faces immediately, sleep, and keep paper cloths moistened under their eyelids that swell and cover the ointment which opens in oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel something exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of work is that the patient places their head on a clean surface; then take one linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach from each part, then place it over; press with your hands on either side so that the exinach is enclosed within the circle; then make a slit in the center of the moistener with a sharp lancet, but not larger than the wound made for venesection; and cut the skin completely until you see the exinach; and from various positions comes exinach from the incision, according to the form of a white piece of fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take a piece of coarse cloth between your hands and turn your hand to the left and right until it is spread; and ensure that you do not stray in the incision, that you come entirely to the oil, that you do not pierce it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the incision does not open at the beginning of the cut, lift a little on the cut lightly until it opens; then pull out as we have said, then moisten cloths in oil and vinegar, and place it on the wound, and hold bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if such men who grind linen and put it on top to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal it until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess hot to the joint comes, then heal it with plasters soothing until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	hair from paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper-like growths grow on the eyelids other than nature, and are nourished, they harm the eyes, and cause diseases such as customary tears and swelling of the paper-like growths, until it leads to the destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways of cure: either by cautery with fire, or by medicine for ague according to what is mentioned in the previous chapter on cautery, or by incision and stitching, or by caustics, as I shall explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must put the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper-like growth on the eye towards your left hand; if it is reversed, that is good; if not, poke an awl with one thread over it; and cut off the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow from these hairs, and pull one thread along the entire length of the paper, then shave it; then make a hole in the part below the paper, under the hair-like growths, all the way from the great tear to the small one; then pull out one thread, and place a small tent made of cotton and linen under the paper, then sew a figure similar to the comb of the blackberry bush, and regardless of its shape, it must be according to the quantity that you see needs to lift the paper which is designated for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And if there is a need to apply a large amount of paper, as the paper is softened; then place the entire sponge on top of the two lines you have marked, starting from the large blister and ending at the small one; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the onion into one of the two angles of the keyhole, then peel everything; then bring the two lips together with a stitch of a thin linen thread and squeeze the blood, and remove the excess length of threads on top of the two scissors with anything sticky, if you wish to do so; otherwise, if you don't want to do it, leave the stitch and threads for three or four days; then heal the wound without stitches with drying and binding agents, as the paper revives at the edge of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitch is spoiled (as they say), and this is a laborious work without fear; and if in another way: it is that you sign the paper with a figure similar to the leaves of myrtle, as we have said, at three onions separated according to the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then fold what is above the small areas equally according to the shape shown below:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not even, take a needle with thread, and insert it into the figure; insert the other thread through the large incision, and the third thread through the small one, and align the threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift the skin as you have said, then sew the two edges of the wound together by stitching, and heal it until it is healed; if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointment and similar soothing ointments; sometimes the hair from the paper is converted: if this occurs, you must use what we have said about the incision; but stitching in one and the other is more artistic.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds is as follows: and it is that you fold the paper and place it inside according to what I have said, and then make two stitches by hand, and two thin threads equally long as the paper and the thickness of the spatula; take hold of the two corners with these threads; next, bring the two stitched parts together subtly over the top of the folded paper covered by oil, and bind the two stitches from the two sides together; leave it for some days, and the skin that is being bound will die, rot, and fall off, leaving the wound open.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it takes a long time, if it is struck with force, then heal it until it heals; and when the wound is stitched up, and the paper is raised, and the hair will no longer grow; this is the shape of the two canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you take a fine needle, and insert one silk thread of the same fineness; then bring the heads together delicately, and let the length of the threads be about a palm's length; then assemble another fine silk thread briefly, tie the ends of the thread; then put the patient's head in your lap; and expose the operations to the sun so that they are visible, for it is a delicate and small operation, then pierce the needle through the entire chase in the root of the hair adjacent, and make it pass quickly through the skin until you pull it over the natural hair; then remove the hair up to the chase, and insert the removed hair into the chase if there is one or two or three or more; then stretch your hand so that the hairs come out from under the chase with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will pull the chase away to where the thread you ordered has been placed, so that the chase comes out through the hole and can be seen by oil vision; then you will pull the chase and the thread, close the wound and the opening, and leave it for 2 or 3 days, until the hair adheres in its place and new flesh grows; if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from natural growth, and let it grow with that one until it is elongated and then clean it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the corruption of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or pustule comes in the eye, it can come in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens suddenly due to a wound or injury, or by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 The method of work in it is that you cut the suture, separate the lips from it, put tents of linen inside and tie it until it heals; you must not use in the treatment of it things that dry out or constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 If you do this, the disease becomes worse than before; but with things that soften it, such as fenugreek; and the juice of watercress or lettuce and flax seed cooked, and immediately afterwards dissolve darnel in any oil, and wrap it in a cloth and apply it to this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you keep it from healing in the same way as it was before; and this work we have said is not without remedy for this disease, so that it does not return in the same way as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the chyle which comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauteries and things similar; and the method of work in it is that you take a needle with double thread, and pierce it through the char, so that the threads come out into two cheeks of the char; then place the char above the entire needle, and crush it with a large spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the shoulder shape returns as it should, that is good; if not, take the rasp and place it in the cleft, turn the shoulder, and make two clefts on its inner side where the shoulder was cut; let the bones of the two clefts be at the two angles of the incision you made, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a Greek letter 'I'; then remove that cartilage, according to the thickness where the shoulder meets it, under the skin; then join the two separated parts with a thread of linen; then apply the medicine we mentioned for softening and healing until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the illness comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, it is necessary to make a flat incision beneath the hairs of the shoulder, as described above; then separate between the two edges of a linen cloth, as I have said; and one should perform the operation according to the shape of the illness, because it is very different in shape, and wise masters prepare engines of all possible power to make the figure return to its natural form. The patient themselves, according to what is necessary for the operation and the application of instruments in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	the sudden dislocation of the shoulder
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture happens in the hands of men in such a way that the paper above is sealed with white oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor blade beneath the paper, lift it up; hold it with tweezers, until you grasp what is near the spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too deep so as not to cause pain to the patient because the spatula is too sharp and pierces the oil; and your incision, from which you scrape that assembly, should be light, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and the whole assembly heals, and sometimes there is infection in the sharp oil and leaching of sweet water and colic; then put a linen tent between the paper and the oil and place moist wool on top abundantly of egg; and after the third day use the colic and other healing things until it heals.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is of two kinds: one is nerve-like and resembles a hard horn, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles white frozen moisture; when it is touched by iron and boiled in tweezers, it cannot be moved; and both appear starting from the large root and grow little by little until it covers the entire eye and all light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient places his head in your hand, then you pull out the hairs; then take some paper in your hand, then pinch the nail with small tweezers, and extend it; then take a needle, and put on it a horse hair or cow hair or ox hair, and one strong thread; bend the tip of the needle slightly and poke it into the nail, pierce through it entirely, tie the nail with the thread, and extend it above; then scrape off all the skin surrounding the nail root, down to the flesh around it, including the gristle and sinew up to the head of the nail, then chop the remaining part in the root of the nail up to the quick, and scrape off all the subtle tissue and small forces, leaving only the natural flesh or root; and sometimes the nail should be extended only onto the onyx alone, and the thread, as we have said; then scrape off all the soft tissue surrounding it, as described in this form.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the tissue does not touch the flesh and break it, and that the gristle is not pierced; and after the incision pour oil a little amount of broken seed oil, and make a collyrium from litargirium, and leave it until the next day; then treat it with whatever is necessary until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerve-ridden and you cannot push the needle in, and the onions cannot enter, it is often cured with medicines for this kind of nail; and they grow as I mentioned in the division, and if you see it covered, open the oil of the patient, and take a sharp spatula according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And the nail above shall be finely reamed, and if you see that it does not shrink at all and the reason persists, distill oil of collyrium made from litargyrium and red collyrium and crushed sulphur from your mouth into it; anoint the oil until the next day; then repeat the procedure according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing prevents you in the oil, as in the treatment of an abscess, first milk it, and heal the abscess hot until it is healed, then repeat the procedure as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the sore harms the oil greatly, suspend it at the onion and chop a part of it and not all, so that tears do not come from it; then distill into the oil collyrium red which is made of litargyrium.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the flesh which grows upon the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 For some men, a red pustule occasionally grows over the fingernail and covers the skin and turns it towards the palm and resembles a rosebud from balustrade; and the treatment for this is that the patient places their head on the healthy part, then you operate on the nails, and all of that pustule should be cut with appropriate incisions according to its shape, and hold it in place with force; then strike the first part of the pustule, and continue cutting until smooth to the end, making sure not to pierce the oil at the operation; and make an incision similar to the spatula as mentioned in the treatment of the nail and small forces of which one removes the gravel, as shown by this chapter's form; and when the incision is completed and all the pustule is removed, use oil of seil broken or distilled red collyre resembling corrosive medicines, and place cotton with egg white on top to ensure heat over the wound; and if anything remains, or the wound becomes cold, and you doubt about a hot abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with calming agents for a hot abscess; then return to your operation until it is healthy, and do the same with all pustules treated in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, you must treat each small wound with natural means; and for an accidental wound, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Should be red veins that are covered on the oil, and they drain their work and weaken the oil day and night.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Therefore, at the beginning you should examine the oil in which the red veins are present and have no other disease except for the sebel; then proceed as follows: instruct the patient to place their head on your healthy side, then press those veins all along for a while according to your wisdom, and let the pressure be subtle double as shown in this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be two points in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then make these veins subtle and gentle, and squeeze the blood out one after another, until you see them moving away from the oil; and be careful not to pierce the oil with the tips of the spatula-like instruments, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so as not to burn those veins; and when you have done that, if it distills green and red oil into a colander for correcting what is congealed within the blood.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect everything in that time, make a plaster on the oil with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and the abscess is certain to heal warmly, then continue as before until it is healthy again; and this is the form of the pressure:
de la fistule de l’oil	From the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The ulcer called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I said earlier, and it is not healed, there is a trap in it that you cut open above the abscess where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, you will see the corruption and the blackness; if the joint is all the instrument as in this form; it is called "rough head", and it should be made straight by heating a rod of iron as shown here.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Place the exposed bone in your hand, then turn it between your palms and press your hand slightly until you know that the corruption is restored; do this once, then restore the position of healing herbs.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the joint is fused, and char (perhaps cartilage) grows in it, and the body of the bone remains fused for forty days without renewal or becoming abscessed, and no serious accident occurs, knowing that it is healthy; if not, there is no other means but to bring the fistula back to the neck of the bone according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicines heated, and when it has been uncovered, take the awl according to this form, and let the point of the awl be at three angles, and the shaft be attenuated up to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place it on the bone at the corner of the eye socket, and move your hand away from the oil hole (possibly a small pit or opening), then turn the awl completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the veins if they keep their hand on their neck; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when cartilage grows and hardens the joint, the matter goes to the neck; it is a simpler thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the dislocation
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the eyes are fully open and cannot be reduced or diminished in any way, you must tie the patient down; then clean the area with warm water, apply a plaster made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolle, and then secure it using bandages and cloths. The cloths should be soft enough that they can be folded four times and stacked one on top of the other according to the size needed; then secure them with a stiff bandage and renew the plasters without cutting to allow the area to heal. When the plaster has dissolved, remove it and if the eye is healing, it is good; if not, repeat the application of the plaster, cloths, and bandages until the eye heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The double rupture of the ruptured membrane.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the ruptured membrane, and fumigations come out like grains of resin, and it is frightening to see; then if you find it covered, the treatment is such that you thrust an awl into the root of the affected area from beneath up to where it is above, then another awl with a double thread from the edge of the tear; and make it pierce through, and leave the first awl according to its position; then tie the end of the double thread around the eye of the membrane and tighten it well, then withdraw the awl and apply soft oiled linen on top; and let it stay until the threads grow with the membrane, then heal the oil from healing substances as long as the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is held in place by the membrane from both sides of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show great appearance, pierce it with a fine spatula coming from oil, remove the white albugine and drain the eyes, then insert a probe immediately; then withdraw it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the bowl of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This illness called "alcunnati" is not far from being assembled in oil, resembling an abscess draining, but it is not an abscess; and the manner of its appearance in the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and upright, then take the head between your hands on both sides, and move it until you see the abscess rise above your eyes; then it should be lanced, and the abscess and light should not drain, and let the patient observe things as he used to; and if it does not drain below, know that it is an abscess, and if the draining of the abscess is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the thin spatulum and place it on the corneal membrane (the conjunctiva with the cornea) I-point, pressing until the bubble forms; and when it is issued, distill into the sharp hot oil mixed with honey, or boiled water and honey, or fenugreek water, then treat it with another cure until it heals.
des aigues de l’oil	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have the appearances of eyes in the division, and what is required for piercing; if it works according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands in a cross shape (cross-legged), away from sunlight, and hold the oil swab tightly; then put the paper of the oil in your left hand if the eye is on the left side, or in your right hand if the eye is on the right side; then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the eye is on the left side, or in your left hand if the eye is on the right side; then put the point of the instrument against the cornea along the thickness of a nail in that white part of the oil at the lower eyelid, then push the almagda instrument skillfully, and hold your hand firmly until it penetrates the white part of the oil, and feel when the almagda reaches the empty space; and the measure of the almagda path should be to the end of the measurement from the pupil to the end of the black line; this is the cornea of the eye, and you will see the bone in the paper due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then place the instrument until it reaches the place where the oil is, then press it gently and carefully.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If the wound begins to drain now, the patient sees it before him and the instrument in its oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After a little rest, if the wound begins to drain again along the second path, apply force with the instrument, and when it is pushed in and will not go deeper, gently twist your hand around it; then insert another piece of gemstone oil within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then pour in the oil of lavender or moistened cloth soaked in rose oil and abundant egg, and bind it with the oil of lard.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, and those of our time, place a thin layer of beaten egg white on top.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard hairs, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is shaped like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 Therefore, pierce only the conjunctive, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then push in as much as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare the patient for sleeping in that dimly-lit room where he sleeps on his back; and be careful of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head either to the right or left, and tie him according to his disposition until the third day; then untie him in that same dimly-lit room, test his vision, and have him look at certain things, and then rebind him until the seventh day; and you should not perform this, except during the cure or after the incision now, but you should alleviate it because the wound rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If an abscess has come to a head, you should lance the oil before the seventh day, and direct it towards that which soothes abscesses; and when it is appeased, then you should drain the eye (of the abscess) and put silver ointment over its opening for covering any day, and remain in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And then leave the house little by little, and turn to your cases; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country, they make almagda piercings, which causes bleeding, but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, nor have I ever heard of it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the resemblances of almagda forms, because those who do not know them see them; and they should be of arain properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the heads of these should be of the same subtlety, and the rear in four angles sharp.
de la char sor le neis	On the flesh near the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 Sometimes births or are born diverse kinds of boils, among which some resemble scorpions in shape; and if there are such as have the boil swollen with black color, and if the boil is soft of bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In that case of the soft cartilage which is not swollen, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, and pour the onion juice into those cartilages, then pull them out; afterwards hold what you can support with a pointed, sharp spatula on the other side until you know that the cartilage is completely detached.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains that cannot be held, you should cut it with very thin and light instruments until nothing is left; and if there are abscesses or wounds, use the remedy as appropriate; and if these are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize them so that the pus is drained and all the growths are removed, then pour onion juice or vinegar onto the wound.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If it does not open and moisture reaches the palace (the nose), know that it is sound; if moisture does not perforate as it should, know that there is a cartilage grown on the bone above, so the instrument will not come to cut: then you should tie a large piece of linen thread with your hands and leave enough space between each knot; put the patient's chin into the thread loop in his mouth as far as he can, and pull it out while smelling until it comes from his nose; and children at school often do this, and it is easy for whoever wants to perform it; then hold the head that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know which one comes after the other by us who are at the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Make sure you know that they have corrupted the flesh there, then draw out the pus, squeeze the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in place as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has corroded everything that remains of the flesh; and then put a plaster of wood on it for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, as one distills oils and medicines in the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and lead it thus; and if you see (a tumor), make a closed cane, and let the instrument be filled with oil or any liquid to purify the bladder; and have one handle on the bladder to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	On the flesh near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	In the head of the nose often arises a disease called 'telul', which grows and becomes large, appearing noticeable to the eye; therefore it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and burn it completely with cautery or hot medicine; and if it is delayed in being cut until it has become large, beware if it is hard, of a dark color, poor sensation: do not touch it with iron as this is an abscess inflamed, for when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is soft touching, not dark colored, you can cover it completely, but be careful that the patient does not feel fear, and treat the area with drying and constricting agents.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and closed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 When solutions come continuously into one of these work cartilages, it helps little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, when such a thing happens to anyone, look if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring together the two lips with a stitch, heal it until it is healed; and if the lips have already separated from both sides, you must cauterize all their parts with lime until they heal, then bring together the two lips with a stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood and finely ground incense on top; place a piece of plaster of strong or another kind that adheres, on top of the powders, and let it stay until it burns through it, then heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of stitching is that you bring together the solution: either with needles, as I have told you in the abdominal stitching; or with thread, as we said before.
des apostemes des levres	of the lips of an abscess
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	For men, within the lips there occurs an abscess hard, resembling grains of peas, smaller and larger; then you must turn the lips, cut above each tooth, take it with pincers and crush in every part; afterwards apply the leech (leive) juice after the incision of vitriol powder, until the blood is stopped; then apply the lard (aisil) to the wound until it heals.
de la char des gencives	From the jawbone
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often, a swelling arises on the jawbone, which the ancients called "albulus"; you should hold it with tongs and crush its root, letting the blood flow; then apply vitriol powder or other drying powders to the area; if the swelling returns after the incision, as often happens, then you should crush it again and cauterize; it will not return after being cauterized; these are the forms of tools for covering.
des sordens	The sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes sores are assembled at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs which are ugly and harsh; and sometimes the teeth turn black and greenish and decay, as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth smell; you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head should be in your lap, and scrape the sores or the scabs that appear, until there is nothing left; and do the same with the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowish and other spots, as long as they are cleaned; and if you remove what is at the first sign, it is good; if not, repeat on the second day and the third, as long as you have finished everything; and know that the teeth require various types of instruments for scraping, according to what the work shows, because the one who scatters the teeth has different shapes than the one who scrapes between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary that when you treat the tooth of its pain, you delay pulling it out as long as possible, for this should not be done; for this is a very high substance up to where there is no excuse for shaving.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then, when the patient is compelled to draw (something), it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth pulling.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Often the patient feels pain and believes that it is a bad tooth, and tries to draw out the healthy tooth; however, the pain does not stop until the bad one has been removed, as we have seen with such patients; and when you are certain of the tooth pulling, you should first sharpen the instrument around the tooth in all directions; then move it towards your fingers or delicate pliers at the root end bit by bit, until it is loosened, then firmly hold the pliers; and keep the patient's head between your thighs, and hold him tightly so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After straightening the tooth without breaking it, if it does not come out on its own, take any of these instruments and gently push it from each side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if the tooth is pierced and eaten, it is necessary that you fill it with bandages where the wounds are; and gently tighten it with pliers so as not to break it while tightening; and it must be operated very carefully around the gums to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And be careful not to break it and leave a part of it, and the tooth will remain in place longer due to the mischief of the root, causing the patient greater pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And beware that you do not act as the ignorant lords do, who by their haste and bravery sometimes break a chariot, and never bring what we have mentioned; but they sometimes bring about any harm from this great disease through the roots that remain or through the chariot that is broken, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine or vinegar and oil; and if bleeding comes forth, which often happens, use vitriol powder; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, with which one silences the teeth first, should be long points and large handles, so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be large enough so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of good iron, and be toothed for gripping.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the roots remain after pulling a tooth, you must put on the place cotton soaked in butter for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 While the shoulder joint is crushed, put the forceps called "algefri" inside, which resemble a beak for healing; and they should be shaped like a chisel on the inside. This is its form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tools, then you must expose the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as forceps, in this shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	Be large and thick so it does not break, and if the root jumps out with them, that is good; if not, help with all the instruments, as the shapes come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you aid with this instrument having two arms, in this shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are before the teeth, and of this tool that appears like large pincers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this tool should not be breakable, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other tools, which are not counted; and the wise master finds his own instrument by himself, according to what his work and the disease show, because there are such diseases where the ancient ones did not teach any instrument due to diversity in ailments; and if it breaks a cart or another bone where it should not, then it searches for the tools that are required, which I have told you, and assists with gestures, as follows:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be large and firm to hold the bone, so that it does not slip, but can hold and remove; then restore the place of medicines suitable for this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, then apply all this tool:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to natural shape and are misshapen, even in virginal women, you must know if the tooth is not born after the dent, and is not properly aligned, and cannot be treated or filed: then cut it off; and if it is erupting with the tooth, take this instrument which has the form of a small beak, sharp at the tip, made of iron;
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the handle of the chisel should be held often for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, file it with a small flat file as shown here:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is like the file used to make needles; and with the flat file grind the tooth little by little, so that it does not move too much while grinding; then flatten the end at any rasp, and if the tooth is very sharp and bites the tongue, you must grind away the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the teeth are loosened by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press on them without them chattering, and you have cured them with binding medicines, it is of no use; they should be restrained with a gold thread, for silver threads become green and rot, but gold never changes; and the thread should be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth; if you see the teeth aligned, take the thread and double it between the two loose teeth, then put the forceps between the loose teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then resume the covering up to the part where you started, and hold your hand gently but firmly, so that they do not move; and tie the thread at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then sew the shoulder bones with a needle and tweezers, and put them back between the healthy joint, and place it so that it does not pierce the tongue; then leave it as tight as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the thread breaks, hold it in place with another thread; if it stays and serves thus for its entire duration, this is the shape of teeth and the form of the alignment of the two healthy joints and the two bones, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out and is replaced back in its place, freshly and as we have said; let no one interfere who is not skilled and patient, and sometimes the shape of an animal bone is made and placed where it is missing, and it is tied as we have said, and remains for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 There is sometimes a ligament that comes under the tongue or is born thus, or due to accidental wound healing; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, hold his head still, and lift the tongue; then sew the nerve ligament wide enough until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or not, it is a deep wound, and sew the unguis and widen the one that is ligamented; and ensure that the incision is not too deep, for the artery that is below; and when you have done this, raise the affected limb with warm water and oil, then place a linen tent under the tongue; and bind the patient's head each night so the limb cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And when blood discharge occurs, place it on the level of vitriol powder; and if it refuses to stay, cauterize with slow fire (slow-burning fire), which is good for this purpose; then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see it of a faint color or black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer; and if it's declining to blenchor and there is moisture, then insert an uncine and make a small incision with a thin spatula from both sides; and if the wound doesn't heal at your treatment, apply vitriol powder until it stops bleeding, then return to your treatment until you remove all the pus; then apply a cold compress and let it heal with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Sometimes boils called "godath" come inside the throat, which are properly called "the two almonds". And when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 If it is red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron, likewise for the blood discharge; but leave it until it becomes ripe, and then you will divide it, or it would break by itself; and if it is of pale color again, and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it, but first check that the abscess is not hot and has been pacified.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his shoulders be in alignment, and open his mouth wide and the sergeant takes hold of it between his hands, and presses the tongue under all the instrument, as shown here; and it should be made of silver or fine iron like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Keep pressing the tongue on the entire instrument and you see the abscess. Then take the hook and stick it into the almond, and pull it up more than you can; and draw any cloth away with it, then cover it with the instrument, forming something that resembles a fist. However, the chief are curved and one end to the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or brass:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this tool present, use pliers of this shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	Then when you have caught one of the almonds, take the other according to the same manner, and after incising, gargarize the patient with hot sharp and thin instruments, and if there is evacuation of blood, then gargarize the patient again with hot sharp and thin instruments, or scorches of pomegranates cooked or myrtle branches, and similar things, until the wound is cauterized; then let it heal completely; and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat instead of the two almonds, if these appear, cut them in the same way as the two almonds.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And so I treated a woman of an abscess that was inside the throat, to wit, the abscess of small size; and had tightly closed all her throat, such that the woman could not exhale due to the constricted passage, nor eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so swollen that it had risen to two fingers above the two openings of the throat.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 Then I immediately inserted it into one [the patient], afterwards pulled it forcefully and a large portion of the bone; afterwards I reset another fracture in the other shoulder, opened his mouth and pressed his tongue; then I inserted the bone again into these abscesses, and took a part of it, and no more blood came out except a little; and thus the woman was led from the throat, and began to drink cold water and then wine, and did not cease to cut down the abscess for a long time; and the abscess closed up again, filling the place that I had seen empty, until it became very large; then I tricked him and cauterized inside his throat; thus it remained without growing; and I left those parts, and let God do what He would with them afterwards.
de l’uve	Of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When the rectum protrudes to the outside and it is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and rounded, it is called "bladder".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is treated as we said in the division and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscesses have calmed down, and it is subtle, you should cut it; and if it is rounded and not long, and it is bloody or of pale color or black, you should make the incision for it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it, according to the way that I have said, of its thickness and length, you should make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue on the instrument as we have reminded before; then insert the probe into the bladder, pull it out, and cut it with the two instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the two anuses.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And it is necessary that you not cover any superfluity which is beyond the natural term; for if you do so more, it harms the voice and the word; and after the incision, use what was said in the incision of the II amandres, and heal it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 If the patient fears covering (it), then you must use an engine for the cauterization to allay his fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the method of cauterizing is with hot iron.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the patient must place his head in your lap, and then press his tongue against the instrument that was said in the chapter of cauterizing, and fix with hot live coal, so it is not too thick nor too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has hair or some substance that you can put medicine on, such as the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument entirely over the medicine on the uvula; and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine but do not reach the throat or the pharynx; then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it against the uvula, for about half an hour until you see it redden and the bites of the medicine are calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument with all the cotton on top of the uvula, allowing the cotton to stick to the uvula; and repeat this process until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. If you need to start the cautery again using the medicine, do so, and after the cautery rinse around the uvula with cotton dipped in burr, clean what is around the medicine; wash with cold water and treat with gargarisms until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more effective than incision, not just cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this way, take camomile, yarrow, origanum, rue, and wormwood, and put them all together or some of them in one pot, add ashes, and make it boil; the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and have one vessel with a cover inside the pot according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And it should be of silver or tin, and one of the heads pushed into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is made rotten; afterwards it often occurs, until the eye dries up, and ensure that you do not do this at the beginning of the abscess heat, for many things happen; and do not ever do this but at the decline of the abscess heat.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 And if this is not present, take a canal and put an eggshell crack inside the head of the patient so that his mouth does not become too hot; for the eggshell crack will not let the steam overheat the mouth, and it is good treatment together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often it sticks in the throat, bone or fish spine, or something else; therefore you should pull out what can be seen, and press the tongue against the sun until you see movement of the object; and if it does not open and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps this will expel the object. Or, the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cotton, or a radish root, or a small piece of dry bread; tie one thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; when it reaches the place, it will stick, and then you can pull it out. And if it does not come out as we have said, take a piece of wood according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and lift the head high; watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, so that nothing harms it or pushes the bone inward; it is better if the patient puts the instrument, because he can move it or the thing is easier to move; if he pushes it down, or pulls it out completely, keep the instrument equal until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	the vein of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Sometimes the patient is cured without medication, as I have said in the division, by the use of medicines; and when it does not help at all, then look into the throat of the sick person towards the sun, because you press the tongue with the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see the pus, pull it out very gently, or use subtle tweezers that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that does not work, take a hairy rope and put it in the throat of the sick person, then insert or push into the throat the hot iron several times.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And let the patient drink water all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, pour it in such a way that it flows down the throat and is swallowed, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the pus senses the water, let it fall out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 And if it [the dislocated limb] does not fall as we have said, you should subdue the patient with anesthetic, at the instrument I mentioned in the uve fumigation; do this many times, for it will require much [treatment].
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The method of fumigation is that you take the pot or one containing charcoal, and cover it with a cloth perforated in the middle, and put the head of the instrument inside; then pour your fumigation into it, and make the patient hold the end of the tube in his mouth and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape but comes only to his sinuses; and the sinuses will now open, and if it [the dislocated limb] does not fall, repeat the fumigation many times; and the patient should suffer from thirst, and eat salty things and almonds, and drink nothing of water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out by this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument to treat the nose, is like scissors curved for entering the throat; and resembling the beak of a syringe, and it should have sharpness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and see below its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	Chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 Many resemble an abscess, according to what comes after in this book from one and the other, and they differ in perforation and incision; and it is in two ways that one of them is similar, and when it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is by the joints that are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 For abscesses of the head are different from those on the base, and abscesses in the shoulder blade are different from those that come at the joints; each should have its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if there are abscesses that should not be pierced, until the swelling is moderate according to its completion; and if there are such that it must be pierced when they are ripe, but do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses that come from joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 For when an abscess appears at the joints and is left until it bursts, inadvertently the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 For if an abscess is present at the main member and you delay the perforation until it becomes ripe, damage will be done to the main member; or if it is opened before it has ripened, this is harmful; nor should you pierce the abscess without complete digestion, except in the case of an abscess under the foundation which cannot pass through and be opened and a fistula forms, and cannot heal within a long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the time for perforation of the abscess that is ripe according to completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the subsiding of fever, and the decrease in pain and redness, and the opening and narrowing of the abscess's head, and other signs; and you should make the perforation where it depends more on the abscess, and where it has opened up; and let the perforation be long along the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that are swollen, according to the affected member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in a charred place, it is good to leave the perforation until it is confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 If you pierce it before that, the body will flow with fluid from it and will be filled with much pus; and by chance, the lips may harden and it may become sealed within.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if any abscess that has been pierced according to the size of the body, as required by the limbs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 It is necessary that you make small abscesses, small incisions; and in large abscesses, large incisions, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where the scab must be shaved, covered; when it has become as thin as a cloth and is moist, it is necessary to do as with babies: and if there are those that have been cut into three angles, and those from which one covers as with the fruit of the myrtle, like angina abscesses; and if there are those where a round incision has been made, and other similar cuts and appearances, it is necessary to cover them.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 One who has no head, like a superficial abscess, you must pierce it fully; and when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, you should not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part; stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing incorrectly; do this repeatedly, gradually, as much as needed, until the pus is gone; likewise, if the patient is weak, or a woman carrying a child, or small children, or elderly people with decrepitude.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 The pus jumps out at times with the release of the pus, by chance the patient may die, and you should not worry.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, approach this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced the abscess, drain the wound, and observe if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a large abscess, bring threads of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess and there is much pus, you must insert a thread in every one so that they come against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, you must fill it with old cotton or linen gauze without moisture, and bind it for three days; then open it, and cure it with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and linen cloth, dampen it, and place it on the wound repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the bleeding persists, provide care and treatment, and apply the powders mentioned in this book in the hands, and if it is a cold season, and the wound or abscess is very nervous, you should place hot tents and damp cloths on it; if it is summer, and the wound is fatty, place damp cloths on it with cold water and oil, or cold water and cool oil, until the third day, as we have said; then open the abscess, drain it, and treat it, as necessary, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	This must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how to approach treatments for abscesses, and now here is the chapter.
des soros	on les doibt traiter par cautere de feu, et si c'est li soros qui est gros ou si c'est en estete, il faut les fistraire ou les aignorer avant; et s'il sont durs et ne puissent pas fistreier, alors les coupez en peus et empoignez le tueu par dessous la poix, et mettez feu au cautere, et on les brande comme il se peut, et ains qu'il soit bien chauffez, pesez le cautere et mettez l'en une vase d'eau, et le tirez hors du tueu qui est oste; et lors que li soros seront toutes ensemeies, si les clavetiez ains qu'il se refroidissent, si com il covient.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 For small abscesses on the head, it is our practice to use linen cloths, as a gardener with a gourd, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are some that have grease and moisture like blisters, and there are those that are hard and rough at the edges without any doubt that they do not oppose the arteries.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of cutting is that you probe with every instrument called "entomoisoir," which gives rise to the following form, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 For if it contains moisture, they make a long incision through it.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is drained, they scrape without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, because it returns quickly if left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment (if present); otherwise in vinegar and lime, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who remain will heal by the third day.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then continue the cotton, as before, on the second day, and on the third, as long as you know that it does not heal too slowly; then treat the wound with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 If the abscess is swollen with pus, press it according to this shape, longwise; and throw out your onions, and remove the scabs from all parts, and apply all your care to draw out the pus where it lies; and if the arteries oppose you, do as I told you before.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And similarly do for the abscess if it is pockmarked, and cut and treat as I told you before.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And the incision on the abscess becomes moist, it is lighter, for there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And in some of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and from those I cut open an old woman's abscess; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; and if one were to cut into it with any tool, one would make as great a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses or heads coming from places other than children's heads and the roots of the ears, they should be opened for as long as necessary depending on the location, to allow pus to drain out; and treat them accordingly.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Often this abscess occurs at the neck, under the jaw, and in the groin area, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, and they are large and connected to each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 Each scrofula is properly within its side, like the abscess of the neck and the abscess at the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities in these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malicious and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In the one that you see with a good position to be touched, and resembles the color of the body, silent in every part and not pierced at the neck nor at the artery nor the conduit, and not penetrated; then you should cut it from above, peel off each part, and place the two lips of the incision as close together as you can if you have to, as we have said in abscesses at the head; and draw it out slowly, and be sure that you do not pierce the nerve or the vein, and do not use too much force, let your hand not tremble, and look not too far ahead, so as not to pierce what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you cut the vein or the artery and it does not let you finish, put vitriol powder into the wound, or some powders that stop blood, and hold the wound closed; leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the wound is not clotted, return to your work until you complete it; then examine if there remain small scrofulas, if so, cut and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofulas wound, it is not necessary to cut that scrofulas at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang out, without harm; then apply old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you excise the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you close the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no more superfluous material remaining due to the largeness of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 It is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it and draw pus, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those scrofulas that have superfluous material, pierce there where the opening is wide; and pierce it in the same way as the one mentioned above, in the direction of the flow, then bring in tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrodes what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply an ointment healing charcoal until it heals.
de squinance	If you make a bloodletting from the artery, then you must bind the veins that are near so that the bleeding does not continue, and close the wound with clean cloths.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the size of the throat, but I have never seen anyone in our land who performed it, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have quinsy, it is required that the throat slit called "epiglottis" should be opened; and no help should be given by these [affected areas], because all veins and the entrance of the sickness are in those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat or in two tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the channel of the tonsil, it is required to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it below three circles or four small slits through the middle, between the two circles or by the size of the split not in the cartilage; and these muscles are capable of being sectioned at the epiglottis's cut such that there is no cartilage. And the vessels are long from here onwards.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 If the master is afraid, it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat completely, then cuts the cartilage until it reaches the trachea; and avoids the blood vessels if you see anything, and then cut the split as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the section of the windpipe which bursts through the broken place, and by the absence of voice; leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hour has passed in which doubt of strangulation exists, bring together the two lips of the wound and sew it closed with care, taking care to avoid the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote healing until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Abu'l-Qasim says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged dead, and the bird pecks out his eyes.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then compress the windpipe because the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, thus guarding against death; and for this reason, the ancients would leave the wound open until the sickness had passed, which happens in 3 or 4 days. And then they would command to sew up the wound and heal it, until it was healed; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 A maiden took the knife and stuck it in her throat, piercing part of the windpipe's channel; I was called to heal her, and I found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I found the wound and discovered blood coming out of it, and that it had not opened or led the vein except through the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I quickly sewed up the wound, healed it until it was healthy; and nothing happened to the maiden but her voice turned red, and she recovered after that; for this reason, I say in such a situation, have no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large one, colored like a grape, and it occurs mostly in women; and it is according to two kinds: natural and accidental; where natural has no device.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And the accidental is according to two kinds, of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other kind is similar to an abscess that comes from us through arteries; there should be fear, and it is not advisable to operate on it without force except in small ones, and prove and search for everything at the intromission: if you find it similar to fatty nodes, and does not open anywhere, hit it as we hit the lymph nodes, and pull off its entire covering, if there is any; and enclose it tightly, and cure it as needed, until it becomes perfectly healthy.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 Many ways of ours are, which I will say all their similarities; and now it is necessary that I say the entire difference between notch and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	A dislocation is characterized by heat and fever persisting until the inflammation has passed, and then the purulence is complete; afterwards, the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 A notch has no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the sinus (sin), which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and it begins in the same way as a boil, and becomes large; and they are similar in two ways, either fatty or moist, and most of their colors are as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the care of the sick, that you examine and test first all the instruments called "entromissoire," according to its shape or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 The manner of inquieting the abscesses from ours is that you take or a more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has perforated the core; then you should extract the intruder, and pay attention to not let it escape.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If moisture runs out from the abscess and it changes color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses; but if no more moisture comes out after opening the abscess, know that it is full, then make an incision in the form of a cross, grasp it with tweezers, gently scrape it from both sides and pull the skin or coat that you are pulling safely with the thread; and if you cannot pull it safely, then cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If nothing remains, the pus will return multiple times; and if a little pus remains but does not bother you, apply some corrosive powder to the wound, close the wound, place something warm over the abscess to treat it, and cure it with other cures until it is healed; and if the pus is large, cut the edges of the wound twice, and heal the raw flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is swollen in contrast or other cases where you are forced to act quickly, use the leech of vitriol powdered, leave it for 2 or 4 days until the wound starts to heal, and let the evacuation of blood stop; then return to treating the part that was left with new dressing.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Behold the forms of the probing instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are also three corners which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are also three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses of fistula; and they are similar to needles used to sew shoes, and they are made of citron wood, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and they are more skilled at piercing through black planks to encircle the openings of fistula; and they are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the wound's width.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The forms of tumors resemble much, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are tumors with two humps in three ways; and there are tumors with three humps, which also have three shapes; and there are tumors with two humps and one hump only, and they also have three shapes; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The tips of these [objects] that are cut are sharp, and those who do not cut them only from one side, so as to avoid striking the vein or nerve; and these insertion points are closed with alum and bound in several ways, so that the patient does not feel it when opening abscesses; and they come in three sizes: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are not used anywhere except in charnut [hard, dry] places such as legs, arms, breasts, and anuses, and sometimes a smaller one is made, resembling fistula cauteries, according to this shape, for bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is put to the place that stops bleeding from veins, arteries, and sometimes returns according to this large shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 At times, the breasts of some men swell when they begin to decay, until they resemble women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, must do so according to this form of the line b. up to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then scrape off the fat, apply medicine to the wound with soothing char, then bring together the two lips of the wound to stitch, and cure it until it is healed; and if the breast sinks downwards and is flattened due to its size, as happens with women, if it becomes two breasts, cut them in two at the top, as if they were two similar splits; so that one is attached to the other at the end of each one, making the larger line contain the smaller according to this form from b. up to g; then scrape the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what has been said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it digests the remaining fat, then cure it until it is drained.
des apostemes des asselles	From abscesses of buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the buttocks are cases of hard scrofula where there is moisture contained within them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line 'b' up to the line 'g': [This part doesn't need translation as it is a technical instruction about making a surgical cut.]
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire bowel in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat it with ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula (or scrofulous lesions), then make incisions in it as we have said before in scrofula incisions, and if the wound swells, apply a cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	The cutting of an artery.
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is open and the skin is stuck together above it, there are often abscesses and the same happens with a burst vein and an abscess; and when one recognizes it by the artery, the abscess will be long in depth; and when you feel it with your fingers, it feels strained; and when it is for the vein, it turns red on the surface; and it is foolish to cut such an abscess, especially when it is under the nails and angles and at the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. It is necessary to remove the iron cure, and also the one who has a head injury must be treated in the same way; and in the one whose artery swells on top of the skin, make an incision through the leather (skin) lengthwise; then open the abdomen as usual, carefully separate the artery from the tendons, until it is exposed; then insert a needle beneath it, and pierce it all the way to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then press the area between the two bands with an instrument until the swelling subsides, and separate the abscess; then apply the cure with a bow until the tendon cries out (indicates pain); then treat it with ointment as needed, until it is healed; and if the abscess is due to an opening in a vein, you must mark the area that you can from the abscess all over the skin, then insert the needle beneath the area that you are holding in your hand, pierce it, and tie it with a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; then bind the abscess, as I have told you, or with a ligature of one of the two ends of the thread; and if you doubt whether the threads will hold, insert another needle through all the threads beneath the incision of the first needle, and tie them in four places; then press the abscess so that the excess subsides, then press the excess fat and leave what is tied; then put a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply cures of tents (bandages) and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	from abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just like abscesses can occur in the artery and vein, so too do abscesses come to the nerves when they are injured or from excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And this often happens with shoulders and thumbs and in all places where there are joints, and it is the great abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in many dispositions causing pain; and when it is squeezed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not entirely in the body, but under the skin; and it is quite quiet in all places, and does not go forward or backward, neither up nor down, and one who is in joints should not be covered with iron: perhaps contraction will occur; and one who is on the head or on the forehead, stretch the skin with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and strike at its root; if it is large, open it with an incision, scrape it, then remove the bone and close the wound with stitches, and let it heal until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	Large lumps hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 Occasionally, it occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "funge," resembling mushrooms; its roots are subtle, and its heads are large; they have both small and very large ones; I saw a man who had two bellies that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were cut open, and moisture ran out of it continuously.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I weighed it and found that one was 18 oz., and the other was 6 lb., and in the operation during incision, you must look at whether the patient is moist; if the color of the artery is pale and moist with a subtle root, take the spatula wide open and have the fire cautery ready for it.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 For in the thigh there often comes too much discharge of blood, and if it flows out, hurry up and cauterize [the wound]; and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the iron incision, take well-made thread, tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; then pull it tight, and do not stop pulling on the thread until it stops the discharge, and feels labor pains; and if the roots are thick, be careful to cauterize only the center, but you can easily cauterize half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and be sure to not cauterize the tendon which is of a dark color and poor sensation and milky sight.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an enlarged abscess, and I will come to the treatment of syphilis afterward.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil bursts out
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of a wound or split in the body, and it is on the belly and among some of the buboes, as happens in other routes, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries, according to what is before, or due to inflammation; and if it is through the route of the bubo and the exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	If it is caused by the outburst from the intestines, then it is more various. When you press it with your hands and it recedes, it returns again, and sometimes if it is sutured, it grows greatly at the entrance of the bath and due to hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing and easily opened when pressed with your hand, do not force it; and if it is due to blood, the abscesses are large and hard, and filled according to a certain amount; and if it is due to inflammation, it is soft to the touch, and the procedures are such that you look to see whether the appearance is due to the blood of an artery, or a vein, or inflammation.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 It is necessary to let the treatment rest.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is from the intestine or the abdomen, you must instruct the patient to fasten their side and be extended straight, then press around the swelling; then command him to lie on his back between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with a spatula, then stretch half of the abscess above with a large spoon; then tie it around with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let the sutures be tight; then open half of the stretched abscess over the thread, and insert your finger, and search for the intestine; if you find it caught by the thread, remove it, and push the intestine to the opposite side of the abdomen; and if you find a swelling, take it with the spoon, and cut off the superfluidity; and if the artery or vein oppose you, go gently around, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two sharp points, and insert the needles around what you have made in cross shape that you are going to pierce; then hold the abscess in four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place as it is, and let the flesh rot by itself; or cut it when it becomes soft and can be pierced, then cure it as required, and seal the abscess as we have said; and extract the pus or the moisture that you find, then cure the place as required, and suture the place.
dou chancre	draw the boil
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the similarities of boils and how to treat them with medicine, and how to handle the cure with iron; and we will say that boils begin in the armpit, and great caution is needed in its treatment; and the ancients said that when a boil is in a place where it can be shaved like a boil that is on the breast or thigh, and in similar places, and it must all be removed when it is at the beginning; but when it is large and old, it should not be approached, for I have never known anyone to heal it; nor has anyone healed one before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the surgeries, when they are in place and can be removed as we have said, are that you purge the patient once of black bile; then make him urinate if he has manifest repletion, then prepare the patient. That is, boil a clean linen cloth or bandage to perform the surgery; then pour your unguents or salve over the sore, and the entire head of it, and the bone from all sides, leaving nothing behind; let the blood flow freely and press well on the place with your hand or something, and if the discharge of blood makes you oppose the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize it until the wound is scorched; then treat it with another cure until it heals.
de ydropisie	The translation for this line would be "of hydropisia." Hydropisia refers to a medical condition in which there is excessive accumulation of water or fluid in the body tissues, specifically in the abdominal cavity.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 We have said in the division the resemblances of edema, and in what manner the collection of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure that is done with medicines, and that which is cured with iron: only these two resemblances should be excluded; namely tympanites and hypophysis, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this resemblance of edema called "edemas" with medicines, and the cure does not help, observe if the patient is weak or if he has another disease besides edema, such as dropping water and similar things; do not use iron in this case, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong constitution, and he only has edema, and he does not have any other disease besides that, and he is neither too young nor too old, then operate as follows: lift the patient upright on your hands, and the assistant presses the abdomen pushing the water to the lowest part of the bladder; then take the curved spatula according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And let it be cut through its second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And let it be pierced not too deeply so that it does not reach the intestines when it is inserted, and it should not be blistered; then check if the urinary bladder is inflamed towards the intestines: if so, you must make an incision below the third rib to the right of the navel; and if it is due to liver disease, the incision should be on the left side of the third rib; and if it is due to constipation, it should be on the right, and the patient should not lie down on the incision so that fluids do not run to that weak place; then pierce the skin with the instrument, push it in, and withdraw your hand to the spatula between the skin and the bladder as much as the size of a nail or thereabouts; then pierce the bladder until the spatula reaches the water level, which is the bladder's neck, then pull it out, and put this instrument where it is shown in the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And it resembles a silver needle, thin and made of lead or light thread, and at the part below the small wound; where it pierces through from one side, there are three holes; and from another part, two, and one from the other; and the head is cut like a feather quill, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes carve with their pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 Above the head is the opening, so that when the instrument comes to the water, you should now press up on the instrument; empty then the middle or third part, because if you empty more than necessary in this hour, perhaps the patient may die from the resolution of their spirit due to the weapon, or they will fall to the ground, or come close to death; but empty according to its strength, and according to what the dispositions of the strength of the patient indicate, and his pulse; then draw out the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now by the cauterization that stops the flow which I have spoken about, namely, that you pierce in this manner; then restart the instrument on another day, if you see the patient suffering this, and draw out a little water; do this every day, and be careful not to leave it but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And if you doubt the patient, and leave him much water, treat him with sepulture or hot sand, and with much sweat or bath and in the sun, and anoint him with wine; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize the stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Sometimes children are born who have no foreskin or whose foreskins are small and not in the right place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it is necessary that you make a very thin incision in all spittle-like places according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 Then put the thin foreskin of wood on it, and hold and keep it in place for three or four days until he wants to urinate, then remove the closure, let him urinate, and then replace it; and in case, there is no need, because the urine that comes out does not leave the closure closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 For the person whose wound is small, the treatment with a cup made of lead, as we have said, will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those without a wound in their place are bled, because no one is born who has a wound on the head of the penis, for they cannot urinate before lifting their penis; and cannot engage due to this reason as the matter cannot reach the vagina, and it is an evil disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of work is that the patient lies on his back with his head raised slightly like the shaft of an arrow, and his buttocks likewise, so that his genitals are in a hole, as required; and be careful of blood leakage which often occurs, and if it happens, apply a pressure to stop the bleeding, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis ulcers
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often this albath appears in the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly skin; there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; you should treat them with a .i. oncine (once) of subtle substance, then scrape them off and cleanse thoroughly, afterwards apply moist cotton in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with diaphinicon ointment until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the ulcer is malignant, of a greenish-yellow color and foul smelling, then you must apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have scraped it, and if the ulcer is on the shaft of the penis, and has both parts within the skin and parts outside, then you must first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is sewn up, you should treat the part outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For when you treat the penis, it is not certain that the testicles will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come into the penis and its surrounding area; then you must cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour made from the skin of pomegranates and walnuts, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if there is discharge of blood, bring the lunar cautery as follows:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cauteries assist each other in the following way: for discharge of blood and corruption; and if the testicles of the penis are corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you bring or lead from the penis a cane made of wood, and make the patient urinate; and when the hairs appear at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary to shave it with an instrument, until the ligaments are loosened, and release the testicles from all sides; and if it is a difficult matter to speak of this, it is necessary to shave it with a thin blade, a little distance from the head of the penis and the pubic hair; then press gently between them, and put a fine linen cloth dipped in cold water on top. It should not appear immediately.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the same as other wounds in terms of continuation; however, when we perform this work of our own free will and specifically on children, it is necessary that we do the best job and make it as easy to heal as possible.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for it is not in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the greater part of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around one day, and with great force, and in a novacule; however, there were those who were careful because there are two layers, and by chance if one above is cut and delayed, the one below will be damaged.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now cover it with copper, and the pain is doubled; and at the amputation which is deep in the limb, the point of the member is not secure; and at the amputation of the nail by chance the iron escapes, and ruins the work, and many times there is no need for amputation and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	In the amputation which is made all through the thread of iron I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the saw cuts exactly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Whenever you press your hand, you should cut it evenly in all its thickness; but the edge should be well narrowed around the skin; and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not bind him except to tie a thread around the rod only, and then let him play in any way that you can; then let it be between your hands straight, and replace the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them nor any tool; then push your hand against the rod and blow or cough, and draw it up until the head of the rod is in; then clean it well of the filth assembled there, then tie the joint signet with a double thread, then tie below one thread to another cord; and hold it by the second knot to the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two cords, then untie the thread quickly and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood flow freely as it wishes, for this is the cure; and put powder on top and on top the powder stick with a little cooked egg white mixed with fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with other medicine until it heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces for cleansing is as follows: the two heads should be tender and pierced, and they should be equal in size to the knuckles.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the amputation is when the cartilage within is cut; therefore, you must stretch it with your nail so that the joint becomes abscessed; and strike it evenly. And if you cannot hold it with your nail, take tongs, and then strike it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it exceeds three days, and that which is beneath the penis becomes swollen, let it be until the abscess subsides, and scrape lightly; then strike it as you can move it, and be careful not to damage the penis.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the joint with things that are submerged in a wound of powder, as we have said or treated powders, and if you strike it with excessive care, and it goes beyond [the limit], it will not harm; therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is due to obstruction by a stone, frozen blood, pus, charnee (flesh-like substance) or similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not relieved, and you see that the retention is caused by a stone which is lodged at the neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be bowed over his knees; and his feet should be placed on the back, and he should extend his abdomen from the upper part of his back, and hold the patient as tightly as possible; then the neck of the bladder must be compressed at the expression of the stone above, so that the urine is relieved; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you administer extraction using an instrument called "siringue", whose shape is as follows: made of thin and light silver cane, like a bird's feather; and its nozzle should be one palm and a half long, and be thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And the manner of the urine issue is that you take a double thread, tie one end to the top of the linen or cotton cloth and push the other end into the syringe; then tie off the excess linen and push it up to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair, and rub the bladder and penis with oil moistened with warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then double the penis over the syringe towards the anus; then push the syringe forward up to the bladder, and have the patient feel the urine coming out until it reaches the empty space, this should not be done in any other order because the conduit through which it goes is twisted; then wind the thread around the linen cloth and the urine follows the linen, then pull it out, and straighten the urine; then reinsert the syringe as many times as necessary until the bladder is empty, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	On the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorches or blood comes in the bladder, or pus is assembled there and you see it distill liquids and medicines, then use all the instruments called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed, and if it has three openings: two of one kind, and one of another, as you see; and the head of the vein should be closed in such a way that the medicine can stop the flow without addition, if it can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary; and when you see medicines thrown into the bladder, place the head of the casket in the moisture, and draw along with it; if you draw out the moisture with the casket, then forcefully press along with it; it will enter the casket, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle enema used to cleanse the bladder: here it is.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And it is made of silver or iron, and the head is higher; beneath it lies the breast or the liver; then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture that you use to clean the bladder, then form a double thread from two strings, and heat the moistened wool on fire; then insert the chief of the plaster into the sheath, then hold your hand above the bladder with all the moisture facing upwards, until the patient feels that the moistened wool has reached the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle, and puncture it roundly; then push a strong thread through these holes, assemble the circle like a thimble, fill it with oil and moisture and water, place it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	From the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the methods of stone and its extraction along with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone caused by the rain, and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate in size; and in the bladder, and in the vein; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder occurs more often with children, and this is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder, resembling urine in its subtlety; it opens the narrow passages, irritates the patient's organ, pricks it many times, and then binds it; and much of these leaps cause the foundation to weaken; and the healing of children is easy until they reach 4 years old, but it is very difficult in the elderly, and it is a moderate illness for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to treatment, it is first necessary to purify the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it sometimes obstructs seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by the feet, bend and move him downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and ascends sometimes towards the top; then make him sit between your hands prepared, his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declining downwards; then press and touch inside; if you feel the stone within the space, hurry now to cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not fall at the touch, moisten your left hand with oil, if the patient is male, or use your thumb, if the patient is female and of full age; then push on the foundation and press the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, squeeze it towards the neck of the bladder; then press above with your finger, and push it outwards in the direction where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Instruct the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out his right hand upward and remove the skin that is under the testicles in the area where you make the cut; then insert the spatula spreading, which gives it its shape.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And it should be made between the one that is located between the cheekbones and the base of the skull, not in the middle but on the left side of the nose; and it should be straight through the bone, and your hand should be against the base or foundation, and the opening should be wide at the exit, and narrow within, according to the size of the bone, not too large; possibly the pressure from the hand that is against the base will cause it to jump out without effort; and know that there may be a bone or an angle, and margins: if it is grated, then it should come out; and if it is rounded, like a bean, and round, the opening will be easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 If it is angular or has margins, make the opening larger; and if it does not come out, you must strain with pliers that are like a chisel at the head, to straighten the bone so that it does not splinter; or push in a thin curved instrument into the head; and if you cannot manipulate it thus, enlarge the opening slightly, and scrape it with vitriol; and if there is more than one bone, push the largest towards the bladder first, then hit, pull out, and the smaller ones after if there are any.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 If it is very large, it must be made larger by making a bigger incision.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 For the patient, there are two possible outcomes: death or urine constantly coming out because the wound cannot heal; but you should still try to draw it or break it with pliers until you can pull it apart piece by piece; and when you have finished your work, you should fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and bind it up, and cover it with a damp cloth in oil and vinegar, or in oil and cold rose water and cold water, to soothe the abscess that is hot; then make the patient rest on his neck, and do not undo the bandages until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you undo it (the bindings), immerse the wound well in oil and water, then apply the ointment "dyafinicon" and "basilicon" until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 If abscesses and ulcers come into the wound and there is blood coagulation in the bladder, and the urine is retained, which is known to be harmful without passing with urine: then press your hand on the wound, and drain that blood, for if it remains, it will rot the bladder and spread it; then lift the wound from moisture and pus, and help in all ways you know until it heals; and it is necessary that all the herbs you use to treat it, that you bind the two legs together, and apply the medicines on top of it.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If the wound is small and it is led by the penis and pierced through, and urine cannot pass out; cure it as I am about to say, that you cut it many times, and excise the cut by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already experienced this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod in the shape as follows and sharpened at four angles, pointed on one thread:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take the thread and tie it around the stone's shaft so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then push the awl gently into the shaft; then turn the awl slowly towards your hand in the stone, little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the shaft.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it bursts and jumps with the urine, the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie the thread around the stone beneath and another one above, then push the shaft towards the stone between the two threads, pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and heal it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	from women's stones (kidney stones)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It often happens that a stone is in the womb of women, and if it ever occurs, it is a great distress for the cure, and it is forbidden for four reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman skilled enough to examine her, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is deeper than the stone of the man, which requires a more profound incision and great fear arises. If it becomes necessary to do so, you must take a midwife who knows, and if one cannot find her, cast a subtle eye; and present a wise matron in the affairs of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to perform the incision of the stone; and pay close attention that the woman is a virgin. Then it must be commanded to push her pelvis or bottom and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should confine it under her pelvis, and you should command her to push her pelvis or hold onto the patient, and press her left hand on the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If found, it must be moved gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike above the stone in the root of the thigh near the middle of the bone, where the stone is moved around; and do not move the finger above or below the stone, and let it be small at first; then push the hand into the lower abdomen, if you feel the stone pressing the wound so that the stone can issue forth, and know that there are many types of stones: namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 know the appearances to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 And if the bone is protruding, put broken vitriole on it and hold it for an hour until the bone stops bleeding; then return to your work, as long as the arrowhead is still in, and have the tools I told you about when extracting an arrowhead for assistance in your work; and if the bone continues to protrude, and it is the artery that has been cut, put powder on the area and hold with straps and bandages, do not start again, leave the arrowhead and do not draw it out, or the patient may die; then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the wounds have closed, return to your work, until the arrow is expelled.
de hernie carnouse	of a carnous hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	An aquous hernia is nothing but a gathering of moisture or pus, which is beneath the bladder that contains the egg; and it is called "pus," and sometimes it is specifically in the egg's membrane itself, if one thinks it is another egg; and this is the skin of the bladder between the pus we have mentioned; and this does not happen except without any reason.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the growth of this hernia is due to weakness that comes from the bladder, and the matter spreads out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 Sometimes it happens that a blow occurs on the kidneys, and this moisture takes on various colors: either a color that declines to yellow, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and this often happens; these are signs for recognizing this assembly, for if it is as white as we have said, it indicates an abscess, the size of an egg yolk, and do not open the kidneys, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 And if there is moisture in the very fabric [of the abscess], it is believed that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin and the yellow matter [pus], one can feel it well; therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, you should probe with a blunt instrument, from which its form is as described before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, judge what is inside based on the probe that comes afterwards.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we treat [the abscess] with iron, it is necessary that the patient be anesthetized to our ability and the fullness of his body; then he lies on his back, on a thing slightly raised, and covers him with many layers of cloth; then he lies on his left side, and commands the assistant to stand at right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the shoulder; then take the spatula flat, and strike the skin between them along its length until reaching the point below the handle, and ensure that the incision is straight in slicing the skin until white pus, and remove it delicately according to our ability; then pierce the pus completely with water at a large opening, and drain all the water, and then insert your fingers, and stretch the pus upward; do not touch the ribs, but only the pus; strike the entire side of it carefully, for if you do not strike it correctly, the pus will return; and if the egg jumps out during your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the pus; then sew together the two sides of the skin near the shoulder with a stitch, and treat [the wound] as other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to bind the vessels that are suspended (attached) with caution, fearing the release of blood; afterwards, cut through the suspension and extract the egg, treating it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And if an ulcer is assembled in two parts joined together (these are the branches), strike the other part as you did the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put damp linen wetted in rose oil into the wound; and put outside another damp linen wetted in vinegar and oil, and put over the two ends, and put over them doubled fabrics, and tie it all with a rope according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take the two fabrics, and use them of damp linen according to this shape and sewn together in the belt of the arms, and one of the ends takes hold beneath the foundation up to the back, and the other at the hilt part; and the other end on the two angles, and bind all together in the loop of the bandage; and sometimes the cautery ramification is used in place of iron cut, and it is that you take the cautery knife-like, and strike the skin of the ends, and let them be heated as we have said, so that the white pus contained by the ulcer is exposed; then take the cautery according to this shape, and perforate the pus with onion-shaped holes, and scrape it with this sharp cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And the blow in all ways that you can, as long as you are heating it; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg (meaning: yolk); and know that this work is more effective; and pay attention to the correct flow of blood, and do the incisions carefully; and if anything happens contrary to this, or abscess or flow of blood or something else, cure what happens contrary to it, according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And if the patient is afraid and does not want to endure this work because of its horribility, administer perforation as I told you before; and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that a pimple has formed in the place, make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below with a spatula wide enough; and make the perforation along the length of the body; let the punctures be large so that all the pus can flow out; then put cotton over the area and hold it, allowing the remaining pus to drain out, until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the pus to flow out from the opening of the wound, you must insert a pen or the instrument used for draining the pus of those suffering from dropsy (meaning: edema), whose form was mentioned before; enlarge the opening of the wound, and know that the pus will return, and will be collected after 6 months or more; and when it is collected as mentioned before, and in this way the patient's days will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the kidneys
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 Know that in the section of this treatise, many fear various dispositions, which is why it seems to me that it would be better to leave it [the disposition] as it is; and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Then many abscesses come from the body, and similarly from the joints; and this is in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 It is about an overabundance of acidic and watery matter that is spread to the kidneys or from impact; and the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the body; it does not have pain, but is a severe abscess; and occasionally there are pus-filled, hard and piercing abscesses with such color, and sometimes comes from new arteries or swelling of veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is from new arteries, it is known by the hot abscess position, when you press on it with your hands; and it should not be touched.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 One who is swollen with the vein is known by his disposition at the expression of the touch of the thumbs; and he can do well the incision on this appearance, and on other sores; and it is that you cut the core of the joints, then is the egg in high, and the string of the white pus, and delivers the suspension from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the egg is already soft with these sores born, then you must draw out the egg and crush it; and if it is swollen in the white pus, or in that which is within the bladders, you must deliver all that tenderness and crush it thoroughly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the hernia is at the rear end, you should cut it all out and extract the egg as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When your work is done, apply the wound with moistened linen in rose oil and wine, then heal it with other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the kidneys
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess enclosed by a covering resembling a boil, with the softening of the joints; and the patient groans heavily as he goes; and the cure for this disease is dangerous in the same way that this was previously mentioned, and we will tell you its treatment, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then place the suspension irons (or stirrups) below the knees against your thighs, at all the places near the thighbone; mark them with the master, and stretch them out fully; then strike the handle of the cautery wide across the thighbones until they are exposed, and then cut off the skin from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then insert a double-threaded needle there, and tie it to the first joint where the vein appears, and tie it straight to the other joint; then strike them exactly, according to the length of the body, and release the corrupted humors; then treat the wound as you would a broken bone, so that no blood flows from any of the thighbones; for this is not harmful, and if all the thighbones have veins, tie the thighbones to them all; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the veins, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of the sifac
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The occurrences of this condition are due to the incision or extension on the abdomen in the part of the inguinal region, because the intestines descend from that wound towards one of the kidneys; and this wound is either the incision or the extension of it, and these two types of injuries occur for many reasons such as percussion, jumping, falling, lifting heavy weights, and similar things; and the signs when it is the inguinal extension are that it happens gradually over a long time, not suddenly; and the abscesses are equal towards the end, because the inguinal region follows the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it is of the section of the dislocation, are that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, under the skin near, and this is due to the outflow of the intestine and the body turning away from the dislocation.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines come out through the hernia, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments there is fear, therefore it is necessary to escape from them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 The method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to push back the intestine inside with their hand towards the wound if they can reach it; then hold the abdomen on top, and spread the thighs; then open the inguinal region above, and cut all the skin from the kidneys longwise; then insert your index finger into the gap between the skin and the inguinal region, and locate the testicle that is under the skin, in the area between the white inguinal region and the scrotum, and between the two testicles; and separate what is behind the testicle and between the scrotum; then move the index finger to the side of the kidney towards the left hand, and pull the testicle away from the entire inguinal region towards the back; and instruct the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards, and disconnect what is in front behind the ligament; and look for signs if the intestine is wrapped around or the hard white inguinal region, and if you find anything, push it into the abdomen below; then take a large-needle with thick thread made of 10 strands, and insert it into the back part of the inguinal region, after the skin; then sew the stitches that appear from the thread, until there are four threads; then arrange them in the shape of a cross, and sew the inguinal region, which is under the skin of the kidneys, with a strong ligament of two parts; then sew the stitches made from the thread, and make sure no servants who nurse it can enter into it, unless the abscess does not come out; and tie the ligament as before, leaving a long distance of one finger's width for the inguinal region that is under the kidney skin; then sew the rest according to the roundness that the testicle carries; then cut in the area that is under the skin of the kidneys, until it is corroded and swollen, as we have said before; then apply moistened linen to the wounds, and apply the ligament that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the whites are cauterized as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 This happens many times, and leave the ligament until it chooses to slip out; if it delays in falling, it should be softened with hot water, and place what has been said on it until it slips out; then cure the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a carnous hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is made like a graft joining the bone, in this way you tie the vessels, after cutting them lightly from below; then break it in half, and treat the abscess with what I have said, until the vessels grow; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Sometimes there comes a hernia in the groin, as we have said, and do not open any of the intestines at the anus, and if some do open, it is too little, and repair it hourly; and yet even if it stays too long in this place, the wound or phlegm forms there where the intestines are opening; and this happens due to the extension of the phlegm which is in the groin, as we have said, for it is stretched, then softened and swollen are the muscles and opened; and it is cured by cautery, as I have told you before; and sometimes it is healed by iron in this way: and the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then break the inflamed hernia swelling from the side according to the size of three fingers; and pull out the phlegm that is under the skin that surrounds it, then take the ram and put it on the exposed phlegm; and press it at the belly, then cut the two visible phlegms around the ram head, and cut one and the other; then pull out the ram head, and do not cover or stretch the phlegm or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the intestines hernia; then cure it by wound remedy.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads (sutures), if it becomes infected and heals the wound, let it remain until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The fistula (li sifac) is closed, and it has no appearance in the wound, and the cauterization is performed in this place, and it is closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin around the eyes
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the eyes becomes soft in some men, because the charms that are inside are softened and it is visible; and when one wants to heal it, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back, and you bandage the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then bring together the two lips to a stitch, and if you see, sew first the excess skin that is softened with four or five stitches firmly; then bandage between the stitches, and heal as other wounds, until it is healed, and stitch the thread.
dou chastrement	The punishment or correction (of a patient)
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 Know that castration is mentioned in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to speak of it in this book; and it is only necessary for two reasons: the first is that masters should answer when asked about castration and its cure; and the second, because we often have need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and pigs and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 Therefore, I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the castration done by attraction, we make the animal sit in warm water until its scrotum becomes soft and then hold it with our hand until it is settled and no longer feels anything.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 From the castration by cutting: it is necessary that you mark the animal, and you press the hide of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the restrainer, and strike above each testicle where you have cut, when you have skinned them properly; leave no small piece of skin or subtle skin that is on the vessels; and this method of castration is dried out as opposed to the one made by attraction, because at the attraction something may remain from the testicles, which makes the animal desire lust; then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites (intersex individuals)
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 Hermaphroditism is according to the two ways of humans: one way is that there is an opening between the two testicles as in the figure of female nature with hair, and sometimes it urinates in court.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other method is in women, and it has above the hilt like a rod and they pierce it.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the cure for a man and a woman is that you cut all the surrounding tumors and treat them as other wounds; in the second method, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of the scrotum, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	The translation for this line is:
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 Tumor is a tumor adjacent to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have one as big as a hand, and this is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 You must stain the excess of the tumor with your hand or onions and cut it lightly; do not go too deep so blood does not come out, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed; and for another tumor that grows at the mouth of the anus, and farts and breaks through, and is like a cow's womb, and therefore called by the ancients "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 It must be cut as we have said before, and it should be cured until it is healed.
de erratique	From erratic [or wandering]
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 If the nature of a woman is not perceived or if it is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that has come upon her; or it is by artificially joined male organ, or too thick or thin sperm, and it is made completely in the vagina, or in the costumes, or under them, or wherever it may be; and they must avoid conceiving, and give birth, and unfortunately allow the flowers to develop; and the recognition of this is by observing the discharge from the vagina.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the discharge approaches, it may be in your hand or at your side.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If it is a subtle wound that is close to the liver, hurry and do this: place your two index fingers together, and have her lie on her back with her legs spread apart; then form the two livers as the subtle wound is rounded, and let the openings be wide; then take linen, moisten it in oil, and place it over the area, and make him lie down at home for each day so that he cannot heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the wound is hard and thick, you should cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the opening is filled with pus, suspend it with onion and cut it; have ready the medicines that stop bleeding, such as garlic, dragon's blood, incense, and many eggs; then provide a large reed pipe, so that the wound cannot heal; let it be long-lasting, and provide a tent of dry linen; then cure other wounds until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when a child is born in marriage, it should be covered according to this manner, unless abscesses are swollen.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 To the swollen abscess that is within marriage, one should not make any attempt to touch it.
des emorroides	Hemorrhoids [or Piles]
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without cort (corticosteroid) treatment is customary, and when hemorrhoids become old they turn into piles; and we have said in the division their similarities, and signs, and I will tell you here those which receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are fully formed in marriage, and cannot be felt, are not cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those at the mouth of the sore, which can be felt, are those who can be healed.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then heat the tongs at the anvils, and put it on its roots, then sprinkle medicines that restrain blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then place her feet to the opening for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and grenadine bark and ivy leaves, and then prepare barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and apply the paste on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it stops bleeding, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If it doesn't stop bleeding, make tourniquets at the back and at the breasts without wounding them; then take linen, wet it in the juice of onions or juniper with old wine, and apply it to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the abscess rests, heal the place with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a hawk's beak, so it must be covered as I said in the ointment recipe; and then it should be treated until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	emorroidal openings (of the anus)
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many types of abscess come in marriage, such as boils and hard abscesses, herpes, scabs, fissures, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I mentioned in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 Therefore, I must say in this treatment about the abscess that comes in marriage (boil), which is not one of those boils that swell; and if you want to know the work of iron, observe whether the abscess is acute at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Therefore, do not hurry to pierce it, but let it ripen until the pain is eased; and then make the patient sit on a chair or small stool, and have two stools or he leans, and support his back and spread his legs apart towards the opposite side of the leg; and let his knees be spread out, and put his arms under his thighs, and bind them well with a good ligament; then draw the pus towards the right side, and bring the instrument for opening the mouth of the boil, from which its form comes later; and it is necessary that when you bring this instrument, you prick the right first hole to know the depth of the boil, so that what enters through the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not burn the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the boil with cloths, so that the instrument does not harm it; and it must put the horn of the instrument on top, and mark the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 And when the abscess is opened and one handles it with a soft hand, it must be covered with a plaster of lard; and when the bowl is empty, you must put boiled linen cloth moistened in rose oil or green dry oil into the wound; and place the linen cloth from the wound to the edge of the wound and over the wound and over the plaster netted linen cloth moistened with water or vinegar which has been cooked; then heal for two days after the ointment following that, until it is healed; and sometimes raise the wound and the blister by a clyster of water and honey, and then of water or longis root and aristolochia which have been cooked; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is sutured in the flesh, you should avoid iron cautery, but treat it as we have said in the section.
de l’enfantement	From childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 It is first necessary for the midwife to recognize the figure of natural childbirth and the signs when she sees the woman straining downward, and desires to smell the armpit: then hasten the birth of the child; then learn that this birth is according to the natural figure, and it issues from the head and follows with a second one; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on her belly, so that the child comes out quickly; for when he descends towards his head, it is seconded by him, and the membranes of the womb are expelled from its superfluities by good cleansing; and this which comes in another way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 It sometimes happens that one falls upon their feet, or the body and the shoulders, or the hands, or it happens upon the belly, or backside, and is turned by chance on the neck, or in other bad ways; in such a case it is necessary for the help to be wise and knowledgeable about these matters, and to avoid error and deception. I will show you all the figures as to how one should assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out headfirst by natural birth and the woman delivers with effort, and her vitality is weak, make her sit on a saddle or have women hold her; then anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then insert the midwife's little spatula, as shown in the following figure:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And divide the second birth canal, and strike its claw until the water that is within the womb flows out; and grasp the woman's belly as the child descends, and if it does not descend, you must fumigate her with musk of fenugreek oil of sisamum; then make her take and vomit purge, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: this will now help the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two hands come out, you must gently push them back a little at a time; and if they cannot enter, lay the woman on the stool, and raise her feet up; then tilt the stool onto the ground, and hold the woman so she does not scream during tilting; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, strike the dead child with the knife that is placed here before, extract the child, and push it back in equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 Of the birth of the child upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes upon its feet, you must push it upward; and then turn it a little at a time until it is equal; then take hold of its feet and stretch them out a little at a time.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 It may jump up to any joints if commanded to do so, making it vomit with convulsions; if it leaps away, it is as God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Therefore it should be done gently.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 If it does not leap as we have experienced, say take musk-seed from high places, oil of roses, pitch melted, and grind them all in a mortar; put this mixture inside the woman's nature (the womb) and apply this ointment externally, then let her sit in hot water up to her ribcage; when she has softened beneath, take the myrrh colander and place it under, leaving it for an hour; then have her sit on a stool, make her vomit and hold her mouth and nose closed while lightly pressing her belly, for the child now leaps around.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the birth of the child on its genitals
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this form, put its hands close together (one by one); then lay it on its back, and hang its feet downwards, and let it lie on the bed; bend its hands little by little, and then grasp its hands above the belly, and break its hips bones below until it is arranged downwards; if the child does not cry, take its feet and turn them inward, then turn the belly upward, then put your hands; rock the child little by little; and order the woman to hold herself as long as the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	The birth of a child that comes out with one hand extended.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It is necessary to devise a means for returning the hand: if it cannot be returned, then raise the woman and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, bend her legs outward; then bring the mustard plaster that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the stool, and try to return the hand; rock the child according to its natural figure, and make it vomit, and order her to hold herself until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Hold the baby by the neck and spread your hands apart, then turn your body towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the servant hold his hand, then twist it little by little and gently; and when it is equal, place natural muscle-relaxant of height and oil on it, as we have said, then command it to move little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to take hold of it; and make her vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way, treat all similarly
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When farting occurs in this manner throughout the second stage, strike the caul at your fingernail until the moisture is voided; and if the child swells up on its face and neck, strike it from the buttocks so that it is not held back, and the child dies; then push the child in, as far as you must, and command the woman to take hold of herself lightly. Then it will pass easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the birth of twins   (In this context, "gemelz" refers to twins, as "gele" means a twin in Old French)
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Note that twins are born frequently and sometimes three or four; and this is not unusual, it happens often.   (The text uses Old French numerals "iii" for 3 and "iiij" for 4)
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 These are strange things that do not live unless they are named; I know they multiply and are eager for the one who conceives them, who is linked to filth; and sometimes they emerge naturally like worms under a horse, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 If they emerge noisily, the treatment should be as we have said, and the balsam shall be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what it does; and do thus according to what is worth moving towards salvation.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 Sometimes they are formed in the womb of a woman for one or two or three or four or five or six, or up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measure of the wise glorious one; and it is necessary that the balsam knows this, because sometimes similar things happen; do accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	Of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you cure a woman of a dead or stillborn child in the womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to operate with your hands; then you must know if the woman is of good health, and has no accident or fear of death; then the woman should lie on her back with her head inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the assistant touches her with both hands, or she may be tied to the bed so she is not treated in the removal of the child; then anoint the husband's mouth with oils moistened with musk and fenugreek seed and linseed; then anoint the assistant's hands with these oils and musks; then he gently thrusts into the woman, ensuring that it enters the place that is suitable; and be careful that the baby emerges from the head, otherwise it may tear in other places; and pierce the child's crown with a sharp instrument, or puncture its neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or near the navel or by the ribs, and if the removal is at the feet, then pierce or pinch and break the bones gently; and you should hold the instrument in your right hand, and place the handle between your left thumb and index finger, and thrust gently with all your hand into any of the places we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty place; and this is the shape of the instrument:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then insert opposite each other as often required, so that the extraction is even; and then make them even while moving from one side to the other, in order for them to be released, and they should be notched to hold them in place, as shown in the figure:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if a part remains, you can use oil and pinch one of your fingers, and push it into that part, and pull the other part; and if no part remains, place the notch or higher up, and do this until it comes out entirely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be returned by holding, you must roll it up in a cloth until it comes out completely; then break it at the joint of the sole or the side, and do this with the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if the child's head is large and it is narrow at the birth canal, or if there is a narrow passageway assembled in the head, you must insert the pointed spatumile between your fingers, and push the head and extract the narrow passageway; or you can use the instrument called "almidach", which will help to form the instruments or chapter that follows this one; and do the same if the child has a large natural head swelling; then pull out the bones with pliers, and if the head jumps out and it cannot be held in place using forceps, it should be cut open, as much as necessary until the narrow passageway is exposed; and if it cannot be delivered, you can crush it into pieces as small as possible. If it is swollen in the abdomen or under the ribs, you must pierce it repeatedly until the narrow passageway appears.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, the delivery is easy, and the guidance towards the mouth of the birth canal is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And if it is protruding from the abdomen or the anus, you must push it back into place covered with a cloth over the hand; and press the abdomen or the anus, until the moisture that is there subsides; and if other members are dislocated, and the joint remains, push the ball of your hand deep into the wound, and pull it out; then push in one direction or two, and pull it further; and if the wound caused by the protrusion is contracted due to an abscess that has formed, you must not try to enlarge it, but instead provide moist and greasy substances; and provide compresses, and smear them with warm, softening, and moistening agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if the child is on his side, and you can place it straight, introduce what we have said in the live child; and if there is no ability to do so, pull it out piece by piece, leaving nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when you have done that, apply what we have said in abscesses which come in marriage; and if bleeding comes out, it should be put in hot binding, and other treatments applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman whose womb had been dead, then the first doctor consulted with another on this matter and revived the fetus.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time an abscess appeared in the buttock, and swelled so much that it opened up, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned to care for it, and I thought about it for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed strong plaster on it, and a bone came out, and after some days another one did.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I want the wound and take out the bone as long as the woman is in her best position; and the woman lives for a long time in this way, and after some time a little pus comes out from the side; and I have never heard of this chapter except because when masters find a strange thing, they know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the marriage to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here follows the form of the pressor, to which one applies books; and at two turnings to the two heads of the two joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 The cornels (used in cautery) should be more subtle than the restrictor, and they should be made of ebony or box; and the hole in the rod should be large, and the edges of the holes, and a length of half a palm; and between the two limbs there should be two joints of the same rod, which should be tightened on one side and the other, by half a palm's length or slightly more; and these two joints are inserted into the hole of the marris to open when turning the two corns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, more slender and lighter in appearance, should be made from the rod of ebony or box, similar to pliers; and it should have two prongs, as you see, a length of one palm, and width of two fingers; and when you are ready to open the marris with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging down and legs spread open, then insert the two prongs side by side into the marris, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs; then open your hand with the entire instrument as you did with the pliers, according to the amount that you want to open the mouth of the marris, until the baby comes out as it wishes.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These tools are all covered and have similar shapes; and when the physician has arranged them, he works more quickly, and higher for humans due to their size.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Never leave the tool unprepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold back her afterbirth, and then make her vomit with a strong emetic, and hold your hands on her mouth and nose; if she jumps due to this, it's good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If she does not do this, take the pot or basin, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as dittany, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a cloth or lid on the pot, and the other end in the woman's mouth, and hold it until the vapors enter the woman; then make her vomit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second one jumps hastily.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 And if it remains after this treatment and does not heal, as instructed by the midwife, she should moisten her left hand with sesame oil or mustard plaster and then apply it to nature, and wait for it to soften; and when she has found it, she should take it and stretch it little by little straight, so that the husband does not resist extraction; but it should be moved lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; it will come out and detach.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 And if the husband's private parts have been stretched out, we have said the cure for dilatation and fumigation of herbs; and if it does not heal with what has been said, ensure you do not pull too hard; but it is necessary that he who is at the husband's private parts ties him to the woman's leg, then anoint it with ointment four-formula; if she can, she will close it and it will heal; however, when she can, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head of the patient, and it injures her.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore it is necessary to use suitable fumigations for this: no one has proven fumigations of dill and dried figs effective.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman for the retention of flowers and the second birth is as follows:    (This sentence is incomplete, so I couldn't provide a full translation)
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And it appears to be like a glass container, and the soft part is placed inside its nature, and the shoulders are held wide open over the fire; and let there be fumigation over the coals, and the tinder until it is ruined, and start another one.
de percier lou fondement	to drill the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many children are born without a foundation pierced, but rather stopped up by some subtle plaster: therefore the ball should be perforated with that plaster to its proper depth, and not with a sharp spur; and ensure that it does not touch the wound; then put damp linen in wine and oil, and apply ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will reopen, place a leaden cannula over it (the boil), and leave it for several days, and remove it when the pus begins to move towards the rooms (of the body).
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess occurs; it should be covered: whether it is healed, as we have said in the treatment of a poultice.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodules and grow larger if they come from above the foundation or in the space between two parts, whether there is one fistula or more; and when that nodule becomes old, it should be operated on, and moisture wakes up a blister or thin boil, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are known by those who see or experience discharge or ventosity, when the patient experiences discharge, and possibly urination.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that reach up to the bladder and halfway down the penis; they reach up to the joint of the thigh, and up to the knee joint.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus it is recognized the fistula persistent at the base, not persistently; and it is that you bite your finger or the base, and bite a thin needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twist in it.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 If it has a twist, then you bite a fine splint or horsehair until you feel the splint or hair on your finger; and if you do not feel it, and no pus or wind or worm comes out of it as we have said: know that it does not perforate; hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has perforated up to the bladder or up to the conduit of urine, if it spouts urine and cannot heal with medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is perforated up to the joint of the leg, then the splint comes to the level; if there is no twist and the pain around it subsides, then it is that it should always be bowed, and no medicine or treatment with ointment is of any use for it; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure other than labor, and vanity of foolish men who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In one who is not paralyzed and is not old, with hope of healing by means of iron, as I have experienced, the patient lies between your hands on their back; you raise their legs up to their thighs, and bend their thighs towards their stomach; then thrust a tent of iron or wood, if there is any curvature, until you know where the curvature comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels pain around the foundation, then you must thrust your index finger there, and if it gives way then the curvature has been pierced; if it is covered or you feel a hard spot there, then know that it is paralyzed; do not try to move it as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 One should always say that some can be cured well, but it happens rarely; and the aid that one does, is when one heats the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as before said; and put it very hot in the fistula, until it comes out from the base; and do this twice or three times, until you know that these charred substances are burnt, which resemble a feather of an eye; and then cure with moistened tents in butter, until the char is gone, then cure with ointment soothing and healing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If it cannot be healed otherwise and the fistula is pierced up to the base and between the finger and the fistula a thick cover of charcoal or syfac is placed, and you see the fistula through the cover with care; if the cautery is applied from the beginning of the fistula, and pushed forward towards the fistula, and then the cautery after, until it reaches the top of the fistula; then the fistula will be freed, and charred; then separate those charred substances that resemble a feather of an eye, and nothing remains.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound gapes and separates, cut between you and it, then cauterize with fire or medicine ointment.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 The fire cautery brings about two good things: the burning of these adjacent charred areas, and the extinguishing of blood and drying of moisture; then it cures tents moistened with butter or cooked cheese until the flesh turns brown, and the charred areas are buried in the boil; then it heals the wound with ointments made from hard char and dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it becomes healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	If a fistula comes all the way up to the bottom, and is separated from the body, push your thumb or finger against the bottom, and check it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the boil and between it is the fabric or leather or charred areas close to piercing, there should be no recourse but the path of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods: either you cauterize as we have said, or you strike to the bottom, or if possible apply tents and heal as before; do not go too deep, so that you do not cover the foundation and bring on suppuration through willful action; then heal, as we have said; perhaps it may become healthy again, or you remove that covering and clean where it was pierced, either with a tent or another tool provided; then burn away the charred material in the wound, as much as possible; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula at the distant part from the foundation: it will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And sometimes abscesses are formed in this manner: and when you squeeze the tent (possibly a pimple) into the abscess, it is where the base of the tent adjoins the skin above, take a lance with a sharp point according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	and insert one thread twisted in two, and press the tent on the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head (or top).
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is pus (pus-filled) on the edge of the base inside, then draw out the thread of that tent using your finger or base; pull out the head of the thread, bring the two heads together, and press them against each other, and leave for a day or two without moving it; hold it once when the threads touch those hard spots (pus-heads) that are between them, and open the abscess; then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce through, make it pierce in all possible ways, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is not advisable to treat a dislocated joint by covering it tightly and then curing it while it is still unhealthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The shape of the spur-like spine from which a fistula is made is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other; not so, because one should not strike what one should not strike, as you see here:
des emorroydes	piles (hemorrhoids)
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 The emorydes (cysts) come in two ways: either they are within the foundation, like a piece of resin, with small and large ones, and on the outside there is blood, and one or more of them; and they protrude from the foundation and at its base; but those that protrude have some moisture, and sometimes there is a little liquid citron juice or blood, and they have the color of the body; and the cure for these that are within the foundation is to command the patient to strain in order to evacuate them through his chambers, until the foundations come out, and then the threads can be seen; if you hurry, pinch it with pliers or hold it with your nail, then strike its roots; and if the threads cannot hold because of moisture, take a piece of linen, cloth, or cotton; and bind them to your fingers, then strike, and sprinkle some hot powders on top that act like cautery, or cauterize them as described in the chapter of cautery, until they heal completely; if the foundations cannot come out, you should enema the patient with a harsh, biting enema to clean what is around the foundation, so it can come out openly; when the patient strains and the threads are outside the foundation, the cure is easy; it is that you take hold of them with your nail or pliers, strike them, and treat as we have said, until they heal, and fear the incision with a knife.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 You must apply the stitching in this manner: take twisted thread and insert it into a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from another side, twist both ends of the thread beneath the needle, if necessary; make a knot with the thread, then tighten the thread, remove the needle, and do the same with all the others. Leave some space for bleeding; place a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote on the wound foundation and tell the patient to rest. Then leave it until it scabs over, when they are healed, treat them with ointment and other remedies, until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The dry heat of the fire or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often, there is dryness from fever in the intestines, and due to the natural constraint, when the sickness is old and medicine has no effect.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary that you cauterize the tip of a spatula or your nail with the skin above it, so it does not get moist; then let it heal as needed; and if it cannot heal, then repeat the shaving more forcefully than before until it heals and is skinned; then let it heal again.
dou fremit	toothache
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 A blister is a small growth found near the body and grows quickly; sometimes it is mistaken for frostbite, causing death-like shivering throughout the body, spreading to all parts, especially the hands.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the cure is that you take a wire of an ostrich feather or a strong chicken feather and place the wire around the frostbite, making circles around it; then turn your hand around the entire wire until it covers the frostbite completely and makes it boil; then burn the frostbite from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do as with a cat's incision of honey or iron according to this form, and be subtle beneath and draw above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce, to keep the tooth, and press more; And if you see, cauterize the froth, as it is in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the clyster   (enema)
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes they make an enema of silver or arsenic, or melted beeswax or mallet; and sometimes they make these small and large instruments according to those for whom they are prepared.  (For the treatment of different ailments)
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, when treating children who are weak and painful, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the cucurbit is both small and large, or the belly is tied in this manner:   (Note that "cucurbit" was incorrectly provided instead of "clistere".)
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 And it should have an opening where the abdomen is sewn, as you see, and the shoulders should be pierced within; and on one side there should be two holes, and in the other one; and let the abdomen or the belly be filled with a bladder of an animal or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be a space; then insert strong thread through the holes, either silk or linen in X or Y shape around, and gather the belly like a she-goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then clysterize; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or goose fat, or similar thing, then insert it gently; then spread the administrators with their two hands together until it is all visible, then remove the clyster, and tie the patient's legs to the parity, and if the medicine appears, press as much as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you plaster the patient with belly distention caused by gas, and the medicine appears to work quickly, continue until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if the hemorrhoids are foundation or abscess, whether it be the suppository also as for a child; and this is the shape of the subtle suppository on which the skin is stretched:
des plaies	in the treatment of wounds;
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the division the treatment for wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments and medicines for hands, according to the completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 The things by which wounds are made are by the thrust of a sword, cut of a knife and scissors, or lance or fist or arrow, or similar things; or those made according to the body's laws, such as wounds on the neck, head, side, belly, liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 I say that when a simple wound or sore comes about, and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is due to piercing or similar things, and the skin is all torn and the wound is large; doubt the presence of an abscess high: make it drain from the head itself, even if blood comes out from the wound, and let it drain in the opposite direction of the damaged part; and have the patient avoid filling himself with wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it does not drain, reduce the meat, do not drink wine, nor eat fatty foods; and place on the wound, if an abscess comes up there, soft cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in stiptic wine; and if there is no abscess, place on the fresh wound, with all its blood, if it is not moving due to air, a powder that I will say a little later; and if the fire has moved it, place some ointments on until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by sutures, bring them together by sewing, as I shall say for the abdominal wounds, with suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is exposed by bone, open and only stays together with a little bit, press it; then heal the wound with medicine, replace hard flesh instead of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as cooked heads (testes) and cooked wheat, also like pulses (peas), etc.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if you find or skin decay, not adhering to the bone, press it all down and pour boiling water on it, then heal it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein without a clot, which cannot stop bleeding with medicines, tie the artery and if it becomes dislocated, hold it with a thread; and if that does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if the wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy: it is that you put this powder on which hardens as soon as the arrows have moved [the wound].
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And the way of the powder is: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; three parts of live coal, and grind it finely, then apply to the wound and press firmly until it purges well and joins with all its blood; then bind it well and leave it to heal, if it does not swell; for medicine is not removed while it is still healing.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes they do this with only chalk, when there is no incense nor dragon's blood, but the wound has not moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the fire has opened the wound, by all means do not put this powder on it; but apply some digestive ointments or flour of barley made with water and honey until it boils; then heal it with other remedies until it heals.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if a bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine tweezers; and I will tell you about fractures of the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound    (literal translation)
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one in the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.   (literal translation)
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is the nerves, there is no other device but to let them heal naturally and not put anything restraining, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, as the substance of nerves is cold and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be warm, such as water boiled in gentle heat, and mixed with rose oil, and boiled again in mild heat, and other stones of this kind, and moist immediately afterwards.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, bind it with strips, then let it heal until it becomes healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 If the wounds are deep and filled with pus, pierce or open them lower down; if the arteries are cut, bleeding will come out, so cauterize it, and lance and cauterize as needed; if the spine of the throat is cut or the glands, keep the flesh from touching the throat but place it in its natural position, then hold it in place for a while, and treat with decayed ointments until it heals; if the wound presses against the bone, open it up; and if there are pieces of bone, remove them all if you can, and leave those that you cannot have until the wound suppurates and discharges pus; if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder on it as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there is bone in the wound and a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a spear or sword wound, and the wound is deep, look to see if the patient shows signs of breathlessness from the wound: know then that the wound is fatal; and if the wound is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it immediately, nor bind it for the blood that would cause it to dissolve quickly and return to the heart, and let the patient die; but apply attracting ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 or 4 days, or more; and there will be no spasms, nor bad tremors of heart or signs of breathlessness from the wound; and when you see good condition, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat the wound and other treatments while it is healthy; and if it cannot heal, then open it up, knowing that there is a fistula; treat it as necessary.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 If the wound is from a sword or knife and it is simple, whether on the front or back, treat it accordingly; if it is large, sew it; if it is small, apply powder; and if it has penetrated the bone and taken pieces with it, either clean the wound and pull out the pieces; and if they cannot be pulled out, let the wound drain, and align the extraction; and for other wounds on other limbs, the decision is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The displacement of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The dislocation of the abdomen is large, medium and small; from a large wound, the intestines sometimes escape once or the intestine's nerves, through which they are incised; and suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because the intestines have to be put back in place with difficulty, unless they are put back piece by piece; because the intestines swell suddenly when they feel the cold, they shrink more easily, and therefore the medium-sized wound is better, because the intestines are reset in their place more easily than for others. And know that the wound of the abdomen is according to four ways: the two common sutures occur in the abdominal wound, and the sutures of other body wounds and two other specific ones are common for other wounds; but they are more appropriate with the suture of the abdomen, and I will say one and explain it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 I say that when the wound is small and nothing from the internal organs protrudes out of it, and there is little to repair, this is easy in one of the two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, warm it in any manner: moisten a sponge or dampen a thin cloth only with hot water, or cook it in hot squill and cyperus root and spike, and massage the intestines until the swelling disappears; and sometimes do this with wine restraining, and it is necessary to have it so that it can be drained.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling separate, anoint the intestine with hot or cold water and rotten vegetables, because this closes the entrance to very little; and if it cannot enter, make a small wound with the instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to drain it, that we should not cut it without great necessity; and this is the instrument for splitting: slice it open inside but do not tear it apart, and look at its shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines fall out, you should put them back in their natural place in their proper position, if you have the ability, because it is important to do so.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is in the part below the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his head; if it is in the part below the navel, then raise the head and feet higher than the parts below; similarly, if the wound is in one of the two sections of the belly, you should take care that the damaged section is raised above the other; and in this way, you should administer what I say for large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 Place small wounds with what suits you, then have a compassionate person who dyes all the wound's edges with his hand, and gather the lips; and this is the common method of stitching, and it is that you take one or more needles, according to the size of the wound's width, then leave space from the chief of the wound, and sew a needle where it has good strong thread; and pierce the two skins with the two skins beneath, which is under the skin, until you make it pierced from that part, and gather the two chiefs of the skin together threefold; then bind a double thread around the needle in two parts, then assemble the two skins of the wound accordingly, then leave space, and sew another needle; then tie the thread as you did the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what is necessary with the needles, until the entire wound is bound; and the needles should be moderate, neither too thin nor too thick, for thin needles pierce all the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well: therefore they should be moderate. And it is not good to push the needles too far from the flesh and skin, so that they do not injure or open the wound before suturing; then sew the heads of the needles, so that they do not poke the patient while sleeping, and put weights or bandages on the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed; and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires one needle or two needles for second stitching, and it is that you assemble the two skins of the skin and the two skins beneath together with one needle where it has medium strong thread; and when you have sewn all the parts threefold, then withdraw the needle to the part where you started, in the manner of sewing cloth; and place space between each stitch the thickness of a minor egg; this suturing is called human, and I sewed a wound with a man who had a belly, which was pierced by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and it was the intestines two palms wide, and the wound was within the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestine before it had been XXIV hours [outside], and the wound was sewn up for 15 days, and it healed, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not cure him with liniment, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicine; and I put sense more on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Furthermore, I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing: take the needle, and pierce from the outer part to the inner; when it has pierced the skin directly, if the chief [layer] of the flesh or that which you have pierced with the needle, pierce it again from the other side of the inner part to the outer; and the meaning of this suturing is that you sew as a pelter does fur, and leave one time the flesh of one part, and take it again of the other, until the suture is completely accomplished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second method of stitching, as Galen describes it, is done by joining the two parts together naturally, and applying one edge of the mirror to the other edge, in this manner: stick a needle or edge of the mirror close by, and pierce only that place; leave the two edges of the mirror aside; then turn the needle and pierce from the outer part to the inner, through the two edges of the mirror; then pierce both again from the outer part to the inner, in the two other edges of the mirror on the opposite side; and this is the more common method of stitching.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galiens said this word and it is confirmed by others, that the belly should be sewn with two needles, each having thread in them; and one needle should be driven in from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets; and know that when the wound is within the belly, the stitching is more difficult than other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgment of the wound is similar to that of other wounds: it is that when you discover the fresh wound full of blood, before the arrow has moved it, you should replace the intestine and the flesh; then put powder healing char on it, and if the arrow has moved it, apply any available ointment until the wound stops bleeding; stitch the skin, sew the sifac, and the mirach; then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, put old cotton on it, as soon as it begins to stop bleeding, two times a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 Since the wounds are simple in many cases and if you doubt that the wound spreads to the main limbs, it is necessary to moisten light linen with warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the swelling, and under the saddle; and if there is pain or rotting in the belly and this happens frequently, clisterize with black wine, especially if the rotting comes up to the intestines; and pierce it and know that when it is the large intestines, it heals more easily than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine known as "jeun" cannot heal when it is perforated, and this is because of the inflammation of the veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 And if the gristle jumps out of the wound, put it back as you would an intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned yellow or black, you must cut away the black part, so that blood does not come from it, because there are veins and arteries; then seize what is between the ligament, and hang the two heads suspended from the area below the wound to facilitate extraction when the gristle falls out, and the wound swells.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the eyeball
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 If the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, because I have seen that a man was wounded or pierced by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became abscessed and developed into a fistula, with discharge and flatulence; I cured it according to what I knew, and did not stop treating it until it healed, and the edges sutured.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I saw it sealed, I doubted that the patient had an illness in his stomach; and there was no illness, but he improved with better nutrition, and eatings and drinkings; and any experimentors said that when a small wound is in the intestine, it should be sewn up in this manner: take large clamps, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the clamp has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips so that it stretches the mouth open; and then hit the head, and hold it so it cannot unfasten, then put another clamp after in the same manner until the wound is fully captured; and sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 If the head of the intestine becomes inflamed, no harm comes to the patient, and the intestine can be tied with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the end of the thread of the animal's intestine which is sharpened, then tie it to the head of the thread made of flax twine, then put the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine and mend it in the wound; and this method of stitching does not provide anything but hope and faith; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, there is no remedy or health, except by subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or that it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that every wound or abscess, when it heals and forms a cavity, is universally called "fistula", and the same when it is closed and becomes hollow.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And fistula is according to the truth, a knot filled with hard and white matter, where there is no pain, and is as hollow as the feather of an eggshell; sometimes clear and hollow, and other times thick; sometimes small, and other times quite large; and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed and has no flesh, it is not a wonder if it is due to one of the nine causes: namely, by the small amount of blood or flesh; or by its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, and above the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or it has too much pus; or the place is destroyed, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or the corruption is the nature of pestilence; or because the region has a slow digestion, and healing is late and weak by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and the medicines for their cures in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Therefore it is necessary that I tell you the treatment for fistula which is done by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the sides, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and it is such that affects the property of the principal member, and similar areas.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And all such fistulas are difficult to heal, except for labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come as I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it recognized, take a tent of fat or metal, if the fistula is straight, pierce it; and if the fistula is crooked, seek a thin probe of wood, for probes bend with curvature; and if the fistula has been torn and you cannot seek it well by probes, cleanse it through one of the openings, for moisture flows from one opening to another, and cleanses; then heal it as well as you can, so that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and whether it is closed completely, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where he feels it; and when you truly know where it is, and whether it is far from jointure, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the areas that I have said, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the rotten flesh and corrupted parts that are inside; and then heal until it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply rooted straightly, you must cut completely, as much as possible, then put moistened medicine-filled probes into it, and push them to the top of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains in the depth; and then put salve on fresh char, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is rotten from the fistula, cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If a vein or nerve does not bother or major limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, remove all the corruption as much as possible, then treat with charms appropriate for healing until it heals; and if it does not heal and returns bowed, know that you are not yet done: strip and clean as deep as you can, remove all the corruption, then restore the joint; and if it is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If the corruption is too deep that you cannot reach it, know that there is no other means but to wait for nature; and if there is a small corrupted bone that you can extract with pliers, remove it with the appropriate tool for that purpose, and if there are many bones, remove all of them without leaving any; and if moisture opposes you or there is error or fear, strike the moisture and the source of corruption with a hammer and charcoal, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something irritating pus on the wound and leave it until the flesh surrounds the bone, and then the bones will be easier to move; and if it is a large bone, as in the leg or thigh, press only the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a large part of corruption that reaches the bone molecule, it must be cut off and covered up to the corruption, and then heal until it heals; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened in a man's leg, so you can take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 The young man was around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to something coming from within the body, and pus accumulated in the leg, and it did not have a way to escape; but they foolishly worked on it until the abscesses opened, and much pus came out, and it became a fistula, and many people who were bowed and weak with moisture of the body gathered around him; and many tried to cure him for two years, and there was no skill in the art of hands, until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines they used to treat him, and the corruption that came out through the wounds at great expense; and the young man's body became red, and he had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I inserted a tent in one of the wounds, and then I searched for all the wounds, and found that some came towards each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 Then I hurried and cut in one of the wounds as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone within; I considered that only this bone was corrupted, except for what I left behind; and I began to heal the wound with salves for a long time, but could not close it; then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found continuous corruption in the bone, and left it, and then closed it up, and thought of healing the limb; but I could not go any further than cutting around one palm's breadth of the bone, and let it hang loose, then I healed it with salves; and it became healthy and closed quickly, but it was no longer necessary to continue the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation (procedure), it often bleeds profusely, but it became completely healthy, and a hard cyst grew in the bone's place, and it was well-positioned and had no harm or disadvantage in any way, neither in its appearance nor in coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 If the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take a suture, and tie it at the open end of the bone, and command someone to pull it up; place another thicker linen suture over the cyst that is below the bone, and tighten it so that you draw the corrupt cyst downwards, and expose the healthy cyst in the place where you want it to be, ensuring it does not harm the healthy cyst; place fire or a plaster under the bone to melt the corrupt cyst; stay like this as long as one can see and feel the corruption, and should also be done again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 If the bone is rotten and will not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, you should remove all the flesh first; then place charcoal under it, and then press from one side to another on the area of the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is at a joint, strike the dislocated joint, and hold the bone that contains the other part; and if the corruption is between two joints, there is no other choice but to cut it; and if the corruption is at the end of the hand or foot, this is very difficult, but you must examine the corruption and see how it can be opened; clean it in every way that you can, but make sure not to harm the vein or nerve; and know that the instruments for cutting these bones are many, according to the type of bone and its appearance, its thickness and its subtlety, its size and its smallness, and its hardness; and therefore, you should prepare an instrument suitable for each type of work; and know that the work will show you the tool that you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the signs of the diseases; and choose the tool that you need according to what is required.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The shoulder may dislocate either internally or externally; and when you have tried the remedy for this corruption through medication and it does not work, it is necessary to cover that member up to the level where the corruption occurs, so that the patient may escape death from this, or a greater evil, namely the defect of the member; and the signs are that the limb becomes black as if it were burned by fire, and later turns black, for the corruption of the member spreads from one to another and affects the entire body; hasten with the covering, and if it is due to the attack of certain venomous animals, such as sea scorpions, snakes, and similar, cover the head when the corruption is in the throat, and do not give it any space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 And if it reaches as far as the hand, strike at the joint so that the corruption does not reach to the arm; and if it reaches the arm, strike at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and no remedy can be found other than the amount of its potency; and thus one should act when the corruption comes or stops: if it comes at the first joint, strike after the next joint; and if it comes or stops, strike the whole affected area; and if it moves to the leg, strike at the knee joint; and if it goes beyond the knee, there is no other remedy for the sick but to let them die; and the manner of striking or soothing the member is that you bind it above and below, extend one of the strips downward, and another strip upward, and you loosen the flesh that is between the two strips with a spatula wide enough so that the bone is exposed; then strike or soothe, and place linen cloth on each side so that the soothing does not touch the healthy tissue, and bring another injury and abscess to the sick.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the area quickly, or apply some powders that restrain; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the limb with a suitable bandage, and cure it until it heals; and I will tell you what happened to a man in my presence: he had a blackness which seemed to be burned by fire, and this corruption first appeared in his foot under the heel, so that it consumed the entire heel; and when the man saw the corruption, he hastily covered the heel with something, and it healed; and a long time later, the corruption returned to the heel or the hand, and it came to me, and I gave him remedies after the purification of his body, but the corruption could not be stopped; and he asked that I amputate his hand, and I did not want, for I had hope of restoring the matter; and also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, as his vitality was weak; and he gave up all hope, returned to his earth, and hastily covered his hand with something, and it healed; and I have told this story only for this reason: that one does otherwise, if needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 Aposteme sometimes occurs in the charnut place and stays for such a long time that it causes a large abscess of pus; and then it breaks open, and the pus jumps out, and the place remains open as a wound, like a warrior's; and the skin which is above it is as thin as unbleached linen, and does not go all the way to the bone or nerve. Such a disease is called "sain", but not "fistule"; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone entirely, it is called "fistule". The skin should be cut around it completely, just as one would cut linen; and it will not heal due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if the skin hardens and the corruption is not yet complete, and the skin thickens with flesh, cure it with a clistere thus: check if the breast is large and the area around it smells bad; then apply an Egyptian-made medicine clistere: take asafetida, oil, litharge, equally, and cook in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; then take as needed from this, make it watery and honey, and apply the clistere to the breast, and hold the anus; leave the medicine for two hours, then remove it straining; do this often, until the breast is softened and the pus is expelled; and at no time clisterize with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes from a vine stick, pour water on it, then strain, and apply, until you know that the breast is well purified; and if the patient cannot endure this, or the Egyptian medicine and the water of ashes, then clisterize with water and honey or mead where the mead has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the blood thicken; and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breast is well purified, then apply whatever heals the sores in the breast, and take emplastrum diaphoretic, and make it with rose oil and vine; or clisterize with various medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken their properties or treatments for ointments; and if the opening in the breast is small, and the clistere applicator cannot enter, enlarge it slightly with a knife, and apply an Egyptian-made linen, or basilicon ointment, until it is sufficiently enlarged; and if the wound is too large, leave it open only enough for the clistere to enter, and if the pus from the breast protrudes above, cover or place lower than that.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	1. When the bone is fully fractured, do not allow any char to enter it; and if you cannot cover the wound beneath as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bone moves to its lowest point because when the bone is fully fractured, do not allow any char to enter it and if you cannot cover the wound beneath as you see fit, arrange it in this manner: the bone should move gently downwards, but do not leave anything of the bone; take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and place a linen cloth over the entire wound; then press forcefully towards the pierced wound, which is larger than the first, because afterwards bind it tightly with another cloth according to the size of the pierced wound, and place it on the pierced wound to align the bone, but do not remove the large cloth until after several days; and the one who is on the pierced wound should frequently remove it in order to realign the bone, and be aware of what comes out from the bone, whether it is poison or pus or something indigestible; also pay attention if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in this manner and you see the nature that rises on the pierced wound, know that the wounds have already healed, and approach health; then release it in the morning, or the third day, and when you release the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the liniment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	If the breasts overflow with undigested matter for many days, know that the breasts do not swell.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle venomous worms come after a long time, do not despair of health, for it approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 And there are those whose flesh takes a long time to heal in their wounds, and of those who act contrary to this; and if the breast swells indigestibly after many days, know that it will not heal; and if the breast does not heal after being drained, and is swollen, apply drying medicines with dry substance and wet virtue, such as oil of roses, and equal parts of old wine in substance; then mix and use them; and the same can be done more effectively when oil of roses is unavailable, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them, powder them on the honey while it is over the fire, and then apply the dough to the breast, and sometimes an astrologer long is administered, and roots of celestial plants, which are like flour and centaur; and use simple or compound remedies: grind them, make powder, and put on the honey I said before, and use it; and if the patient is not healed by this cure, know that corruption is complete, and makes an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or ligaments; if the patient is not healed by this cure, then know that the corruption is complete, and make an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or ligaments; if the patient is not healed by this cure, then heal with a fistula cure as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the nail bed
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 Parasitic abscess originates beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or sometimes in other parts; and when it grows, and care is not taken, the abscess spreads, runs and spills pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and possibly the entire nail; then the corrosion reaches the bone, causing a strong-smelling pain, and the joint becomes wide and discolored.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail, and cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The cautery is a great aid if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound; and if the nail grows into the flesh, begins to swell, and bleeds, you must put heat underneath the nail so as not to burn the flesh, and push it upwards, and gently and lightly strike the nail with a sharp instrument to remove it; then heal it with ointments until it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if the corrosion is in the bone, strike it and draw pus out, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see it becoming corrupted, strike it with a splinter as before mentioned, then let it heal until it is healthy; and if it is wounded and hurts greatly, it must be healed first; then strike the nail with a sharp instrument in a crosswise cutting, but watch that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, put something on it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain in the hand gradually subsides.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 One must straighten the fingers that are born in some people by chance, and they are all flesh, and sometimes there is skin or bone there, and occasionally there is a nail; and none of these grow from the root of a joint, or their growth is in one of our palms.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 The one that is born in any nail of the hand does not grow, and the one that is born at the joint of the hand, by chance sometimes grows; the shape of the one that is flesh is light, in this manner: cut it back to its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure, take care.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the one who is born or should be in the last nail, you must cut the flesh roundly up to the bone first, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and then treat it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together in the fingers also come together by birth, or by injury, or by fire burn, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 If it is necessary to sew up that wound, the limbs should be repaired according to their natural forms; then put between two cloths or linen moistened in oil of roses, so they do not stick together; or you can put between two thin pieces of wood until the limbs are joined as needed.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Similarly, if it comes to either of its sides with the palm, you strike the joint as necessary.
des vils	 of peasants
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 These are veins that are thick and full of melancholic superfluidities, which come in many members of the body; and it happens more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must administer purge of bile at times, and then the healthy from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The iron cure is according to two methods: one is when they are sewn and the black blood is drawn out; and the other method is that you tie the vein and let it all drain out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The size should be as follows: first stretch the leg with hot strong water until the flesh becomes soft, then hold the patient's leg above the knee up to the part below the groin; then cut open the vein in I or II or III, of a large size, then separate and draw out black blood up to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the disease can withstand; and then tie it, and command him to bandage himself with meat broth colored black; and start the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and this helps the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The bandaging should be as follows: lay the patient's leg flat if there is much hair on it, then immerse it in water or put it in a bath and stretch the patient's leg with hot water until it turns red and swells the veins; if you don't have water, heat the leg with fire, and then cut open the vein at the long part of the thigh to the top of the knee or below to the ankle; tear the skin around the vein from both sides, exposing it when it is felt; it should appear red and black, and where the skin surrounds the vein seems like a white cord; then push the meat down, allowing it to swell under the skin, and then gently tie it at the ankle, then cut another opening 3 inches further; tear the skin over the vein again from both sides, exposing it, then draw it out as you have done, and move to another incision; then make another cut, or more if needed, then draw it out, and tie it to the second knot, as you did before; then make another cut, or more as necessary, draw it out, and tie it at the end of the bone; then pull and draw out until it is completely emptied, then bind it; and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, insert a sharp thin double-threaded needle, bind and pull, and push it down under the meat; turn your hand from side to side until it is emptied; be careful not to cut it, for if it cuts, you cannot draw it out or lift it, which would harm the patient; and when you have treated it all, place linen soaked in wine and oil over the wound; and cure it until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And if the eye is contracted, twisted and rolled together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it open but do not cover it; pull it out as we have stated before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The form of the iron used to pierce the eye should be curved and not break, but should not pierce the vein; it is of large curvature, for if it were thin, it would pierce the vein. However, it should be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is embedded in the legs, in warm areas where no grass or trees grow, and in dry land without moisture; it can also grow elsewhere, and this happens due to a swelling that comes from beneath the skin, as it grows within the body like a snake, embedding itself between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very large inflammation comes in the leg and then the joint changes and the vein starts to forcefully appear, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the joint opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of wood from 7 to 10 inches long and sew it, and leave the wood on the leg, and each time it swells outwards, you wrap it around the wood again and sew; and if it is too long, cut off a part, and wrap the rest, but do not cover its root until it is completely out; for if you cover it, it returns to the flesh, causing abscess and pus or poor health; therefore, it should be treated carefully until the head, and nothing remains on the body; and this vein is sometimes when it is treated 5 or 10 fingers long, or even a foot. Once I had a case where it was 10 fingers long, and when you cauterize it, you press the iron or the hot iron, and pierce until it all comes out; empty the matter that is inside, and apply external pus-reducing medicines for several days, then cure as you would with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And sometimes in opening this vein, the hand slips, especially when it is open at the joint of the foot or finger; much blood spills out and it jumps back; so you must heal it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 of worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land because it often appears in cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes through the entire body expanding and contracting, and feels from one member to another until it reaches the skin or bursts out; and it is infected with corruption of certain humors, as snakes, serpents, roundworms, or ascaris in the stomach; and there is doubt about its harmfulness, for when it goes through the body, it ascends to the head, and it comes to the eye, possibly enters it, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it to be treated and drained, one can force it out only when it moves: therefore, you must bind the limb above and below with a strong rope tightly, then strike upon it and pull it out, and if it goes in deeply into the flesh and cannot be seen, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does is that it runs oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold a lizard-like clamp under it, then strike upon it and pull it out; and one must use the patient with purification of body medicines soluble for bad humors, and avoid consuming foul-smelling foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 Of the pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This disease is called in our land "wind-affliction", and it is a pain that moves in some members, and spreads from member to member; and I have seen what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to a sick woman, and I found her arm swollen, and I saw a small boil in the armpit of the arm; then afterwards, it rose up like a worm towards the shoulder, faster than anything alive, like a live knife when it cuts from one thing to another; the pain spread from that place, and entered the shoulder, and then shortly after ran throughout the body, until she came to the other arm; then she told me that she turned around the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how it moved from one member to another, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 In addition, I would have wished many who wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I did not want it for myself, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed, and due to this, such constrained windiness appeared; and it does not apply according to this reasoning to those who are delicate and have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you wish to cure this disease and the patient feels such pain, if it opens as we have said, lie it above and below quickly, then strike above so that the constrained windiness goes to another place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it at your eyes, cure it with such things that expel windiness, like fetid pills, pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	 arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their shapes and according to the parts of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 The diversity of them is that there are those with large points, small ones, sharp, and blunt; and those with two edges, and those with tongues, and those with segments; and the one that falls into any member falls according to two ways: either in a principal member, like the brain, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, kidneys, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it falls into any of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appears: then it is necessary that you take care of extracting this arrow, because death comes in many forms; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not completely embedded, pull it out and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the sign of the brain when an arrow hits it and pierces the bone, and a swelling appears on top of the skull, is when scotomie (blindness), scole (hardness), esvertin (convulsion), roujor (redness), and inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile; and possibly without fever from the nose or ears; and possibly losing speech and voice; and a white, moist discharge comes from the wound, resembling pus, and in addition it swells like bruise of flesh; and if this sign appears, avoid treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 And the sign of an arrow when it strikes or pierces the liver, is that it lies near the left kidney and feels like it has been inserted into a hard object, not empty; possibly the liver becomes swollen as if with pus, and black blood flows from the wound, and coldness and cold sweat comes, and fainting: then there is no doubt that death follows.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of an arrow that never pierces the flesh is when bubbles rise from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, sighs loudly and seeks fresh air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if an arrow falls into the mattress of the bed, it is removed between the ribs; and it causes great pain, deep breathing, and groaning; and all the limbs of the shoulder move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	If an arrow falls into the stomach, possibly something from indigested meat may escape from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	If an arrow falls into the belly and nothing escapes from the intestines through the wound, there is no hope in the treatment or removal of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, as the hand, arm, throat, shoulder, armpit, backbone, waist, hips, legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of this you do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to the man that an arrow or shard struck the root of his nose; I pulled it out from another side below the ear fat, and it came out without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And by playing, an arrow was retrieved that had struck the oil bag under the paper, and the arrowhead was hidden, and it could not be reached but the tip towards the trunk; and the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, with a light iron tip on ears; the game was without pain, and no bad accident came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And retrieved an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with iron ears; I had to beards, and made it thin enough that I pulled it out, and the Christian was without pain.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And I removed an arrow from the man who was either head or belly, and I thought he would die; but after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow and drew it out, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And if an arrow strikes a man either in the head or back, and the wound is sewn up over it; the arrow remains inside him, and his natural condition does not change, nor does any harm occur in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And visit another man who was struck by an arrow in his face, and the wound was sewn up; he endured great pain for a long time, and many similar symptoms occurred.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And remove an arrow from the body of the prince's king, who was lying within the snow, and was slightly slanting to the right side; and the arrow was fully imbedded. I was called for his treatment after it had been there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 Found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 I pierced it with a fine probe and felt nothing; but he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was the arrow tip. I placed a soothing and digestive plaster on the spot as the flesh did not swell; and the arrowhead appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I left the plaster for many days, healed the wound completely, and kept him in that state for a long time until he felt the arrow within his belly; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 I apply a corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it is opened, and then I probe it, and feel the head of the arrow which adheres in place; afterwards I treat the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow appears visible; and it heals well within four months, and then I release the wound that I had closed with pliers, and pull it apart from both sides, and it could not come out; therefore I did not stop trying and inventing ways to extract the instrument, until I made the pliers properly, as described at the end of this chapter, until I draw it, and return the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the men judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored; I will then restore it, and the wound will heal, and the patient will be completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so take care in this which I do not specify, because books cannot grasp everything; but wise masters understand well a little thing and the present and failing case, discover new work, and find a new instrument, for the things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows enter the members where they are driven only through two ways: either through the way they enter or from another side; and that which leaps out through the place where it enters is an arrow entering into flesh, and leaps out sometimes at once.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And if it does not jump now, leave it until the charms are spread around, and align the joint; and in the same way, if it is pierced into the bone, and cannot come out, leave it for some days, and move it every day; then it will jump, and if it still does not jump, perforate around with a sharp instrument, until the sides are widened, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 And if the arrow is pierced into the skull bone and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, or any of the accidents that I have mentioned before happen to the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it until it is aligned after some days; for if the arrow reaches so far, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow has not been lodged deep into the bone but only slightly, and the patient experiences no severe incident and remains for some days, you should devise a means to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply inserted and cannot be removed, administer poultices around it, as I told you before; then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And if the arrow is lodged deep inside the body and cannot be seen, you should search for it diligently; if you find it, draw it out with any suitable instrument; if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves or veins, widen the wound as much as possible; draw the arrow out when you can, and if it has ears like they hold onto something, remove the flesh that is lodged in it by half on both sides as much as you can, then bend or break the ears of the arrow to facilitate its removal; be careful not to break the arrow as this would make it harder to draw.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you cannot pull it out in one go, push the linen cloth around it until it is reached the joints, then pull it gently, as the extraction should be done carefully.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And if the flowing of blood hinders (the process), bring forth what we have said about the cure in its chapter; and beware of incision on the nerve and the vein, and provide means to draw out the arrowhead gently, quickly or firmly, as circumstances require; and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help that can be, and if you cannot do so, place him according to what the signs indicate.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 The arrow that comes from another place, opening something or the skin is swollen in one place as can be seen or felt; cut (it) then, until tongs can grasp it, and pull it out. If it jumps away now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And if it cannot be drawn out, leave it still and then continue the extraction until it comes forth; and if it was of an arrow, push it all in; and if it fell, and you see that you must administer a forceps, use a forceps so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the forceps; and then push further, and if the arrow is caught by the forceps, push in the forceps with the pointed end entering, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if the arrow is touched (by the forceps), it is necessary that you cut around where the venom is, as much as possible, then treat the wound as required.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if an arrow falls or pierces the abdomen, bladder, ribs or side, and it is close enough to reach, cover it if you can; avoid covering the vein and nerve, then pull it out, then cut the wound if necessary; and cure it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tweezers used to extract arrows resemble an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape of the hair root is similar to the feather of a bird, to guide the point of an arrow, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pliers for pointing and straightening is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	incisions of the body common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The veins from which one recovers are thirty-one, so it has eighteen branches, that is to say: two bandages after the ears, called the "dou herbech"; and the two arteries in the two temples visible; and the two veins in the eyes' hollows, called "aspir"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the neck; and the two tendons that are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the lips, which are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins that are commonly healed in every arm are V: one is the cephalic, which is located on the left costal side, and it's called by the lay people "arm vein"; the median is called "fistula", composed of the cephalic and basilic, and it's called by the lay people "heart vein"; the basilic is located on the right costal side, and it's called by the lay people "abdominal vein", and it's above the elbow, and it's the one that is opened which clearly appears near the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 The cubital vein is the one that is between the ulnar and little finger, and has two rainfall systems; in the leg there are three veins: one is under the wrist on the left costal side, another subsaphenous vein at the right ankle, and the vein called "nasse", which is located at the other ankle's wrist; in the other leg, there are three veins below these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The first sore after the ears helps with ancient catharras and migration; and the quality of the cure, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head, rub the place or the sores with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a screw until the two sores appear behind the ears in the two places depending on the head; then press down on it when you feel the pulse beneath your hand, and hold firmly; then take the lancet, and thrust it through the sore up to the bone, then pull your hand all along the sore, and strike and the skin and the sore well two times through; and make the blood come out until you see; then strain and tie it, until it is healed; and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The first vein of the two that are in the temples, is suitable for treating old, sore, and commonly occurring inflammations of the eyes; and the quality of this vein is as I say: and it is that the patient extends their neck so that the two veins appear clearly; and you feel a pulse under your chin, then press on it; then lift the skin above the vein to your chin mark, and push the lancet into it, and lift the vein up, and break it, as you have done in the other veins, and draw blood according to your need; then release the patient, and place your chin on the vein for an hour, then cover it with cotton; and then form a bandage around it and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about its treatment and its extraction, or the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The vein in the forehead is as important as the cephalic vein in ancient facial diseases, and it has migrated and reddened; and the qualities are such that the patient stretches his neck while turning, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Place the tip on the vein and press from your hand or something else, allowing the blood to flow according to the quantity you see; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein when it is healthy and not once during any of its workings should one use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Moreover, the flames should not be too sharp; and pierce through obliquely because the bone is close, and accidents may occur if the flames are too fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The veins in the two eyelids aid in redness, tearing, reddening, swelling, and facial diseases; and the qualities of their veins are that the patient stretches his neck while twisting a little link, as before; then tie it, and make the tie with a short flame, but not too wide, for there is no heat.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the fire is subtle, perhaps it breaks; then make an incision for the blood, as much as you need, and then tie it up with a cloth, and secure it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The incision of the vein near the nose is effective for ague, scrofula, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, especially when it is old; and the quality of the incision is that the patient holds his neck, then presses his nose to your left hand, takes subtle flame long, and thrusts it into the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open easily and the wound will start to heal soon; do not go too deep, make the incision according to necessity, then let it rest for a night, as it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The straining of the second joint aids in the setting of the ankle, and at the beginning of swelling, and many diseases, and infection, and corrosion, and herpes, and abscesses; and the quality of the straining is such that the patient stretches their neck under one and the other, as we have said; and the master standing above the patient, and the patient lies on the seat, then strain the vein gently along its length, then draw the blood moderately, or as much as necessary; then close another vein, then untie the ligament, and gently tighten all the veins so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	 Of the liver surgery
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The translation of the given line is as follows: "The opening of veins in the lips above helps in cooling in the mouth, and in corruption of the gums, and cuts in the lips, and toothache and around."
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 And the qualities of surgery are to make the patient sit before you and hold his neck as I said; then turn the liver, and look at the two veins, one on the right liver and the other on the left, and they can be recognized by the fact that they are black and have small black veins around them; so seize both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are uncertain, seize the largest of each pair, and also do the same for the veins above and below in the same way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 Of the liver beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The surgery of the veins beneath the tongue is done after the cephalic surgery, and it is at the incision of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth; and the qualities of surgery are that the patient lies down with his hands between the sun, and the tongue is lifted, and look under each side to find a black vein: seize both of them, but do not go too deep, as beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The veins from which one commonly heals are healed in two ways: either by pricking it with a large instrument made of mirrat or subtle olive oil, and this is called "anesil"; and they are large and subtle according to the size and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of mirrtin flames is very renowned, and it is wide as you see: (Translation)
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 It is necessary to open large, plain veins that contain thick and turbulent blood, and this is the form of olive oil fire.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more pointedly subtle, and is for refining subtle veins with citrus-colored thin blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The sanctuary of the basilica, one of these veins, helps with diseases that are under the throat, neck, chest, and belly; and it is necessary for the healer to bleed profusely and to release the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And if the artery is touched and bleeding occurs, it must be stopped as I have said; and the flame should not be pricked but cut like an anvil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the basilica does not open clearly, you must cut it open and change another one; or you may want to find another route for it, or bleed in its place through the arm vein: it opens clearly; and strike the flame like an anvil, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you want to find the joint of the bone, you must also stretch out the arm, touch the joint until you recognize the pulses; then mark the joint with a cross, bind the arm and burn the vein with the flame carefully; be sure not to cut into the artery when you see the joint swelling, for it is the artery: avoid that.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it rises upwards like a child's urine and the wound is red and tender, know that it is without the artery: hurry then and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger when the bleeding stops, for many times this happens; bind the arm and leave it as it is, let the patient not move it; be afraid and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If the wound is not stopped and it bleeds, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, as the head of the artery retracts; stop the bleeding in the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And take a piece of fennel root, cut it and take one half and place it well on the other until the next day; if it does not rot, that's good; if it does, heal it as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding; and the stopping of bleeding should not be greatly delayed due to the small size of the wound or the thickness of the bandage around the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The vein in the middle helps to treat bleeding from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins as we have said; therefore the healer should cleanse for the nerve that is beneath, and if it bleeds too much, and finds the nerve, inflate and heal it carefully, but may not be able to heal; this nerve opens up often, and if it does not open in some men due to its subtlety, you must treat it with an instrument such as a lancet or a needle; and avoid damaging the nerve to your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The first aid for the cephalique [head] wound is to draw blood from it and help the eyes; it is necessary to cauterize with olive oil or myrtle fire, as this is the safest of all veins, because there is neither nerve nor artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Furthermore, it is necessary to seek the shallowest vein, and not to worry if it must be done for the first time, and we try again; and sometimes the veins swell in some men, which causes difficulty for the first time, but we should not worry about it.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound, according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you should know about bloodletting is that it should not be done except to preserve health and to prevent future diseases; bloodletting should be done in one of the three veins: cephalique [head], faste [arm] or basilique [leg]; and it should be done at the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear; and it should be done on the first or third day, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The cure for the sick is not determined by a fixed hour, but whenever there is need, day or night, at all hours and in every moment; and it is not appropriate to heal children before they are fourteen years old, nor a woman carrying a child until after the fourth month up to the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	They should not heal the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 And when anyone wishes to be healed, in whatever way that may be, it is necessary that their intestines are cleared with a gentle enema if they have retained much gas, so that the veins do not attract waste from the main organs; nor should one heal the one who is too salty from food, or drunk, as long as he continues to be drunk, nor the droplet-prone; and if one wishes to heal after a colic affliction, vomiting, stomach disorder, excessive urination, hard labor, staying awake, exertion, fasting, and those who have recently had sexual intercourse or been wounded, then subtle the humors if they are too heavy, by food and drinks and medicines, if you have the power; then immerse [the patient] in water, unless something prevents it, to refine the blood, and heal the vein from the third part, as we have said; and protect that day from labor, pain, lust, and similar things; and be patient and joyful, and let the healer rise higher than the one being healed, and stroke his arm two or three times, then gently pull out the suture above; for when it is too tight or thin, it cannot heal without it; and then stroke the wound with your hands until the veins swell, and feel them; then moisten the healer's hand with a little old oil, then place his thumb of his left hand below the wound where one wishes to heal, so that the wound does not collapse or fail when striking.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 There are veins that flee like cords in a sieve, and some of them are filled with pus, so that when flame is applied, it recoils from the flame and cannot open the vein; such is one's case; and if the vein opens, the wound is too narrow, hence the surgeons should be aware of these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, that's good; if not, continue a little below or above that spot, unless it is inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 If the thigh is swollen and the patient fears, let him rest for a day or two, and do not bind his arm; perhaps pus-filled abscesses will come out; do not immerse it in water, then resume surgery if he consents; and if the wound is small or narrow, carefully and gently make an incision with a thin knife, and doubt not that there may not be as much blood flowing out as you see; apply the flame directly to the wound and open it slightly so that the thigh swells. Such happens frequently when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the joint swollen, do not start treatment immediately, but put a little bit of oil on it, as oil liquefies the body's blood, and oil is absorbed in this place where the oil is applied; administer the oil in each wound to stop the flow of blood; and similarly, use oil for every artery you treat, to stop the bleeding; and likewise, apply triacle and bowe when placing it on the joint; if it becomes too thick, make it more subtle.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 If there is a large abscess which often occurs when the incision of the vein is small, hurry up and put a damp sponge with hot vinegar on the joint and hold it for an hour; you must do this after the blood from the vein has drained, and if it remains in place after several days without black or green discoloration, that is good; and if you see any pus, apply something made of aloes or myrrh steeped in cumin, camphor, or similar substances.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And there are often abscesses and signs in the sanctuary of the temple: put your hand on it then, if you find it soft to the pressure of your hand, it is an evil sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not place anything of what we have said on it, for by chance in court without the artery; but make one dry compress to harden it, then heal it with another remedy until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw blood from each person according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And it is necessary for those who are full and swollen, and have a need for the extraction of blood, to make a larger incision, and let the veins be wide; and for the weak ones, do the opposite, and it should be drained little by little, and it should be drained by cutting across, not by pricking; and this method of draining is safe from the displacement of blood and the compression of nerves, and it is more effective than long draining rather than wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 For the body that needs to be drained, it is necessary to give soft bread soaked in pomegranate juice below; if it is heated, let him drink blood three or four times; and for those of cold complexion, before draining, eat soft bread moistened in syrup made from honey or aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and a fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if the hand is wounded after much bleeding, then it must be treated with burnt charcoal, a fragrant subtle syrup, and other things as mentioned in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If one wants to fracture his arm, and heal it again at another time, if it is weakened by repeated healing, then let him heal little by little, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to fracture his arm after the first healing, and has a strong body, let him heal in 6 hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to heal from another part, should heal on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 The wound within the body has much blood which is already heated and causes fever; in such cases, a large quantity of blood must be drawn out and the wound opened wide until it stops bleeding. Then you should attend to all the conditions of healing, place your hand over the pulses when it heals, so that death does not occur at the site of bleeding, which happens frequently when healers are negligent; and it is not necessary to dislocate the arm and draw blood again if the wound closes, you should instead press firmly. If it is curved, stretch the arm quickly, but leave it until it stops bleeding a second time; or touch it with the point of fire when the congealed blood from the vein flows out, place the edge of linen soaked in vinegar over it and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has burst, leave it and do not squeeze it until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to draw blood a second time, draw it from the same place, or another vein, or the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are opened at the location of the neck because they are composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the method of the wound is that the patient puts his hand into hot water, until the flesh becomes red; then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then heal the wound carefully through the cross, not wide or long; and make large wounds, and the wound should be healed close to the joint of the hand, and if one cannot pull it out, put the hand into hot water again, and let the blood come out in the water until you have enough; and if it is in summer, do not strike the hand into hot water again, for it puts more winter there than in summer; and the wound of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The warm salve of the left hand is effective for all liver diseases, and this is how it works: hold the hand, immerse it in hot water until the vein swells if you can see it; if the wound is transverse, cover it completely with everything, it will cause no harm; do not go too deep because the nerves are entirely naked under the skin. Then put the hand back in hot water, but make sure the wound has not frozen and cannot be withdrawn.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drained the blood as necessary, put oil and wax on the wound to heal quickly, and do the same for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The purgative of the hand on the left side is beneficial for the disease of mice, and do as I have told you regarding the right one.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The salve of the thigh is effective for all diseases under the body, such as diseases of the belly, retention of fluids, kidney diseases, and old leg and knee diseases, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 And the qualities of his health are that the patient should step into hot water up to his ankle, and rub on top of the vein until it perishes, and tie above the joint of the leg; and the vein is at the knee, and from below the leg there will be much bleeding; thus the wider the blood flow, or at the knee, the better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	If you should raise [the vessel] above the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below, and pierce it similarly as in cutting; let the flames not burn it.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the limb cannot come out, put it in water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if it is necessary to start the first time, then begin the second above a little, because the salt water is leaking; do not doubt of the nerve, as we have said, and thus do likewise with the treatment of the other leg equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The place of the sciatic vein is at the knee of fire, and its lesion is worth the pain of the hinge when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And the qualities of his health are that the patient immerse himself in water and twist above the knee four fingers, because otherwise it will not open the vein; and if it opens, then you should bleed in all ways that you can, and by crossing; and it is better to cut it, for the water is salty, and it is much prone to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 And if you don't treat it, no remedy for the one who has a joint opened or dislocated near the little finger, and towards the base, keep away from the nerves; do as much compression of the blood as you see fit, then unbind the ligature, put cotton on it and bind it again; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 of suction cup remedies
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Blisters are made of horns, or hair, or glass; and blistering is done in two ways: either by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 This suction cup treatment is performed in two ways: either it is applied to all parts of the body or not applied to fire; and the suction cup treatment made by wounding and extraction of blood is performed at twelve inches from the heart, so one is entirely on the head, another at the neck, another in the chests of the neck, another under the chin, another at the shoulders, another at the elbows, another at the ankles, another at the feet, another at the wrists, and the suction cup treatment does not treat blood except for small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it should not be applied in any way to fire or without fire, in any disease that comes from retention, until all the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if it is necessary due to illness that one needs to be bled, or for habitual reasons, we will administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle, and in every time; for there are those who, when they need to be bled, have a heavy head; and there are those who find swelling and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darken the eyes; and there are those who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue is swollen, and they drool blood; and there are those who think, and see ghosts and hallucinations and death-like things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially if it is outside of the month, we command to ventose after 3 hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The bleeding of the nose helps with headache ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of the entire body; and this bleeding is instead of the cephalic bloodletting, and those who are cold in constitution or have a fever should not use it, as it does them great harm; and therefore, those with headache illnesses should not use it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal themselves often become careless and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the danger of negligence.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The ventosation in the neck is located near the jugular vein and basilica, and for this reason it is effective in the restraint of the pis (a disease or condition), and in cutting the channel of the worm, and in piercing, and in filling; and it must be pressed gently, because if it holds too firmly, it may cause obstruction in the bladder or the heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 The ventosation in the costal part of the neck is effective for headaches, otitis (ear disease), migraines, strangling, and tooth root pain, and it is located near the basilica vein; you must instruct the patient to press gently with their hand, not to hit the artery, and there should be no bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventosations below the chin are useful for mouth disease and decay of the gums, as well as similar diseases found in the mouth; it is located near the salivary glands of the two lower lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventosations of the shoulders are useful for disease caused by heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The ventosations of the ribs are as valuable as three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins; instruct the patient not to be too bold, for the muscles are bare and know beneath black and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The blister that is on the buttock is effective against hemorrhoids from their foundation and diseases beneath, and it should be large and made of goose feathers, which requires good drawing; and if it were too fine, it would break; causing large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The blisters on the legs open widely because they draw blood from the entire body, and they are effective against ancient pains of rheumatism, marasmus, and the bladder, and remove inflammation; they are located in the joints of the knees and ankles, and weaken the body after long use, causing paralysis in many positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of putting on the cupping glass is as follows: first make it empty and fill it quickly, then place it immediately, move it evenly, and do not stop doing so until you see the skin turn red and swell, and appear the color of blood; then let it rest, and replace the cupping glasses, and take care in the arrangement of the body, for there are some who have thin skin and clear veins: it is necessary to make a single cut, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and one deep puncture; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	If the skin is thick, then it is necessary to make two cuts: the first time to refine the vein's path for thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	If the skin is very thick, then it is necessary to make a third cut; and when we want to draw blood drop by drop, we should only poke it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if we want much blood, we reward often; and if the wound is thick, be bold and mark its end so that the pores are pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for the one with thick skin and hard, who has narrow pores, to anoint the muscles of the ventosations with stimulating and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, use oil of lavender, sweet almonds or pumpkin seeds; and if it is in winter, use oil of parsley, watercress, camomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amoradine oil, or balm of Gilead oil, or anise oil, and others similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if one who is to be healed has to stretch out tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be put on it, but it should be washed after the ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or water of morels, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or any similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture should rise from asses' milk, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 Those with large superfluities rise from old wine, or water of sour milk, or decoction of anise or camomile, or any similar; and it is not advisable to ventosate before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath one hour or two; and do not sleep after ventosation, and it is necessary that he warms himself when he has to be ventosated and when he is being ventosated.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And guard that the one who is healing is coleric, and if he lacks it excessively and becomes inflamed; then it is necessary that he take cold things, such as watermelons, lettuce and endives; and similar foods; and drink little, eat meat of a rooster, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 If he has a cold complexion, he should take syrup of honey and fragrant wine, which is neither old nor new, drink liquorice or musk melon before or after ventilation, to strengthen the main members; let him be thin, but he must not drink if he is hot.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The following hiccoughs that are placed for wounding are those that are placed on the liver, on the spleen, podagry, on the belly and the buttocks and the flanks and the groin, because these members cannot be wounded elsewhere, and it is done only to draw blood from one member into another, as we do with mammary glands when they are inflamed; for removing viscosity from the member, as we do with ventouses on the belly and the buttocks for reducing swelling; and for alleviating pain, where there is an abscess or a stone, it draws the abscess by chance using its attractive power or removes the stone from its place; and in this way, it functions when placed on the liver and the spleen where there is retained wind, and these ventouses are administered empty for squeezing only; sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, such as in cases of pleurisy, and in this manner, a ventouse is filled with hot saline solution or with hot water in which herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the bladder administered to fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And it should be two fingers and half a palm wide, and have a small hole pierced through the middle, as for pushing an awl, and made of bone, soft in front so as not to prick the patient when placing it on the member; and in the middle there should be a rod of bone or iron, for setting a splint, and they should be large and small according to the illnesses and age of those who suffer from them; for the boils of children are different than those of the elderly, and thin ones than thick.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And this splint should be placed on the member in the following manner: take the linen or wax and place it inside the hole in the splint, so that the light is at the bottom of the splint to prevent burning the patient; then place it on the member, with the fingers over the hole as we have said before, so that when one looks, if steam escapes, the splint is removed; and linen or wax is taken again as before, and repeated frequently, if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the bladder, which is administered in disease of pleurisy, not sharp nor pointed, and is not administered unless it is full of liquid, and is placed only on the member; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Bladders are not administered in small members, such as lips and gums, or similar places; and in naked skin areas, such as fingers or nails, and other similar areas; and the quality of the user is that when you find bladders which are in clear, clean sweet urine, take them; put them in a container with clean sweet urine until they become familiar and have nothing inside them; then they should be drained through vein and bladder, then rub the member until it becomes red, and place the bladders on it; when they are full and warm, if it is in a place where a bladder can be placed, place it there, for it works very well.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If the shoulder is not dislocated, raise the arm gently and then immerse it in cold water, afterwards rub it; and if the arm remains diseased too long within the body, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it, until the sores are dried; and if the sores multiply, place crushed vitriol or gall, and similar things, until they are dried; or place half of raw beans on the shoulder and leave them until they adhere to the shoulder, which will now stop the bleeding; and if you have more need, take other arteries.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the arteries do not want to drain, rub the arm with fresh blood, or you insert a needle until the blood comes out, and then place them, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will clot; and when you see that they bleed, sprinkle a little of aloe and frankincense powder, or ash, which will now stop the bleeding.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Know, dear son, that the foolish man despises this chapter, for he never sees any of the old books or reads their letters; and because of this, the science is foreign to our land, for I have never found anyone good at it; and I do not know anything about it, except by the knowledge of the old books which I have studied so much that I have treated the subject and by experience, and by the habit of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments brought forth, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary for us to say the prologue of this book the summary of speech and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who have experience know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 When a fracture or dislocation or torsion or curvature comes to someone, it is necessary that you quickly clean the patient from one side and the other, unless something stops you, such as weakness of the body, or infants, or elderly; or if the time is not very hot or too cold; and avoid cold meat, namely cold cuts and meat eye and shin, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fat meats, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about the abscess being hot or of the spreading of matter to the member; if the patient returns to his first proper government as he has used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with foods that make thick broths, or they have thickness, such as cooked wheat in water, and meat of the head, and feet, and pancreas of cow, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	In prolonged nursing, the wounds break more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that the broken bones of the elderly and weak cannot be well regained or joined according to their nature due to the relaxation of the limbs, neither those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but pay no heed, set above the broken bone large splints which hold and join the limb together, until it hardens as it was before; and do not let him move it at all, and for this reason feed him with large foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are different in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the neck is different than the break of the arm or leg; I will tell you all the ways of a break in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that heal by growing together like the quill of a pen when writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if the break has an open wound, and the break is just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And each method has its own tool and equipment for restoration, according to what memory comes in its place; and it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs when the joint is twisted and opens widely due to dislocation, and is pressed by the hand; and when there is no twisting nor touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture; but it may have a twisting, or a fissure, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	Do not move the hand at all, but place medicines that come after here, and then hold it gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the fractures that go into the joint, and are the two parts disjoined, they must now be set equally, so that abscesses do not grow there; and if abscesses grow there, leave it for a day until the abscesses are pacified; then equalize it with the bone that you can easily and skillfully set, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations where there are pieces; then tighten it, as required hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 If there are broken bones with pieces, join the two parts together, whether it is a hand or foot, or at your hand a small member, or with cords, or with one cord and your hand; set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the fractured member are disjoined, you align all the additions in their places with what you can using your skill, and ensure that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; then align the two joints of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	Feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that they are not well aligned: straighten them beautifully and do not strain too much, nor force like those who make abscesses burn and contract the member by their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is set, punish the patient well so that he does not move it, whether awake or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and be careful that the limb is as secure as possible so that it feels no pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 For if it feels no pain, it is not set and must be put in such a position that it feels no pain; and ensure that it is straightened, so that twisting does not occur when it is restored; the quality of the broken limb is as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken members vary in smallness and in size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 For there are small members such as fingers and thumbs: wrap them in soft and thin linen cloths; for the larger ones like wrists and legs: use a wide and firm bandage, for large bands embrace the entire large limb equally and hold it evenly without any swelling; then wind three or four turns around, depending on the limb, and tighten your hand slightly around the whole bandage, then go to above the break and tighten less than the break; then move away from the break a little; soften the bandage gradually, taking as much healthy tissue as possible; then take another bandage, and turn it around over the broken limb; then return to the part below the break, and tighten slightly, not too strongly or too loosely, as we have said in the first rule above; then put between the bands some soft linen or cloth, until they are all even; then tie everything together with a knot, and then make good splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 And if there is a swelling or abscess, place something soothing over it and remove the swelling, and let it be thus for some days; then tie above your elbows, and they should be about half the width of a large cane, cauterized properly, or of a rod used for dividing land, or of palm branches, and they should be in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 but the arm that one places over the break should be slightly larger and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as required for the member of small or large size; then tie above the arms in the same way as you have done at the first joint, then bind on top with a cord passing through, as at the first joint over the break; the cord should be slightly tighter here, then less so; and it should be medium-sized, not too thick or too thin, and made of flax yarn; because if the cord is thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their cords from twisted flax yarn, and that is a great error, because the binding cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two fingerbreadths of space between each arm.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient has been struck by the heads of arrows in their joints after they have been set straight in healthy ones, place linen or cotton poultices over them so that they do not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bones are broken, I shall tell the cure below after that.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to set all fractured limbs at once on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 For when the limbs are large, one should not set splints earlier than five or seven days, or more according to the confidence of the abscess healing; and here is the way of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour kept near the mill walls, mix it with plenty of egg, and put this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, into use, and this is the common way of a plaster restoring the fracture in various positions, and especially for women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to make the plaster that restores fractures and dislocations and twists: Take barley flour, salt, linseed oil, resin of pine, myrrh, aloeswood, and mastic, .x. pounds; of balm of Gilead and aloe, .v. pounds; and make powder from these ingredients, mix them with abundant egg, if the constitution of the patient is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and benefits many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another plaster that is useful for twisting: take mugwort and wormwood, ten times as much; myrrh and aloes, nine times as much; cassia six times as much; Armenian bole ten times as much, grind well, mix with vinegar or plenty of egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another method of bandaging for joints and bones dislocated from their place, and alleviate the pain occurring, and cut the bone, and break it: take new linen, wet it in warm water and oil, and put it on the spot.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This bandage does not restore [the joint or bone], but it is good for alleviating the abscess heat and bone pains properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster to set broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-parsley leaves, grind them together and make a plaster from it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method of bandaging for the restoration of the fractured bone and for hastening the healing of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take root of mallow, chamomile, violets flowers, flour of beans, each one part; grind and mix with wine, and if the members are scalded, mix with moist coriander water or vinegar, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of emplastrum (medical ointment or paste) stronger than the first, when an abscess hard comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take roots of comfrey, flax seed, balm of Gilead, trefoil, and sagebrush, and flowers of violets and chamomile, in equal parts; grind and mix with salt water or sweet water or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates wrote in his book that no other substance should be placed on a broken member for restoration except for an ointment made from beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It seems Galen says that dry and somewhat warm things should be placed on a broken member for restoration, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plaster that is beneficial for injury and pain: take ground-up mugath and chevyl d'omes coppez (or pennes of oiseaux), and vismalve, and mix them evenly, and grind into a plaster and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then remove the bandage a little after, and make sure the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not remove it for many days If pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry, and remove the emplastrum immediately; take a thin cloth, sea sponge moistened, dip in water, and clean the place until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, damp with water or rose oil, and tie above a nut, as long as you are sure of abscess heat; and let the inflammation of the member subside, and the pain disappear, then continue the thin covering, a little emplastrum, and not too tightly as before; and make it subtle until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the abscess has healed and turned red, swollen, hot, and sore, and you need plaster and linen, apply it as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 And if no swelling comes to the limb from what we have said, do not dislocate it except after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it twenty days, as one sees, until the fracture heals and the joint approaches its normal state; then restrain it more than before, and make the flesh grow, as I have said before; and if you see the joint drying out too much, know that nourishment cannot enter therein; therefore warm it with hot water every time you dislocate it, and let it rest for a little while each time; by this means, cut off the nourishment from the limb, and hasten to correct what the foolish surgeon does, who leaves the limb twisted: this is harmful, and this is dangerous work, and I see no other but laziness and working incorrectly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 Many kinds of breaks are present, and various shapes, and the causes are determined; for there are breaks made by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone breaks the entire bone up to the shaft that is under the bone, as happens with a fracture or a splinter; and this kind of break is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	For the sword strikes the bone from above to pierce it, and this type of breakage is called "absolute"; and the wound from these two breaks, whether large or small, is called "fracture".
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a percussion buried, or a cleft or shaft of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent fracture that approaches the membrane beneath the bone, or it is on the bone itself, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if there is a wound that penetrates the bone as fine as a hair, and it makes a small fissure, and this kind of fracture is called "capillaire"; and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or something similar, and forces a piece of the bone inward; and the bone ends are chewed like a blacksmith when he hammers on pots, if it is struck by stones within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And this happens more often in those who have or a moist bone head, like an infant's head; and it occurs in all these ways of breakage where small pieces are dislocated, such as bones; and I will speak about it later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the exploration with probing, and by corruption of the flesh that is above it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairy appearance is known to those who, when they have uncovered the bone and rub it vigorously, make the fracture blacken.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, beware of the patient's condition, and if you see any unfavorable circumstances, such as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, paleness, high fever, hairs appearing and turning red, and other signs in various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no unfavorable circumstances and hope for a recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the navroz comes first to you, and it is in winter, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the start of menstruation.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this state, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is not corrupted, and come the complications as we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 If the bone break is up to the skin covering the brain, then you must cut the broken part like this: and it is that you take hold of the head of the patient with a firm grip, and expose the bone on all sides as much as possible, and above the wound more gently than possible, and if drainage of blood or abscess comes out when exposing the bone, help yourself with whatever is necessary, and it is that you fill the area with damp cloths soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses have calmed down, and ensure that no more blood drains; then start to remove the bone, and this is done according to two ways of working: one way is that you make a narrow cut beforehand, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then make another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method is to have various incisions, some narrow and some wide, pointed and made with a sharp instrument, and work lightly to prevent cutting the bone.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is dislocated and hard, then you must perforate it around (the dislocation), so that you administer splints with wedges, but not so much as to pierce through the bone of the chest; and above the point it should have a margin or a circle that does not allow the point to pass through the bone; and you must have more than one, so that each one comes in its place along the thickness of the bone, so that you have wedges for all sides; and this is the form of the four kinds of wedges:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for perforating around the broken bone are that you place one wedge on the bone, and turn your hand until you know that the bone has been pierced; then move the wedge another little bit, and do so all around, then cut the space of the bone that is between the fracture, and do it as subtly and lightly as possible, and gently, as we have said, until you draw out the bone or any tool that you have such as pliers or tweezers; and make sure not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you reset the prominence which remains of the bone with all other instruments resembling a chisel, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other chisels; and if anything of small bones or scales remains, remove them lightly with the tools; then treat the wound with salves and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of work is the one that Galen speaks of, which is more secure, and he highly praises it, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must cut open a part of the bone where the fracture is visible, so that when you have exposed this part, you will place under it the head of the curved incision, which has the shape shown below.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 Do not cut from one side only and let the partition be in two parts so that the saw is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer so that you lightly hit the bone all around, and take care of the cloth that is beneath; if it is pierced through to the bone, remove it gently, for it can be removed too much, causing harm and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone does not break through to the cloth, and the bone is chipped only from above, and there are small pieces, then you must do this after roughing it up, and remove the scales with a sharp razor of various sizes, in order to make available the most suitable one for each place, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	The patient should shave off large areas of hair, then proceed to finer razoring, and continue this process until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In the other haircutting and subtle breakages, you must bring appropriate tools according to his guidance; this is not a task that can be answered by one who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 If the wound is exposed, you must take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil, then place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled over 2 or 3 times, soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; do this gently, so as not to burden the wound, then administer it with another linen, but do not tighten it more than necessary to cover the wound only; leave it thus for a day or two until the abscess has subsided, then remove it, and provide medicines such as root of lilies, flour, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; from these things make powder, and place it on the wound, and administer medicines that do not bite immediately; ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave any ointment or pus in it, as when pus gathers on the cloth of the head, it can corrupt and become harmful to the patient, for when something biting is placed on the wound, it burns through from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, be careful to avoid any bad accidents happening to the patient as we have said, for it is doubtful and full of doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if blackness does not come forcefully except by the medicine that has been placed upon it, which has this virtue, then you must take a part of honey, and 3 parts of rose oil and mix them with wax, and apply it thereon; then cure it in the manner of treatments as necessary, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	It is known that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one alone, because they are two bones; and the one below is cartilage, and does not break, unless it protrudes or twists, but heals again.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And if one of the two parts is broken, you must place your little finger or thumb inside the nasal cavity, and equal that break within your indicated finger, and at the nostril outwardly, until the nose returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the fracture is in the part above the nose and the thumb cannot reach the place, you should place it equal to the top of a small rod.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 And if the break is in two parts, you must repeat the procedure, and hurry to restore it within a day if possible; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has been calmed down, then hold at the top of the nose dampened linen cloths, if the break is in one place.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind another one from the other side, if there is a fracture there; and let the cloths be as thick as they fill the wounds of the head.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And they said any remedy that one should soak tents in butter and churn them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It does not seem good to me, but they should be soaked in an egg yolk concoction and ground flour mixture, then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilages are stiffened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one inserts goose feathers instead of tendons and wraps it with one piece of linen cloth and holds the breakage together, and blows warm air into it; then do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	If an abscess occurs while you are working on it, put either cotton soaked in rose oil or a small piece of camphor on it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If an abscess does not open itself, apply a plaster from flour and incense powder mixed with egg yolk on the outside, then place light poultices on top without tying them tightly; and if the break in the skin is small and it breaks into small pieces, remove them with suitable instruments, then stitch the wound with suitable sutures or ointments; and if there is no injury within the skin, treat it with tents and place cotton swabs until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	If the jawbone is fractured without any external wound and the break is not split in two but only displaced, and if it's recognized easily that it's just displaced, not broken completely inside, as can be seen from the curve.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side of the jawbone, put your index finger in the patient's mouth; if the break is on the left jawbone, use your right hand index finger and push the break gently from the outside, then align it with the other hand from inside.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced in two places, you should provide extension to both places equally.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth move or break, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place a splint of broken jaw, and place one double cloth; and place on the cloth a large well-made peg or a piece of equal skin, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it where you can, and command the patient to rest, and nourish light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see that the fracture changes, dislocate it on the third day, and then reset to its original position; apply a poultice with flour from a mill mixed with egg or meal of some herbs after removing the splint; place a light linen cloth over the poultice, and if the poultices swell and the patient's dislocation does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it will heal within four weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess arises, apply what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, be careful not to remove any piece of the bone; if necessary, use subtle instruments for the extraction.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, expand it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is no more left, then close the wound, if it is wide, and apply one dressing suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the bandage
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks in multiple ways, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is of three types: either it is broken and dislocated in two places and divided into pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when the fracture is accompanied by an injury, that you have two assistants, one to hold the shoulder where the force is broken; and the other to extend the neck towards the affected area; then make the dislocation equal with your hands so that the form is as it should be, without any appearance or misalignment.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, place a round cushion of cloth or linen under the patient's shoulder, and make it as large as necessary; then pull the limb and hold the cushion so that you can align the fracture as needed.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder outward due to its being deep-set, as it comes in deeply, then the patient must lie on his affected side, and place one ear against the shoulder, and push the shoulder downward, until the bone of the socket is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then direct the fracture to your hands, and if you find debris, then you must cut it upwards; pull the pieces gently apart, and if the bone cannot join due to any hindrance, strike one of the incisions that you have made; but place this instrument under the socket to prevent dislocation.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And it seems like a ladle, and not narrow, and let it be as wide as needed, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and there should be two cups, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, as is the wound that you made when treating the bones; and when you are sure that the abscess has healed, then cut the wound, and if the wound is small, or if you doubt that the abscess has healed, then use linen cloths and bandages, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if pustules become hot, soak a cloth in rose oil, asafoetida, and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The setting of the bone, when it has wounds and cuts, is to put on the plaster of milled powder and egg yolk, and place light splints on top, and put a spike under the bandage if needed; then take a very wide strip one palm in width, then cover the splints with two layers of linen cloth, and the plaster; then take a thin strip three feet long and wide, and wrap it around that strip, so that the end of the strip hangs; and put the strip on the fracture, and turn the strip over the neck, and under the armpit, and under the sick arm; and pull from each side, and when you see that the joint holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the thin strip does not move above the broken bone, then hold it every day, and when the bandages slip, tighten it; and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the armpit, to lift the shoulder up; if the fracture aligns in the shoulder socket by the alignment of the shoulder blade, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident happens, until twenty days have passed; then restart the plaster, if needed, and hold it and leave it like that, until it is healed; and it will be healed in the most cases within twenty-eight days, and less than that for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 It happens that the shoulder breaks or moves out of its place, and it can only be felt by touch; then arrange it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form in all possible ways; then put powder from the mill with a lot of egg and light splints on it, and put a double cloth over it; then put a wide and delicate splint on top, a little larger than the shoulder, and if there are any cavities in the splint anywhere around the shoulder, fill these cavities with linen splints so that the splint is smooth; and then bind it tightly with a great bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and observe the ligament every day; and each time it softens, bind it again, and adjust the splint if it is out of its place, and have the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 25 days. When this number is reached, release it, and be careful, for it is not easy to put a bone back into its place lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment protrudes before and not beneath the skin, lift it up, remove it, and do as we have said in the treatment of an abscess to cool it.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture by the wound
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The fracture is sometimes broken in the middle, but it happens seldomly; however, it often breaks obliquely.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 When it is broken through the middle, it declines below and causes the patient great pain, lack of alignment, suddenness, and occasionally vomiting blood, and the fractured bone opens widely, and it feels bad everywhere.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back over his chest, and one places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two ribcages in your hands, and carefully align it in all ways that you can; until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then place pressure bandages and padding on top of the broken bone, or a lighter splint, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; then turn the limb roundabout, and hold it straight, and tighten the bandage hourly, and if it swells, tighten the bandage; and if it needs to be dislocated, due to corrosion or itching at the site, or pain or abscess, hurry and dislocate it, remove the padding, and address whatever has come from the wound in ways of treatment; then remove the padding, and hold it straight until it heals.
de la brisure des costes	of the broken ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breakage of ribs occurs only in large bones near the back and chest, and they do not bend easily except for when they are slippery; and this is felt clearly at the site of the injury.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 The restoration is that you make the break even again, as necessary.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 And then put a splint and bind it with a stick if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inside, causing the patient severe pain and shortness of breath, as well as coughing like in pleurisy, for the bone pierces the lung; and the patient points to the place where it hurts, and immediately vomits a large amount of blood, this is a serious illness, and they used to apply great effort in the past.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that distend the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not let hot irons come, unless they have arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	If they have arrived, we heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And it was said by some that they put leeches on the wound to draw pus, which seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the leech draws excess fluids to the wound due to its weak constitution.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And it was said by some that one should cover the wound with damp linen soaked in hot oil and put plasters between the ribs to make the wound evenly healed, then it is cured with a cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the patient feels great pain that cannot be borne by the bone covered with cloth and fear is present in the patient, it is necessary to cut through the rib above the broken rib, and it should be placed under the instrument to protect the splinter; then you must cut the bone, pull gently, then sew the two edges of the wound, if they are large, and treat the wound with splints until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess comes, place oiled linen cloths on it and on the affected area; and treat the area as needed for the abscess, and let it lie on the side where it is, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	There is never a break in the collarbone or spine bones, and it does not bend in the same way as others.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens and you want to know if it will heal or not, take note if his hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel pain.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that it is mortal in various positions, and if they are mute and can feel when stretched or pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient should be healed if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And if a similar thing happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take care if the feet are numb, and if there is an accident that is in hands, and above the back there is swelling and discharge without intention; and when it has been sustained on the stomach, it discharges without intention.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And if it has been sustained on the back and you want to relieve it, you cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Know that it is fatal: do not labor in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this accident does not happen to him, it will be a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward [the patient] if there is an abscess that burns hot, you place on it rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed; then put on one of the soothing and drying ointments and tie it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If any bone is dislocated, it must be covered; and cut the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat it with an ointment healing charcoal until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "head of the cow," you push your thumb of your left hand into it, and make it equal to your right hand in power, then put the ointment and the cloth on it, if you have any need for it; then bind it, and if there is a dislocated bone, you should make it fit, and cut it and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break in the shinbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It often happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it occurs, there is only a little lessening at the head; it becomes long, bends towards the outside, and causes pain and swelling at the break.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above [the break], so that you are above the fracture; and feel which is the fracture and the shape of it; and if the fracture is only at the head, then make the fracture equal to its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or bends inside, then lay the patient on his stomach so that the restoration of the fracture may be apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it straight, place the plaster on it, then place a splint of wood or horn over the break and hold the fracture still so that it does not move; and apply the yoke under the ribs, until the sides are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on the unaffected side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	If an abscess swells up, do not touch it until the swelling has subsided, and place what was previously mentioned on it; then return to treatment, and hold it as necessary, if there is no harmful accident; and this is how it is done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder blade is the part between the back and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two ways: Of which one is that you take a rod made of thick paste, in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends of the rod with two cords and raise it above, and position the patient on one side; then he lets the broken arm hang down over the rod until it reaches the same level as the other shoulder, and make a hump in the rod at this point; then suspend a heavy object or the assistant stretches the other end of the rod below; then the master places the broken part even with his hands together, so that the break returns to its proper position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is to place the patient on his side and tie his arm to his neck, then command two assistants that one holds the broken part with his hands above, and the other holds the rod below with one cord and extends each part to its own side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 If you see that the extraction is too strong, hold the ligament beneath the break, and above the break, and extend each of the assistants to his part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, you must place a splint underneath the joint and the other side toward the break; and in the same way, if the break is toward the joint, you should gently place a splint, without labor, until the break is level with the joint, and with the chest; then make it level, as needed, and hold it in place, if no abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If abscesses are present, do not hold the ligature for more than 7 days, and place a soft cloth soaked in rose oil over it to calm the abscesses; then hold the ligature, and the method of holding is that you place the pliers on the break, then assemble the arm above the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or the chest. Place the gauze, and hold the ligature above the shoulder and above the arm, so that the arm is in a straight position, unless anything prevents it, or the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use splints and place a larger and stronger splint above the break, with at least two fingers of space between each splint, and have each splint be as wide as it passes the break by four fingers on each side. Then hold the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, firmly but not too far apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 If you see the alignment of the bones and the compression, as we have said, during the time that you are restoring the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days at the binding, to ensure that swelling does not inflame or come to the place, or the pain comes to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If the direction, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And if no such accidents occur, do not remove the bandage before 3 days or more, and let the patient lie on his back, with his hands on his stomach; place under the shoulder a linen compress of equal size, and observe every hour of the day or night that the broken limb does not move or become softened tendons; if it can be moved or the tendons are soft, change the bandage by the power of medicine, and give him the meat as previously mentioned, so that the meat is initially tender; when he begins to recover, let it become thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be bound for 40 days altogether; then it should be removed, and a bath and ointment given to realign it.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the structure (of the shoulder) is deformed and swollen, it remains to loosen it for several days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of a broken arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of 2 bones, which are called the "two shinbones." One is small, and it forms the elbow; the other is large, and it is beneath, toward the little finger. Sometimes only the large one breaks, or sometimes both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When small fractures are broken, restoration and healing are easy; but when large ones break, the healing is poor, and more painful than when they break together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If only the small fracture has been broken, it should be slightly extended and aligned.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it is the large fracture that has been broken, it should be tightened more forcefully; it should be extended on the splint, and the thumb of the hand should be higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the others, and the patient should cross his arms over himself, and the splint in front of him should be higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then stretch the assistants arms below to the part under his hand or to the elbow, and one other assistant above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then set the patient straight, according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there is a fracture in pieces, put each one in its place; and if any of them has slipped out, pricks the keyhole, and you cannot restore it to its place, then saw through and remove the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture in pieces, I have spoken of it in the specific chapter; take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And at the beginning of healing if abscesses occur, glue a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft, onto it, and stick the cloth gently until the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 Then remove the wax, and apply a plaster of the flour from the mill with plenty of egg, then set the splints, and let the splint for breaking be stronger than the others, and slightly larger; and know that it should have six splints or more in various positions: whether the break is in one bone or two; bind more tightly around the break than elsewhere, but less when aligning, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are over the break be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the thread, which holds it, be linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And hold the member and the joint afterwards for some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if any bad accidents occur in the member, such as itching that comes on the member, then you should irrigate the member with hot water until the itch is alleviated; and let the member not rest at all.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then continue the bandaging, and if the ligaments are damaged and the bones dislocated, or similar things, take care to do so.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the urine cannot reach the member because it is too narrow, so that it does not pass through, then you must soften it with a poultice for a short time, and leave it like this for some days until the urine flows through, and then bandage it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things mentioned above happen to the patient, do not release him until twenty days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 In what follows, then place his hands at his neck and let the neck be level, and keep him from moving or turning, and let him sleep on his back; know that this fracture will heal in thirty or thirty-five days, or perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the remedies.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	In the back of the hand and fingers, there are few fractures, but rather many bending multiple times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is fractured or bent, the patient should lie crosswise and rest straight in front of him equally; then place his hand on a cloth extended, and the attendant extends the broken bones, and aligns the mirrors so they are equal, until they are well joined; and apply the poultice and compresses, unless an abscess forms there, then place a splint according to the severity of the fracture; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is near the ventral side of the lower limb, make a tourniquet of cloths, and instruct the patient to tighten it around their fractured limb; then tighten a long cloth, and let it be as thick as the palm of the hand, and tighten, as required.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the limb, so that the hand is straightened and bound tightly, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the flow between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture occurs in any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, make it straight as required; bind it with the palm, and if you see that it needs a splint to lift the fracture and not move; and if the fracture is in other fingers such as the index or others, make them straight, and bind them with the adjacent healthy finger. Or tie all of them together in one place, for moving is harmful, or put a splint on it, as with a thumb; take care in the restoration and the setting of the abscess and be careful to treat those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken leg
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The leg bones are often broken, and one sees it when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that one places one splint above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then each assistant extends their splint to their equal portion; and this is when the break has been set in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the fracture is close to the root of the hip, it may be one of the ligaments towards the knee, and the other ligaments on the opposite side of the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And if it is close to the knee, then the ligaments should be on the side of the knee, and the extension below; then align the bone with both hands according to its natural shape, and then apply a splint, and bandage, as long as no abscess comes out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess that is hot, let it cool first, then return to your work and treatment; the remedy is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 You must wrap above the fracture and bind it tightly in two or three layers, and remove the excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, and pass a long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and bring the ends of the thread above; then turn the leg and the bandage above the leg and above the hip, then place splints on the fracture and a splint on the bone of the leg; then use soft cloth for seven inches between the leg and the thigh to straighten the splint, then start tying three or four turns above the fracture; and as you move further from the fracture, you should loosen the splint; then take hold of the two threads you inserted between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are above, then return to below the thread ends, so that you reach the foot; tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it as it is, until no abscess or swelling or any other similar thing comes out.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it happens, unbind and correct what comes out, as we have said many times; and if there are bone pieces that protrude, they must be cut, if possible; and if not, the place must be broken and drained, and treated as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thighbone is broken in such a way that splints are placed there, as in the shoulder or arm; however, in the healing process, this does not cause discomfort to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thighbone is healed within a few days or a little more or less, according to the variations of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the knee joint occurs little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 If it breaks, it is not really a fracture, but rather a split or piercing, causing pain at every wound and this hurts greatly.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when one equalizes the limb that is dislocated with its opposite, as long as it can be assembled in movement; then put the splint, and place a round peg if necessary, and tighten it as needed, then reposition all the alignments that we have said in other breaks, such as abscesses and others; place at each accident what is required, as long as it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the leg fracture
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that the leg has two bones, one of which is called the "ham", and the other is called the "shin"; and it breaks in the same way as the arm does, and therefore its treatment is the same as that of the arm, and the work is equal. And if both bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	If the slender bone is broken, it bends forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 If the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen; and it turns underneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then apply extension, and make it even, and tie the limbs equally; however, if the break is ugly and there are many pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter; align accordingly to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of splints that span the leg on both sides and are as long as from the knee to below; then wrap them in two layers, one above and one below, and tie them in the middle as well, so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one should apply a splint of wood along the length of the leg, but rather a bandage, and place the leg for preventing movement, and carefully make this at the break where there is pain; and move the leg every day, to see if there is an abscess or other accident; treat it until it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the break of the bones from the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no break, but sometimes breaks occur in the bones of the foot and toes, and it requires certain treatment in many positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see the bones rising against each other, put the patient lying on his back with his foot raised, as if he were walking, then place your hand under where the bones are raised, press them back to their places; then cover it with plaster and wool and place a small table with two even surfaces beneath the belly of the foot, then tie the foot in place with bandages and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandages, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two bones are broken, restore them as we have said for the bones in the hand; then place a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and let it be slightly larger, then place under the bone that table I mentioned, and hold it securely; and if there are 2 or more, or more, break each bone and place a splint on each one according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and hold the bone under the skin; and let the table be positioned above the belly of the bone, so that it touches well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And do not forget the other things I have said about broken bones, after we have discussed them; and treat each case according to its circumstances.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone in the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of the female nature is broken, make her sit with her back leaning, and hold it from behind; then fill the wound of the patient with cloth and also as large as necessary; then turn the woman, lift the buttocks little by little, and then push the cloth until it reaches the entrance of the wound, and the bone comes out with the stick; when she wants to urinate, remove the cloth, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or so: the break will be healed, and if you see, take a bladder of barley, and tie one end to the wound, and blow all the bladder into the wound; then forcefully exhale through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside: the bone will return to its place; then fill with cloth, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bone of the arm is broken for either man or woman, restore it in the manner as we have said in the thigh-bone; and these nearby breaks shall not be concealed from him who applies his study and skill, and read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 The break signifies in various ways the correct course of restoration: so then do it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In a staff when it is broken, take an owl's gullet and put the staff in it; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of breakage with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	for the one who has a breakage with wound, particularly if it is large, such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or something similar, that it should be treated now, so that the sores mentioned previously bear witness to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, apply vinegar to it, if you have none else, then begin again to heal the breakage in that same hour, or on that day, if an abscess does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If an abscess comes up, wait until the ninth day for it to be soothed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a bad incident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks and appears exposed on the edge of the wound, you must set it gently in place with light pressure and extend it slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions do not appear equal for you to set in place, then use this instrument that is made of iron, which is 7 or 8 inches long and the width is according to the size of the wound; therefore, the mirror must grasp 3 or 4 fingers, depending on what is needed for each bone-setting treatment; and it should be round and somewhat large but not too thin so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, and it should be sharp in front and thick from the middle forward, as follows:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "thigh-bone", for this reason the curved heads should be placed on top of the visible part of the bone; and push it once until it returns, and they should be even with one another.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 If the break is subtle and the instrument cannot properly take hold of the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone, so that the instrument has power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, strike it with an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, within your power; then remove what remains sharp and in small fragments from the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is set, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 Then put it in its place, then moisten the linen with black stiptic wine, and apply it properly if it is hot; do not put any oil or ointment on the wound that might cause pus and corruption; then administer some bandages when you have set the bone, leave the wound open, cover it with a dressing according to the size of the wound, and be careful not to strain the wound with the fracture; many times the foolish surgeon has caused this to happen, causing harm or even death to the patient; and the bindings should be softer than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may come, as we have said, and you feel pain at its place, do not put on splints; but wrap around it instead, in place of splints, hard bandages and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after one or two days swelling at the wound, remove whatever you have put on it entirely and apply healing ointment for wounds such as tetrafarmacons and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the member twice a day, once in the morning and once in the evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb should be aligned in such a manner that the bone moves down gently but gradually.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If it passes many days and cannot heal but the bone keeps moving, since there are small pieces of bone, which is why you should press the wound with pressure, and remove all those dislocated pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula or any kind of corruption comes at the place, you must treat it, according to what is said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And when the bone is broken and open at the limb, such as the femur or shoulder bones, and other similar large members, do not draw it out because many times death comes from it; but leave it until it can set itself; perhaps it will heal itself after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The coming sores on the sore (translated as: 'the sores that come upon a sore')
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	There are often times after the fracturing of health that it occurs again, especially near the joint, and it is a displeasing sight to see the figure of the limb; and by chance the limbs cannot perform their natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if the limb is fresh: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocola, acacia, and similar ones, so that you take any of these things or all together, and crush them with a sharp liquid such as vinegar or egg white or oil; then apply it to the knot in poultices, and keep it tightly wrapped and not loosen it for many days; and then dislocate it, and begin another, until the swelling subsides; or you may hold it on a piece of wood well-made because the properties of wood are such that they remove all inflammations from the limbs; and if the nodule has already become hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut the top off, and reveal the superfluous part; or you may shave it with a razor, until it is removed, and cure it until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb which is weak after being set (or treated)
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains weak and tender after that, it happens for many reasons: one is when it was bound too tightly and was not bound as it should have been; or when there were too many splints, and the nutrients could not reach the member; or due to excessive rubbing; or due to excessive movements, not at the appropriate time; or because there is little blood in the body, so it remains weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body become strong, until the blood multiplies within him; then administer baths, and give joy and pleasure; afterwards put ointment on the member, so that the ointment attracts great nutrients to it, and rub it frequently with cold water, until the nutrients reach the member; and return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The member twisted out of health [or order] after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is disfigured, it does not lose its natural function; do not believe the fools who say that one should break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and great harm comes from it, and sometimes death; however, if the dislocation and torture are fresh, then they must be treated with hot water or softening herbs such as vismalve leaves, roots, medick, and similar things; and you should make a soothing poultice, such as dittany well made, and take musk from vismalve, mix it with beeswax or camphor oil, and apply the poultice; or you may use figs softened with wheat bran, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes the dislocation is opened by rubbing continually and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 Bring movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is grown and hardened, as stone, and needs to be cut with iron, it should be covered up to the bone, at the incision made subtly and gently; and put on a cushion and bandage in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs to someone, it must now be reset without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 For if you delay, the joint swells, and in case it is reset on small bones; therefore, it should not be moved when it is swollen: many times it brings spasms and other pains; however, when this happens, make the patient bleed, then let him rest, until the abscesses calm down; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently move it, and cure each limb as it will come in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It often happens that the jawbones are dislocated on both sides, and dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are slightly dislodged from their places and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the cheek, and saliva drools out of the mouth that it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and it wraps its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a small dislocation returns with various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 And if it is whole and complete, you must quickly reset it, without delaying; and in such a way that the servant holds the head of the patient, and pushes one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is from two parts; and the other hand should be pulled aside, to make them equal; and command the patient to soften their jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the mirror set even again, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the jawbones are dislocated, anoint them with hot water and oil, gently adjusting them until they are set; do not force it to return, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they are reset equally, and the mouth of the patient closes well, put on it a cushion filled with soft material made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with several bands; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his arms between two pillows so that it does not move to either side or makes an effort to move, but takes light food until the pains are gone, and the jaws are healed; and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not strain himself in opening the mouth to eat and drink, until the jaws are well healed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be properly set within an hour and are not returned to their places, then fever and accustomed sweats occur, and possibly rupture of the stomach, and possibly vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is lost causes; and many times the person who experiences it dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	Of the collarbone
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The collarbone cannot dislocate towards the chest and ribs from the inside, nor can it dislocate outwards; however, it sometimes does dislocate, which is felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and stretches out his arms; then presses the joint firmly with your hand, and it will return; then put a splint and bandage on it, and hold it in place; and the dislocated shoulder cannot dislocate again; if it does, reset it to its place as we have said; then put a splint and bandage on it, and hold it in place, and tell the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus the shoulders of the back are also reset when they are dislocated.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	The dislocation of the shoulder   (from the previous sentence)
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways: the first is when it dislocates at the socket below; and the second is at the hip part; and occasionally it dislocates above the part, but this rarely happens; it does not dislocate behind the shoulder nor inside the nerves; and often it dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, because it can be easily forced out; in those who have enough flesh, it is forced out only slightly, and returns only slightly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance happens to some men percussion or breaking, and swells the shoulder with an abscess hot, and believes that it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must check it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And it is known that the dislocation occurs downwards towards the socket, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest difference; and at the top of the shoulder, you will find a hollow, and beneath the socket, where the top of the shoulder touches the socket, as if it were an eye; and the sick cannot bring their hand back to its place, nor can they make any movement; and similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it manifestly at the socket; and this type of dislocation is not difficult to return, except when the infant is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then places his fists under the joint, and forcibly moves the joint upward to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, extends it upwards, puts it back in place; it will come back immediately.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if the dislocation does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and bring soothing, softening and calming remedy, such as a concoction of elderflower, fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and administer it; then lay the patient on his back, and place a piece of equal linen fabric under the affected shoulder, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the heel of the other assistant on the fabric, and lift the head of the shoulder skillfully, and pull the arm of the patient; another assistant holds the head of the patient to prevent him from moving forward; the affected shoulder returns immediately, and if you see it dislocate again in this manner: then make a person larger than the patient be present; he should be facing towards the side, and push the affected shoulder under the patient's affected shoulder, lift the patient's affected shoulder upwards so that the patient hangs on the arm, and another assistant pulls the patient's arm downward toward his stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too weak, he cannot lift anything heavy, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And it is also done in another way: and it is as one pushes the long needle into the ground, so that the head should be aligned like the pistil, and not too thick nor too thin; then it is placed beneath the patient but with a cloth soft on top, and the patient remains lying down; then his hand is extended from the other side to form a hook, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, this treatment is done: take the needle of two hands wide and four fingers long, which has its head rounded for entering deeply beneath the ascle, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lay the rod on top of the patient's head, so that the rod does not pierce the patient, then put it underneath the sick person's shoulder; extend one arm above the rod, and place the shoulder above the rod, and the arm to the top of the hand, then put the arm on a 1-inch block from a scale, and let the hands hang down below; the joint will be reduced now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, in whatever way that may be, you must place an equal sphere of wool underneath the shoulder, then apply the plaster made of milled powder, with incense and egg white, all over the shoulder and around, then hold it underneath the shoulder carefully, and twist the linen around the plaster, and bind the hands to their neck, and let them remain in that position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	It is necessary that he eats little food, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal faster; and then eat less after 5 or 7 days, and move it; if it becomes hardened and does not soften, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is out of place due to moisture which has come or for some other reason, then you must apply fire cauterization at three points, as it is described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this and it dislocates again after seven days, and the jointure does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder has been cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the jointure should never be forced back into its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	A dislocation that is towards the buttocks or backside, and the limbs, should be treated by pushing and stretching with hands, and other means; and it should be cured until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing comes swelling in the member and it gradually moves, then the patient should use baths many times until the swelling subsides and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	The cost of dislocation is...
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	When the joint is dislocated at the point, it will come back to the same place again; and if dislocated in all parts, front and back, and the dislocation is not repaired because it can be seen and felt clearly; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the sick body with healthy one, make sure to see them clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is stiff, and cannot bend the arm nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it when abscesses have grown there, for if abscesses have grown there, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be reset in all places, especially when it is at the back; it is more difficult than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes there.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	Then the restoration is such that you extend your two hands towards it; his arms should be spread out, and the hands turned as much as possible around it, inside and outside, and push the joint back to its pockets, or to the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when you double your hand over your hand, and bend the root of the palm that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 If it does not return to its place, apply strong extension; and there are two persons extending the arm, and two persons pressing it so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm on each side, when you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide around it; and when the healer joins the joint with his hand, oil it to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly until it returns; and when it is in place, apply dry plaster with egg, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then unbind.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the jointure is fixed in its place, break the ligament, and leave it; and if you see that the jointure does not hold well, repeat the manipulation and the ligament, and leave it like that for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 And if there is pain after the resetting of the joint, and it swells, wash and rub it gently, and press until it is soothed; or you place a sheep's fat pad on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and have it enter the bath; and when it sweats, wipe the joint gently, then place the fat pad back, and then enter it in the bath; and do this two or three times until it is healed; and if you see, place warm moist hay wrapped in butter on it, and apply pressure; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand's joint is easy to relocate compared to other jointures, it must be returned to its place quickly, during the very moment when it is dislocated, unless the lews are inflamed or there is an abscess heat.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 And the resetting of the hand, you place the sick hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and align the fingers, so that the palm is placed above the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns to its normal position; it is necessary that you observe whether it is in the correct place; then have the patient lie down his hand on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on the table, and have them put their other hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, it is well; if not, apply a pressure plaster to the abscess, and leave it in place for it to heal.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 And if he cannot tolerate it and you cannot put it back after any days, the dislocated joint remains so; this does not harm the patient as long as his hand is disabled and he cannot strain anything at all: therefore know that the nerves are severed or the arteries; there is no other remedy except to apply a fire cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at its place, put on the plaster as we have said, then strain it and leave for 5 days, then release and let it rest.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot move properly and there is no swelling, wet with warm water and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 When the fingers of the hand are dislocated on both sides, or at the back of the palm or the belly; then you hold the dislocation in place with your thumbs until it returns, then you hold the head of the finger and turn it towards the side where it is disjoined; and leave it for two days, and then make it straight that day; and tie it as we have said, and untie it the next day, and make it move, and reattach it; and do this often, until it becomes narrow, and do the same if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	And also for the dislocation of the vertebra in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the vertebra in the back or neck is dislocated, and if there are multiple dislocations without any treatment, death quickly comes to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 And the signs are that the excretions jump without will, and cannot be held; they are often softened in any member, either the two legs or the two arms or the backbone; when the backbone becomes silent at four parts; that which becomes silent in the back is called "gilbositez": the remedy is to check if the gilbositez has come from childhood: if it has not been cured or healed since then.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of cure say in great words, but there is not much benefit in all this; but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that in the hernia that comes before, there is no remedy nor health; and similarly the one that comes directly to both sides, and can only be cured by the one coming from behind, as I have said; and it is that the patient should be spread out on his face in one place, and have a support underneath him, so he does not bleed; then stick the needle into the head in the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a cord over the hernia of the patient, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles; and two assistants know the cords, one at the head and others at the feet, between the two needles; and they should be well closed, the needles as we have said, and the assistant places his palms on the spine firmly, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if the dislocation does not return by this cure, then take a table three spans long and shaped like a wedge, and position the patient on their side. Push the head of the table under the opening, then place the handle of the table on the spine. Place your hands on either end of the table and press firmly until it returns to its place. If you see it, do so on the turntable that turns with the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And take two needles of a great span in length and place them on either side of the patient's head, with a palm's length of space between each needle. Place a small stone or weight at the end of each needle to keep it in place, ensuring that they do not move. Between the two needles, insert a third needle that can rotate like ropes, with two small needles of a palm's length on either side of it for turning the rotating needle. Then tie the cords that pass through the openings to the rotating needle at the head and the other cords to the rotating needle at the feet, allowing each assistant to turn their respective rotating needle fully. The master will ensure the spine remains in its proper alignment as described earlier.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 And when it is aligned, put on it a plaster with desiccant made from egg and then bandage it, and afterwards place an elm stick of three feet long, pushing it through the thickened part and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a rope as we have said, and make the patient use gentle rocking until it is healed; and if something comes at the end of the healing process, administer softening and soothing medicines, along with the stick mentioned earlier; and sometimes a piece of wood is administered, and sometimes the appearance is in the back spondyle of the spine, and it seems to be dislocation; but this is the bone that opens, which should not be presumed: maybe death will come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of the dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The dislocations of the shoulder and those of the elbow joint come from nowhere but only dislocations; and the shoulder joint is dislocated in four ways: internally and externally, front and back, more internally than otherwise, slightly dislocated in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when the sick leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and wider open at the knee than the healthy, and the sick person cannot bend their knee in fire; and it is the joint which is displaced due to abscess heat that is swollen, because the thigh of the calf comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who comes to discharge (or expel), is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one whose leg is well-set according to the completion; however, do not double the knee due to pain, and if you want it to walk, it cannot move forward, and it retains its urine, and when it walks, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one whose condition is behind (or posterior), are that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and the leg is twisted more than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The re-alignments of this kind of dislocation are that you watch if the dislocations are old and remain in place according to their position, without any treatment; and it is not necessary that there be any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	For the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of four kinds of dislocation, hasten that you turn the joint, and push it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, it will not need any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this way, then you must call for a strong servant and hold the leg firmly with both hands or tied above the knee; another servant extends his hand in such a manner that he puts his hands under the shin, then tightens a rope ligament above the calf; another holds the thigh of the ligament; and extend upwards and downwards all at once so that the patient is lifted off the ground once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This way of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If not, it is necessary to treat the condition when the dislocation is at the front. It is necessary that you place the patient on their healthy side, then tie a rope around the root of the hip, and the part that is under the angle, then pull the rope up towards the angle and towards the forceps; then take another attendant and grasp the large hip of the affected limb and extend it outward in the opposite direction; it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot set it in this manner as we have said, it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient tightly with a strong rope around both ankles and both knees, and the affected leg should be extended two fingers' breadth more than the other; then hang him by his head on a pole, and let his arms hang down for two spans from the ground; then command the attendant to seize the hip of the affected limb, and let another attendant hold on with the patient, who will grasp the limb in turn, because the joints return quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And when the dislocations are displaced, if the patient lies down, as we have said in those with gout, and stretches the ligament above the diseased leg and similarly on the arm; then put the splints, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert the splint between the knees of the patient in the proper form; and plant damp cloths around it so that it does not burn the patient, then extend each minister toward him, and place the mirror equally against his hand for the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it comes back, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If it does not come back, place him on a table and press as we have said in the case of gout, and make the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it must be extended as quickly as possible, according to what I said earlier; and place the mirror on the opposite side of the diseased limb, then press with the other hand, and turn it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And if the dislocation is to the outside, it should not extend the patient below, nor raise him up off the ground, but rather he should be as if the shoulder was dislocated to the outside, as we have said in the lying down on two beds; and it should be on its face, and the limbs extended as we have said before, and it should press on the joint to the table; and when the patient extends his legs and they are even, then align the thighs, and place the pillow, and bind with a bandage so that the shoulder does not move; and rest for three or four days, then unbind, and place the pillow again; and if you see that they are even, bind as before, and leave it for three days; then unbind, and let him walk gently until the limbs are comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee dislocates in three ways: inside and out, behind, and not in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all such cases is that you make the patient sit straight, extend his leg if he can, place your back on his thigh, and place his foot on your feet; then take his kneecap in your hands, pull it between your palms, then bend both sides of the kneecap outwards; another assistant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it should be properly bent at the knee lightly; apply the plaster and hold the leg to the thigh firmly for three or four days, then release it; do not allow the patient to walk until the limbs are comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not present, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it tries to move forward towards the part where it is dislocated: the readjustment is easy, and it should be gently extended with the hands when only swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is fully dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright, and hold him by the leg above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then to the left hand twice, then lift it up, and push the foot hard upwards; and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, start again, for it will return; and if it cannot return, lay the patient on his back on the ground, and fix the splint firmly in the ground between his thighs, and wrap cloth around it so as not to hurt the patient; then hold the leg straight by the minister, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And when it is set (the dislocation), place the plaster and poultice on top, and hold it in place, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle so the ligaments are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments weaken, reset it; then release it on the third day or fourth, and make the patient walk for four days; and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess swells up, you must treat it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
des dois	The two [things] (or parts)
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two [things] are dislocated, they must be stretched gently without strain, and it is an easy task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back or foot joints, then you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a chair straight, and place your foot above the openings of these jointures, press your foot firmly until it comes back; and when it is even, and there is no opening, place a two-toed table under the foot's sole, then hold it in place, leave it for three days, then release; let him rest until he recovers.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound comes with dislocation and it is to be restored, many times the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in treatment, if you are not skilled in the art or have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, yet not hasty; and use, at first, cooling agents on the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of healing; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, as soon as the abscess subsides; and when the limb is in place, administer cooling agents on the abscess again, and heal the wound, as necessary, with dry ointments; and if there is a break along with dislocation, and small bones are displaced, set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and beware of entering into a path of fear, as I have said, because it will affect you according to your Creator, and for the sake of your knowledge and body's health.
Amen	 Amen (In English)
