O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	I have completed this book, dear son, for you, which is the rear part of the science of medicine along with its filling, and I have brought it to an end through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is hampered in our region and is entirely foreign everywhere, it is destroyed and dismantled, and nothing remains of its origin except for the small descriptions about ancient practices that have been changed.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes error and vanity, and closed are the intentions and alienated is wisdom.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I shall come together with the forms of cautery irons, and other instruments of work with the addition of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good master of hands is found in our times, the art of medicine has grown distant.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who engages in this must master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to the extent that he knows the judgment of members, and their forms and joints and separations of them, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of bones, and their movement and the moving and resting veins, and the direction of their outflow.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates said that the nose with the thumb is much, and with work is little; and the same in the art of healing.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the beginning of this book that he who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, let him be careful lest he err and cut men; thus I have seen many times more of those who engage in this science and abandon themselves to science and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Because I saw a foolish man who cut open one abscess of scrofula from a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another man who removed a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; it took with it a piece of his bladder, and the man died within four days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been summoned to treat it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if it was cut he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And there was another doctor who took care of the leg of one of our land's dukes, which had been broken and caused an injury; and these doctors, full of ignorance, set the break above the wound with great force, and did not leave any splint on the wound, leaving it in such a state; and he commanded that it should not be dislocated again; and it stayed like that until the leg became completely swollen, and the toes rotted away and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called upon to come and loosen the leg; and when I did so, it became peaceful and he felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until it was completely destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there comes another mirror which collapses an inflamed abscess, and then sets it on fire due to the malice of its power.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is full of black bile, it should not be touched with iron unless it can be completely removed that which is corrupt.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, a surgical operation where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 Because it is necessary for you to take care of yourself, so that the foolish may not speak ill of you; take up arms in good armor, and treat your patients lightly but firmly, and use the best method, by the grace of God, may you come to salvation and be praised; leave aside diseases that give hope of grave sickness; and discard from yourself that which makes you doubt, and be faithful in yourself so that you can depart from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Galen said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on a bad disease, lest you be called a foolish healer.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have designed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire and medicine cauteries and they are arranged from the head to the feet; and the forms of instruments, and the cautery irons, and everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and of the ventouses and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and they are arranged in order with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are arranged from the head to the feet, and with the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, remembering the work, it is necessary for me to tell the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	The quality of the aid, and the harm, is a long discourse and subtle science, and the secrets responses; and many wise men spoke about it, and agreed with this; and I do not trust their words much because I reduce the length of it.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, whether it be in two complexions: that is to say the hot complexion with matter, and the dry complexion with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In a hot and dry composition of matter, some said that fire cautery is great aid; and others said the opposite: that fire cautery is not useful for sickness caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot and should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat or dryness; and he who said otherwise said that fire makes great aid for hot and dry sicknesses coming into men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you understand the body and its moisture according to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, do not interfere unless the one who has tested it and knows by long experience the chapter on cauteries, and the variety of human constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their symptoms and the space of time; we have no fear for other constitutions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians agreed and concurred to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that a cautery together with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and of greater goodness than a cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come out except for the member that is burned, and it harms no other member unless named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Hot medicines cause illness in one member when moving from another; and they bring diseases of severe healing to the member. And by chance, fire may kill the patient due to its high temperature and the goodness of its substance, unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this for you by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into my art, and it is in line with truth; and because of this, I apologize for the length of my words, for I do not wish to deprive you of the secret which is revealed or fire, and the quality of the work, how diseases of the body can be driven away, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time the cauterizations should be done and chose their assistants.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that a cauterization is useful in all times, because the harm that occurs is kept at bay by the help of cauterization; and indeed, if the cauterizations are necessary for pain, they should not be delayed until greater harm comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think about it, dear child, as the foolish do; for a disease treated by cautery has no return; and they say thus; but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not just medicine that changes the complexion, but rather dries the humors that cause pain, and acts more quickly than other medicines due to its potency and the virtue of its work and dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And sometimes the disease comes according to the complexion of the sick and the nature of the disease and its properties; and superfluidities are gathered in him through the consumption of food and similar things, unless cauteries have been administered where there is little superfluity or moisture, such as dense cauteries for pain, and similar things; but this does not often happen.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the rear of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauteries have value after other medicines, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of cure in any disease and they are of no use, then we administer cautery, and it has value.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clearly stated that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	They used to say that cauteries made from gold instruments are more effective than iron ones, and said this only because of the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance; but this is not true, for I have tested it, and found it true in some men; and a golden cautery is as effective as an iron one, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And even though you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot due to the color of the gold and can suddenly cool; and if heated too much, it causes fire, and so there is enough reason for concern.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use the fire cautery, which we have found suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I hereby order you this chapter on the head down to the feet, because the veins will be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for both moist and cold conditions on the brain, and it helps with a disease called "soda," as well as many humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and numerous dreams, throat pain, and neck pain, and similarly for all diseases caused by coldness such as paralysis, sode, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine, clearing his head for three to four times or according to what the virtues and age and accustomed tolerance of the sick person can endure; and then make him lie down again on top of the sick man's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then place him crosswise between your hands and put his hands on a soft place; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your thumbs meet, it will bleed, then heat the cautery called "olivare", which is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand back and forth while turning it over and over; then remove your hand immediately, and watch the spot to see if you can see a small bone; and if you don't see it, continue heating the cautery until you do as I have told you; afterwards take a small piece of oil and put it on a soft cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; afterwards place soft buttery cotton on top of it; and leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And as the ancients said, when the wound is left open longer, it purges more; therefore, if assisted, it heals faster.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And said some that the fire cautery should be allowed to burn part of the bone, then clean and heal what is burned.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that the cautery should be allowed to burn from above, and strike it so hard that a space as large as a walnut is hollowed out, because the humors flow out; then the wound should be left open for a long time, after which it should be cured and dressed.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauteries do not seem good to me altogether, except in some men where there is fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; because the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have witnessed in other members; and even when the head of the patient is naturally weak, the first appearance of cautery seems safer and more beneficial to me, and from this use I work for salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the head comes chronic and lasting pain, the patient should use earwax and pills called "cochie", and purge of the head and oils and plasters; and if one does the cautery that we have said before, it is not worthwhile.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's shoulder is strong and not too cold; then cauterize below that fire cautery a small amount as we have mentioned before.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing cautery on each temple of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and perform one cautery called "vasselz"; it is one in which ventouses are placed; align your hand so you do not see past the bone: the patient feels more intense pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak about this later; and the cauteries on the temples should be finer than those used to cauterize the midline of the head, and here is the shape for it:
dou cautere dou chief	the cautery on the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes in one part of the head and the disease spreads to the oil, and the head is purged by various medicines, and other treatments as I have said in the division of diseases are performed, but none of it helps; then cauteries are done according to two ways, namely by hot medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery by hot medicine is that you take a shallot and remove the skin and place it on two eyes, one piece for each eye, then make an incision in the temple where the pain is located so you can place the shallot under the skin; and when it is placed, press it well and let it stay for 12 hours; then release it and treat the shallot strongly, letting the wound heal for 2 or 3 days; then cover it with a cloth dipped in butter until it becomes dry.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointment until it heals; and if you see that this does not work, perform one of the treatments using burning medicines as I have written or the 12th remedy for treating burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 For the iron cautery, this is how it should be done.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cautery with this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	It is called "clo" because the head is made in the shape of a cup with a shallow indentation, and it has a small appearance; place it on the painful area, hold your hand and lightly press the iron until half of the thickness of the iron is burned; remove your hand so that the artery does not burn, that is away from the burn, and draw out the blood abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton on it for two days, then put dampened cotton wool on it, and afterwards heal the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this boil with the cautery called "cultellare", prick it all over, but be careful not to touch the artery in this boil that is not old.
de emigraine	Of emigraine (Translation: From emigrain)
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat emigraine, as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you find that cauteries before mentioned in the medicine do not help, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called «cultellare» until it becomes white; and hold your hand on the side of a line of half a foot long, and strike once, and strain so as not to touch the artery or come to the bone; and watch for the jaw that moves when eating, and veins should have no sight but the moving one and spasms should not come upon the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is cut, or bleeding too much where there is great fear, especially for those who do not know it and are not trained and experienced; and leave the procedure in progress; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be found in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it near the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals; and if you find, administer the cautery mentioned or in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than the one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold and medicines soluble and other treatments mentioned in the division have been applied but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", here is its shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing all around the sick ear, or in both sides where the pain persists, move away slightly from the root of the ear after you have marked the spot; and place 10 "poins" around each ear; treat the spot until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture by cautery can only be applied to those that move due to fever, as we have said in the division of diseases; and never do cautery to similar ones that come from scurvy and internal bleeding.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When treating this type of torture caused by fever and purges of the head and gargarism, it is not effective. Therefore, you must cauterize the patient with four cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little distance from the temple, and the third in the corner of the lips; put the cautery in the open healthy part, and make it burn towards the ear above a little bit below the forehead, and another in the temple as long as a fist; leave the cautery for as long as half an hour is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is similar to the shape of a surgeon's instrument that we have mentioned, but it is slightly more subtle and requires the knife to be a bit larger; after curing the wound as I have previously stated, let it heal when it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient does not have a fever, then perform four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one on the top of the head, one in the place called "bellybutton" as we have previously mentioned, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	bedridden
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large years and round pills containing cerebrum; afterwards, anoint the head of the patient completely, and place the plaster of mustard (sinapi) on the occiput which is written or treated as plasters; and this is the method of cautery: if done as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy, it is good; if not, perform four cauteries on the head from the neck to the collarbone, and keep a distance of two between each cautery; heal as with others, and if you see any danger, and the patient is enduring, perform one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns (temples), and heal until it is healthy; and let the cauteries which are called "olivare", as I have previously said.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to clean the head (skull) with years and what was said before; afterwards, the head of the patient should be shaved, then make a fire cautery on the head and one at each temple, and one at the back and three on the spine of the neck; if you have more need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; let it be until the most painful part is burned, then wash your hand; afterwards, cure it until it is healed, and heal the cautery that is called "olivare" which was said before.
de l’epilempsie	epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to clean the brain with years and other remedies as we have said in the division when the patient is large and suffering from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, give him gargarism and frequent mastication of the brain with good foods; afterwards let the head be repositioned, and make one cautery according to what has been said before, and one cautery on the forehead, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and enduring, make cauterizations as I have said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make a subtle cautery in this way:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When because of melancholy are the superfluidities or corrupted and thick fluids, then make the cautery with such cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluities are descending towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that will purify the brain, according to what was mentioned earlier in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place the patient's head; make a small linen bandage in the shape of a circle and put it around his head; cross the patient, hold him securely from all sides; apply liniment made of old butterbur, then heat it gently so that he can bear it; empty the circle from within around his head, and let it cool; do this to the patient once a week with good management, until he is cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 If you wish to cauterize (it), make multiple points all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This method of cauterizing greatly reduces the brain; then place damp, soft cotton soaked in butter and linseed oil on top.
de l’awe des eulz	From the swelling of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the swelling of the eyes comes first as I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something cleansing for the head, and guard him from all moisture, and make it sweat or bathe it more times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterwards, command him to lie on his back, and make a fire cautery on the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the swelling is in both eyes, or one if it is in one; and touch all the veins and arteries under the skull with the cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the size of the temple; and be careful not to spill blood, and if you see too much blood flowing out, stop it with your power as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in making incisions with caution, how to stop it; and sometimes a fire cautery or hot iron is made under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	The heart weeps
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or from the arteries that appear on the forehead; and it is seen that this is due to cold, fleumatic superfluities, then do the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this work, namely: cauterize in the forehead, and two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries or cauterize beneath the eyebrows of the eyes; and if there is need for more, cauterize skillfully above the corner of the eye with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The heart weeps inside the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat the patient as we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the sick person three black eggs to drink; after these, roast the head with olive oil cautery or millet seed cautery; and make two cauterizations called "clavilis" over the two sores, one under the hair; beware of the artery that you do not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	 This is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to perform two cauterizations on the two witches who are long as witches are; and do not leave your hand except when the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair which pricks the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are converted into eyelashes and prick the oil; and cauterization is done according to two methods: either with fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are even, then place the patient on a paper with a figure shaped like the fennel stalk, and make the incision at the beginning of the sign where the hairs are; then put dampened cotton soaked in egg white and mustard seed oil on the heated cautery, then heat the cautery to this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have marked with small strokes many times until the hairs are burned in that spot; and the signs of the health of the work are when you see the paper shrink, and the hairs rise to the tip of the oil; then lift your hand and let it rest for four days, then soak the cotton in butter until the burn is removed; after treating with ointment until it heals.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come, and the paper becomes soft, then repeat the fire cautery on that same place, as you did before; and if the hairs curl, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural position, and is straight, and does not curl anymore.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The hot cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and straight, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and hot vinegar, each one .Z., and grind them together well; and apply it hastily, so that it does not cool down, then place the medicine on the parchment with the hairs; and if the patient only feels one oil, you must work with one, and if in both also; put cotton moistened with egg whites under the oil; and the patient's shoulders should be healthy and you place your hand on top of the medicine, pressing it with one finger every time the patient feels a burning sensation from the medicine, because it burns like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the mordication has passed, lift up the lump, and turn it over if you see the paper lifted in the same way as it was lifted by the constriction of fire or incision; and if it is like this, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is not like this, then apply more medicine to the lump or the medicine has not worked, until your efforts are equal and your eyes focused; then place damp, soft cotton soaked in butter until the sore is healed, afterward cure the lump with the ointment called "dyafenis" and others until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if it is necessary for you to guard yourself well during your work, keep far from the eyes the medicine at all costs.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And if the paper becomes damp after, and the hairs prick in the oil, start the medicine again on that place which has been properly purified with the paper, as you have done before; afterwards, cure it until it is healed; and this is the form of the fennel seed.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the hairs of men are different in size and length, and according to this, apply your efforts; and never deviate from the correct path for those who study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as previously mentioned in the description of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head on a clean surface; and have an assistant hold the patient's head between their hands in such a way that it does not move or turn; then put cotton soaked in egg white or linseed oil on the area to be cauterized; after heating the cautery until it is hot like iron, place it on the patient's head in the shape of a pen nib, with the cautery also being shaped accordingly; if you see, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, it should also resemble a tent; but regardless, the one that is shaped like a pen nib is more suitable for your task.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, drain the pus and dry it; if it is closed, open it and remove the scab; after that, place the heated cautery on it in the shape of a cross, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part near the nail so as not to burn yourself; and place the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrode it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you come to the start of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If that's not the case, start the cautery again once more, and if you need to, and leave it for three days; then put moistened cotton on top of it in butter, and cure it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days have passed and it is still not healed, apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king according to what will come in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a manner of fire cautery that none of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Stretch open the wound; then place the Camahan substance from this mold into it.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the quantity of one .5 cubits; hold your hand with camel's fat firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the molten plumb flows into its oil; it is necessary to put linen cloth dipped in egg yolk or oil on the wound: the plumb will heal the fistula by a wonderful healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the fire cautery that we have said, that's good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If it is not so, it is necessary to administer pepper to the nose and bring the fistula back to the chest towards the heat as is proper for its place.
des crevaices en levres	deep grooves in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are grooves or cracks in the lips, called "hair" and also in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cavities as we have said in the previous sections and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery scalpel according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply it promptly into those cavities until it reaches the bottom; after heating the area with a cautery iron until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess from the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess appears at the root of the throat or in the uvula, palate, or roots of the teeth, after becoming pus-filled, growing, and developing into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the previous sections, and it does not help: then you must have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; after emptying or puncturing the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron is hot at the bottom of it, and where the last part is; and do this once or twice, after curing as we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it heals like this, it is good; and if not, you must discover the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The translation for "dou movement des dens" in this context is "the double motion of the teeth".
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicine but it does not work, then put the head of the patient in your lap; afterwards heat the cautery in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside immediately, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and continue with the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and keep it there for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the moving tooth is confirmed, and the softened gums are kept restrained, and the moist corruptions dry up.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold or there is cold or fever, and the medicinal remedies do not work, then it is necessary to use cauterization according to two ways: cauterization by bull and cauterization by fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with bull fat is as follows: take bull fat and put it in an iron or brass container; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, moisten it in boiled bull fat, apply it quickly to the painful tooth and hold until it cools; repeat this process until its property reaches the root of the tooth. If you see that the linen and cotton are moistened in cold bull fat, then apply it again and apply hot iron on top of it so the fire penetrates the tooth's crown.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The cautery with fire is such that you take a wire made of iron or steel, thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; then heat the cauter, and the shape will come afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, as pain will be removed from him that day itself or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then let out the wind; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cautery from whatever material you have at hand; and this is the shape of the chain:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When scrofulas are from flux and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery hair as described below, and open it for the smoke to exit towards the other side; and place the heated cautery on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it reaches the base of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it thus for three days; and place soft cotton soaked in butter over the burned area until the inflammation subsides; after that, treat the area with ointments and poultices until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The form of the arm:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When the cold humors conquer in the channels of the arm, especially when this comes from a cold constitution, then the patient must first be purged with dissolving medicines; afterwards do cautery at the root of the neck, and take care not to go near the throat, but only burn a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then do another cautery at the junction of the neck with the spine, and let it be the cautery that is called "clavicle" from which we have the shape above; and heal the place until it is healed.
de la toust	of the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of pormon are due to cold moistures, and the patient does not have fever or secretions, and the disease is old, make two fire cauterizations on the thigh; and another cautery in the middle between the breasts; and let it be the cautery called "clavile" according to the shape mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see, do cautery by pricking with the entire cautery that is called "point" from which the shape in the disease of the ears is above; and let the points be up to 30, or less around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the joint as previously stated, let the cautery have three parts according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because the cauteries are lighter, since you make them in pairs (copies).
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After placing the patient on their back and on their side, press the sore with the heel of your left hand, and if the joint is dislocated within, use a heated iron with two nerves as shown here to reset it.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the sore up to the ribs, and the figure of the cautery will be accompanied by four cauteries; and this is made with the cautery that has two nerves, because the figures of cauterization are these cauteries; and these nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, which is the form of the cautery that has two nerves.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is dislocated above this nerve, for which there are eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After apply the cautery, break it with oil; after that let the patient rest and do not move the limbs for long times until they are comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then do cautery on the thick part of the cauterizing claw or with many cauteries poking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is reset, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When coldness and moisture come in the stomach, which are according to its constitution, causing many catarrhs to him, and the methods of treatment used are not helpful, then the patient should be made to lie on his back, with his legs and arms extended.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 Then make three cauteries under the spoon-shaped scoop with a quantity of one finger, to the full length of the cauterizing claw, two cauteries outside the ribs such that the figures of the cauteries are at three angles and have the appropriate distance between them so they do not touch each other when they emit purge; and let the figures of the cauteries be so sharp that they prick both sides of the liver, and let the figure of the cauteries be arranged according to this form without deviation:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery within the stomach according to this form; and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and pressing on the stomach at the chosen point according to your desire; then cauterize entirely with the entire cautery that is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the wound as we have had before, let it be clean and healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When the liver feels pain from cold, moisture, and excessive wind, and it is far removed from its natural composition due to superfluities; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help him. The patient must be made aware of his sickness; and sign with three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, between the hypochondriacs, where the sides of the body come together; and there should be a space between each cautery the size of a dove; and let the cauteries be long enough for the body, but do not press too much with your hand on the entire cautery; and let only the middle portion be burned, and the patient straighten up on his feet; and if he cannot, let him lie down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And if your will is so, cauterize these fire-cauteries with the knife, if you are skillful and wise in this art, but beware not to overdo it, for you would burn the entire body; and do not let it come close to boiling water, for the heat is very subtle there, and the skilled one can see it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is inside the liver tissue or the membrane: if it is in the tissue, the patient does not feel much pain; but if it is in the membrane, then he feels madness-inducing pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this treatment ceases to work for the sick person, it is necessary that he lie on his back; and then gently push in the direction where the abscess is, and then heat the iron, which looks like a horseshoe, as follows:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And burn the fire cautery until the core is burned and reaches syphac, until the wound is completely open; afterwards, treat according to the treatment of abscesses until it is healed; and it should not be used by anyone except those who have long studied in the art of medicine, as many times such diseases have been corrupted because of this cautery.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then one can boldly work, but nevertheless it seems to me that moving is better.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the cautery of plasters
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said that one should perform cauterizations on pleurisy using roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest one you can find, and let it be dry, and also as thick and long as your fingers; moisten it with oil, put it into fire, and cauterize one cautery between the armpit and the neck, and two small cauteries a little below in the area beneath the beard; two cauteries between the fifth costal cartilage and the sixth, declining slightly behind a little; one cautery on the side, and one other on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two at the sides of the shoulder away from the cautionery that is between the shoulders; do not press your hand tightly, but act gently as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And they said an old man that no one uses the fire cautery like a razor and burns it and places it between the ribs, until the abscess comes out; and quickly the pain subsides, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mice as we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not improve, then there are three ways of cautery that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 The first manner is that you make three or four burns, aligning according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery as we have said before; and do not rush your hand onto the entire cautery, let the patient rest on his back; and another manner of cauterizing is that you heat up the cautery with two veins, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the area where the mouse is located, or the patient's sore comes toward the left side, and raise the area according to the area you are lifting, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After that, press the two inflamed nerves until the openings are pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, so there will be four [openings]. If you see, cauterize all the nerves at three openings.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After treatment when pus has been discharged for a long time, this is what the other remedy before mentioned is worth.
de ydropisie	Of hydropisy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cautery does not work on dropsy except in the manner which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When the treatment according to the methods we have mentioned in the divisions does not work, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the anus, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the bladder, and two behind the back near the spine, and one at the worst place; and let the cauteries be close to the thick part of the skin.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the fire cautery heal for a long time, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and the two intentions (healing and God's help) would be united.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is like the key that we have shown before; and for the back it is olive-shaped, as it has been mentioned before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical and full of water, it should be cauterized on the back between the little finger and ring finger; and hold the hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not insert too deeply, otherwise the water would burst out forcefully, and let the cautery be shaped like this:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing two cauteries on each leg with the tip of the knife; let one of the cauteries be behind the knee and the other outside the leg; and leave the cauteries above for a long time to heal, as the citrus juice is in it; after healing the other wounds that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the treatment
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the hernia of the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, while the digestive and retentive virtues that are in the stomach and intestine are obstructed, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, do this: make one large cautery on the stomach as described earlier, the cautery of the stomach, around the circumference; and four subtle cauteries around the abdomen, one subtle cautery each on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, do cautery on the joint, and one cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries on the stomach in place of the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	On the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When the hemorrhoids are deep-rooted, one or more, and are old and full of thick cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we have said in the previous divisions, and it does not help if you perform cauterization: III on the spine of the back, that which is far away from the sacrum and gradually forms a triangle, and the cautery should be placed below the buttock; and if you think that his stomach is chilled and meat does not cook, and the face swells, then the large cauterization is performed on the stomach as previously stated, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with the entire cauterizing iron; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the limb until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh growth which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply althelul, heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and then place it entirely over the althelul-coated wound; leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the vein opening, thus burning the wound; do this once or twice, and if there is much of althelul, cauterize each time as we have said; afterwards, cure with herbs until they are healed; and if you cauterize a large cautery over blisters, it will provide more aid.
de plaie mal curee	of an improperly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate incision or opening, as we will explain in its place, this illness occurs that can only be healed by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 If any abscess comes with pus and is enlarged and filled with corrupt moisture, you should pierce it with a subtle probe and ensure that you know exactly how far the probe goes in.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After heating the cautery that resembles a razor, push it into the abscess according to how far the probe has entered, and repeat the cautery until the body burns and corrupts once or twice, as much as is needed; be careful not to burn the nerve or large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the abscess goes to the body of the bladder or intestines, be careful with those areas and not perform the cautery outside of the charred area, and consider that it is not persistent; after curing the limb until it is healthy, if the limb is pierced and materials have been removed for a long time, then know that the limb is healed completely; if the materials are not removed, then know that the limb is broken, and burn the bone at its base. And as one of us will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the kidneys, accompanied by large swelling, and does not take on female form, then it requires cautery over the kidneys on both sides with the cautery described earlier; and if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have four cauteries in a line, and will provide more assistance.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold or moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a cautery on the area outside of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left, both as long as our thumb; and make one incision on the back, or two if necessary; and let the incisions be like the shape mentioned before.
de la marris	of the kidney
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the matrix is cold and moist and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delay; and when they come, they feel great pain: then it is necessary to apply four cauteries around the womb, as we have said (cautere of the bladder), and two cauteries behind the back; and may the cauteries be sharp, as we have said.
de la hainche	When the loins are cold and moist, and do not allow conception, and the seed is corrupted and its term prolonged; and when it comes, it causes great pain: then it is necessary to apply four cauteries around the flanks, as we have said (cautere of the bladder), and two cauteries behind the back; and may the cauteries be sharp, as we have said.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous fluids descend into the belly of the loins, and because of this it moves away from its place, and the signs are that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints are found to be dislocated, if so you must cauterize the patient on the belly of the loins with one cautery resembling a circle, and sign in front of the joint around the belly so that the belly is within the circle; and may the cautery be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this fire cautery is not present for you, make 4 large olive oil cauteries and let them be as perfect as all the others; and apply it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain from the hernia
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the area of the hernia, and it is caused by coldness and moisture; and the patient is cured with what has been said in the division, but the treatment is not effective, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient from the thick humors using fetid pills or other good-seeming pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 After that, perform cauterization; and the method of cauterization is according to two methods: namely, with burning substances, and cauterization by fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Cauterization by fire has many methods, one of which is to cauterize in the middle of the haunch three triangular cauteries according to this form, making a good depth and large incision, with space between each cautery the size of a thumb, and the cauteries should be olive-shaped; sometimes cauterization is made in the middle of the haunch on the head of the thigh, for which there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, cauterize the cautery of the circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the haunch, but make it so that the circles encompass the entire haunch, and all the fat surrounding it is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain persists in the hip, and does not reach as far as the thigh nor the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 If it reaches the thigh and the leg, have him perform fire cautery where he feels the pain, and make the incision 4 fingers above the ankle, to the left a little; let the cautery be a lancet, and let the thickness of the coal be as desired; and if he feels that the pain extends to two fingers or near there, have him cauterize where he feels the pain, 3 or 4 times at the location called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a fire cautery with a cutlery or circular cautery, and be very careful in all your cauteries not to let the cautery burn nerves and large arteries, and not to cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I myself have seen many who have performed fire cautery above the ankle and allowed it to remain until the leg was completely swollen, and the feet also, and all the toes were pierced and ruined.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a belly solution in which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two places together, make a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And say to the patient in the cautery of the incision, as follows, make such a knife and be its tip as thick as a fingernail of the thumb or slightly less, and be it between cuts or one between cut and the other with a space the size of a nutmeg; and let the cuts be above two parts, and let them be like nuts, and have the iron handle well made; and this is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be scorched until it is all red and blistered, and then place it on the sick person's bed, turning it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with one hot iron and leave it for 3 days; then make a plaster of butter, and keep the wound open for a long time; after that, treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly due to fear of its appearance, and not many seem to use it; nevertheless, this is a good cautery for those who can endure it, and in places where it adheres.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The medical cautery burning instrument is that you make it with cuts that penetrate the margin of the opening, and it should be made of iron or steel long enough, and at the top have two notches, and between each have the size of a thimble; and they should be turned over and above, and join together in this manner:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing the hot iron (cautery) on the patient's shoulder lying on his left side, then your hand very near to the iron; afterwards pour water between the two circles of the hot iron which should be heated in fire at the tip; and leave it for an hour, let the patient endure the heat and burn from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it burns like fire; and when the burn has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the shoulder from the water, and leave it for three days, apply butter until the blackness of the burn is removed; and leave it for three more days for pus to drain out; and this will be the final aid after the ointment treatment until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And if the pain has spread to the thigh or the leg, make him lie on his side according to what you have done in the haystack; and this is the method of hot cautery, and I have written about it or treated it in the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take quicklime and hot live coal, as much of one as the other, and grind them together and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 or have a small hole covered except that the tip of a thorn can enter; and place one pot on top of the other well sealed, and put hot coal and lime and warm cautery powder on top until you have enough powder in your hand; and leave it like that until it settles down and becomes ash or pot boiling, then take all that ash, and pour it onto hot coals and lime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And then if it [the shoulder] becomes extremely hot and is treated with various medical operations and fire cauterizations for other members, because it does the same work as fire, and if other medicines are administered that cauterize well the wound, such as wax, tallow, honey, and almond oil mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 Gailens tells us of a cure in which an honorable man was healed from the pain of the hernia and sciatica, and highly praises it, and says that no other cure was applied, and that he was cured within a week when this cure was performed, and he bathed himself as instructed below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he says in this manner that you take green litharge and dry it, grind it very finely with a little fat, and place it on the hernia and on the thigh and leg where the pain is felt, and hold it there; then leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make it enter the bath until the body is slightly heated, and place it on a bed, and the pain will disappear entirely and become healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use such fire cautery, unless after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscorides says that when the vein sciatic is cauterized by goat's fat, it helps much; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take flax and beat it with old oil, and place it on the hole which is between the toe of the foot and the other one called foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 Afterwards take dry goat's fat and heat it until it is charcoal, and place it on the flax, and leave it until it is saturated; and repeat in this way, and do not stop doing so until you believe through sense that it reaches the hock, and that the pain is ceased; and this method of cautery is called "cautery of goat's fat".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from striking or excessive bleeding, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these cases are worth cauterization except for that caused by infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	Afterward, the patient should be purged of foul pills or similar substances applied to the back where the pain is located, three lines marked with incense, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations depending on the potency and quantity that the patient can bear; and the cauterization should be done according to the cauterization called "poins"; and if you see, do 4 cauterizations or 3 according to the medium clavicle cauterization in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Often, this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow anus when they defecate, and fear; and you find in the lower spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you intend to cure it, if you cauterize it with the cautery of that kind according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 The cautery enlarges each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointed two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the joint until it is healthy as we have said, be careful not to apply cautery in a gibbosity that is on a nerve's spine.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	The pain of the joints is due to swellings which are present in every member of the body. When it comes in the feet (they call it podagry properly), and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries as follows: make the patient ready for the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary to prick the hip area, do it with the entire cautery that is claimed as "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pains come up to the knee and other joints, which happens frequently, apply cautery on each knee with three or four cauteries of the olive-shaped cautery on each part; and if you need more, do more, but don't hold your hand further than necessary for the core to be burnt.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend until the genitals and the back, administer the fire cautery as we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains are in the hands, make punctures at the joints two inches apart; and if no pain remains at the fingers, make punctures over each joint and the skin of the hand; and if the pains come to the sides or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and administer good care to the patient and think about medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you give good care and purge the phlegm, it will be healed with God's aid.
de la routure dou syfac	of the breaking of the saffron
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When swelling comes in anger and the boils descend into the eyes and it is suddenly occurring, if you see it when you want to cure it, you must not let him eat on that day; and he should use things that loosen his stomach, so that phlegm descends from his stomach. After that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his elbow as long as the boils are protruding, and rearrange them to your fingers, and sign on top of the swelling over the bone of the wrist, and at all one sign that is similar to half a circle above the chest; then heat the cautery in the shape shown here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it becomes white and gives off odor.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then, push the shoulders back into place; and have the assistant hold his hand so it does not return; and work the thighs on the patient, and put the cushion and sergeant under him on the thighs, and another one beneath the knee to hold the hands; then place the cautery over the spot with your entire hand, hold it straight and continue until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again until you reach the bone; be careful that the cauterized area does not boil as you perform the cauterization; and beware that the patient does not die or suffer harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cauterization, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And the cauterization of children should be subtle according to their size, and that of grown men should be according to their measure; after three days, cure the wound from the cauterization with butter until the burn is healed; afterwards, use other medications until it is healthy, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound heals well; and it is necessary that his exudations are allowed to dry out, so that the boils do not protrude when he gets up to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 After forty days, when he wants to get up, have a soft bandage made for him and apply it for another forty days; let him rest well, so that he does not work too much or eat and drink excessively, and speak too loudly; if he follows this instruction, he will be completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will tell you hereafter about the treatment for amputation in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	From the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When roundworms appear in other bellies and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow any further, then apply the cautery to them according to their size, and burn the third part of the body; after that, cure it as we have said; and no one of the old ones has said that it should be burned with the cautery at three angles according to this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first mark the place where the worm is and make a line above it along the width of the worm, and another below it, and then place your hand on the entire heated cautery handle.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the early cauteries are lighter and quicker.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	From ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any limb, either from falling or being hurt, and that pain lasts for a long time and medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and frailty, and its virtue and location of twisting and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If the first cautery is healed, that's good; if not, repeat the other cautery on the same limb because it often changes in the nearby member, which means you must perform the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	When mixing medicines, be careful to measure each ingredient accurately and mix them well, so as not to create an incorrect or ineffective remedy.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The sickness can sometimes be helped by cauterization with great aid, and the same illness that comes from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 Can you see the patient to be cauterized, take care if the illness is at its beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither boils nor remains, and you doubt that the corruption will affect the entire patient, then perform V cauteries on the head: lift the head toward me, and the other towards the forehead to the end of the hair; and II (two) above the II (two) horns, and I (one) behind the nape; and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scabs come out from it so that the vapors of the gross humors can escape; and cauterize on the swelling according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the flesh is scattered everywhere; it is clearly rotten, you must cauterize with the cauteries that we have said, namely one cautery on the neck, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large one on the crotch and another small one, two on each shoulder, two on the sides, two on the tendons of the feet, one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of nerves that are above the last calcaneum, do not burn them; and sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the thumb, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more you do with the fire cautery, the more help it provides and benefits the patient; and know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And the cautery should be large or small according to the members and joints, as you will find in ways of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After treating the wound with wheat flour with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When a swelling appears in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, plasters, but is not healed, then perform cauteries on the member according to its size and smallness of the member; and let the cautery be slightly penetrating into the flesh's thickness; then cure it with oil until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And sometimes they make a fire cautery at the hand, foot, and back, at the nerve ending that makes the limb numb, and thus if the flesh is cut away; however, no one should interfere unless he is knowledgeable about the members and the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	If a worm falls into the eye, you must put the infected eye into vinegar to make it sleep for a while, and then take out the worm with tweezers; if the worm does not come out, you should apply oil of roses or camomile to the eye.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the illness called "albaras" appears and the devices of medicine are useless, then cauterize it with a deep cautery, according to the thickness of the flesh, until the white spot is removed, and the color changes; then cure it with flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, blood of cattle and blood of almonds, each one in equal parts; mix them all together, tie it up in a cloth, and apply it to the place until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of syphilis by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a boil begins to form and you wish to stop it, if you cauterize it using a round fire cautery around the circumference of the boil.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 However, the wise say that one should cauterize in the middle of the boil; however, this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and rotten, and I have seen it happen once before; a more appropriate thing is that it should be cauterized around, using the fire cautery called "circular", as we have mentioned in the discussion of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	The swelling that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati", which delays healing due to its excess or because the patient is elderly and weak with little blood, or because of age; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize it with many small cauteries around it by pricking. After that, leave it as it is.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 When it hastens to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you wish to pierce it with the entire cautery, heat the cautery as follows:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced the core, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them leaving their course of purification clear.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After that, cure it until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another kind of disease there is called "corroding," and it is nothing but the consumption of a limb, for it consumes the limbs as fire dries up dry things.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease in a place that can be treated with cautery along with fire, then heat the cauteries little and big, as needed for the place where the disease is; after cauterizing all around until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, remove everything that is corrupted.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days, and put on the affected areas softened cautery ground with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the treatment of wounds producing pus.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if you see after three days that healthy pus does not emerge, it is good; and if not, continue the fire cautery on the corrupt parts of the body.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this burn is sometimes cured with hot medicines instead of fire cautery; but in any case, fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already said the cure for hot medicines in the section on hot diseases; take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	sore on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 It often happens that through the foot a disease called "cloth" arises according to our intention, and it is a swelling full of pus which inflames the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cauterizations for this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is known as cauterization by fire and cauterization by hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Cauterization by fire is when the patient's head is heated with a pencil-like iron, made of good iron that can pierce the nail from all sides and has narrow margins; then put it all hot over the nail, turn your hand around the nail until it comes out of the nail hole; leave it like this for three days until it starts to discharge pus; then make a plaster with bitter herbs ground with oil, and leave the plaster on top of it all night, and the nails will shrivel up and be removed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the joint with soothing ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 And if it is turned outside the body, and this happens in both hands and feet, you must apply hot cautery; and do it like this: take a cane of iron or copper, or a feather from the boar's bristle, and place it on top and the salve, that is to say to remove warts; and place the cane so that it surrounds completely, then put a little hot water there, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water penetrates deeply to the root; and let the patient endure for an hour a little bite of the hot water; then leave it, and it will be uprooted completely with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 Thus treat another, as long as you strengthen all those in the body, then heal the ones that are inflamed with warm ointments.
li cure dou trembler	the trembling cures
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone shakes from cold or from quartan fever or another illness, you must make 4 or 5 fire cauterizations along the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and 1 cauterization on the heel, and 1 on the stomach using the olive-oil cauterization; it will stop the trembling, and the health will improve from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of putrid boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes, through the body, baths appear or pus-filled sores come, which come from large decayed substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 First, when they appear, it is necessary to perform a fire cauterization on each head of the pus-filled sore: a subtle cautery made from mirte wood, whose point should be immersed in fire, or a long root of arum lancifolium, or a cauterizing lentil.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear in this way, and they cannot grow further, but the excess from which they come is broken up, and they become healthy; however, it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are large internal movements of blood from the cut artery at the wound, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and similar things; it is a very grave thing to let it out.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Nevertheless, whenever this happens, hasten to put your finger over the opening of the vein, and hold it very tightly so that the blood is stopped under your finger, and no more comes out; then take olive oil-soaked cotton balls of various sizes and apply them until they are all red; then take cotton made from hemp, or large or small according to the size of the wound and the location where the artery is damaged, and apply the cauterized cotton over the vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterized cotton in place until the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the limb jumps violently when you place your hand on the vein, and the cautery is applied, take quickly another cautery that is near the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	Keep doing one after the other until the blood stops flowing; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is exposed, and ensure no further harm comes to the patient; and know that when the artery is large, it cannot be stopped from bleeding if not through one of the four ways we have mentioned: either by cautery, or extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines placed on it which can stop the blood; and bind and tighten it accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever brings a tight binding of fabrics or places hot substances on it, or other similar things, if they do not help, will not benefit.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone who has no mirror or medicine present, you should place your finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out until it is stretched taut over the wound and the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold moisture often so that it becomes very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stretched taut; and inquire about the ones in front of whom you need cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery or hot medicines, and we have explained their types, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterization; and I placed that chapter from the head to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter along the same path for those who seek it more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore, as I begin this, dear son, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason, greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many ways of people come in cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 Also come those who swear that they will die easily because of the foolishness they find in their disease and the great severity of their illness, and one should fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And among these there are those who give you advice and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the disease is deceptive.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 It is not appropriate that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not be easily deceived but wisely of those from whom you are certain and whom you can rely on; and use diagnosis and guidance in the cures of your patients so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dearest child, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, come here.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have arranged this chapter in discussing by chapters, following the order of each chapter of cauteries that I have previously described to you from head to feet, as these are easier for you to understand what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The full head is swollen with water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease often comes to children at childbirth, and sometimes it occurs due to an unknown reason.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those whom I have seen hurried death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is worthwhile to devote some treatment to certain cases.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose head was swollen with water, and it grew larger every day until it could no longer support it; and the moisture gathered underneath the skull between the brain and the bone; and the treatment is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make an incision large on the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out; and see the shape of a lancet:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If the moisture is beneath the bone and you see the signs (of the abscess) as the corners of the head open up from each part, and the pus jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not heal: then you must make four incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision remove all moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 And after the incision remove the bandages and powders, and put vinegar and oil on it, and leave it like that for five days; then unbind it, and heal the wound with stitches and ointments, and let the swelling subside gradually, and give the patient dry meat without moisture until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another way of incision is that you look for the size of the abscess, and the flow of fluid; because sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind; sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, make the incision where the abscess opens, and empty the fluid, and do as you can; but be careful not to cover the artery; and let a vein of blood flow, so that the patient dies with dignity and from the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens with any disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or at the worst, and the disease is old and medicine does not help at all, then the last cure is the cautery, namely by cutting two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Therefore, when you wish to bind it, the patient should bend down; after that, rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then the patient should tightly fasten their neck with the cloth; then look where the veins are, and the places on either side of the ears are found; then mark the places to be cut, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two fingers deep, so that the incision comes up to the bone, and this should be along the large part of the neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you want to cut them, push the spatula under the artery and cut it from above, while cutting as deep as 2 fingers through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when a vein is cut, it leaps out continually without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If the artery does not open on its own, then you should measure the space of three feet and then drill to the bone; and the amount of blood that needs to be let out is 6 cubic centimeters, and sometimes a little more or less according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery; then observe the wound: if it remains above the bone without swelling, then the pus from the abscess will not come, then hold the wound closed and tie it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of immigration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migration comes and an acute catarrh, due to moisture in the eyes, heat in the temples and an ancient madness, which seems like other things, and it is treated with methods of medicines, but none of them benefit, we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient pulls the hairs on his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well with its beating, and is easily found except in some cold people; and if it is found, the patient should strain the neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and burn the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatumile (a medical instrument) as shown here:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it up to the clamps, and remove carefully the threads that are underneath from each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it at the point of the scissors, then tie off that section according to the amount of the two shoulders.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not cut (or injured), it cannot move at all by itself.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from the .vj. c/, up to .iij.; and if the arteries are large, you must tie it with a double strong silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound is sealed, and there is drainage of blood; then cut off the excess between the .ij. ligaments at that same hour, and if possible, cauterize the area with a cautery knife up to the bone until the head is amputated; this is the mutilating work, if the patient does not have fever and has a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	The cauteries are aid for healing wounds: therefore it is of greatest aid to those who are wounded.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	It is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the area with old cotton and places well-made tourniquets on it; and when they are loosened, one should be cured with dry medicines that produce heat, and tourniquets, until it is healed; and if without cutting the artery as you work, you must hasten to cover it by cauterizing, or use vitriol and hold it with your hand so that it is scorched; and if this is not present, place your thumb on the area until it freezes, and moisten the area with cold water until it stops, and hold as necessary; and the one that is mutilated and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this sharp cautery twice, but the cuts should be wide enough to keep its heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the straw is too thin, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives, one thickness of a finger's space, and then when you have signed up to a depth of two inches, and heat the iron hot enough for it to reach the bone, strike the vein in intervals of two inches; they should be spaced apart as they are not entirely sealed by this fire cautery, and this is the form of the cautery.
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears flow from the eyes that are above the vein on the forehead of the head, and it does not benefit the medicine applied to them, and you see the patient wrinkling his forehead like shivering; and if they are thin and moist so that the hair of the eyebrows falls out, and the eyebrows are burned and scorched by the heat of the tears, this treatment is required.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And it was called by the ancients "cure contused", and you should make at the back of the patient who has this disease let the hairs grow long, especially on the forehead; then you will make three cuts equally along the length of the forehead; one cut shall be as deep as necessary down to the bone below the eyebrows, and the other two shall pass through both cheeks above the eyelids, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are located above the eyelids; and distance your hand from the continuation of the lower jaws, and each wound should be the quantity of three fingers joined together; and prepare a piece of sponge and much cloth for sucking out the blood, then insert the sharp spatula made as shown in this figure:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the first incision which is at the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the core that is between the two cuts to the root of the bone, then continue from the mid-incision to the other second one, and draw out this pointed spoon.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Push the instrument called "cultellar" into the first incision, and it is very sharp on one side and soft but not sharp on the other, and its shape is:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And make the incision cutting towards the raw flesh at will, and the incision soft towards the bone, and push until it comes to the middle cleavage.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And gather all the vessels that descend from the head towards the eyes until the incision is continuous up to where it opens the raw flesh, and then another part should be made in the middle cleavage up to the opposite hollow; and then drain blood evenly, and press firmly for the blood taken; then put a tent of old cotton in each incision, and place wet linen soaked in vinegar and oil and alum on top, and make sure no pus comes; on the third day, untie the ligature, and apply great heat with warm mustard, then heal with ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	the root of the hairs
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When anyone comes with an acute catarrh, you see the eyes becoming swollen and small, blurring the vision, and burned papers; hairs fall out, and a headache ensues due to pain, and the patient coughs; then recognize these symptoms that those substances and this catarrh do not come from anywhere else but multiple veins, and the remedy for this illness is what is needed.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And you instruct the patient to lean back their head, then make a large incision on the forehead and another deep one at the base of the neck.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 From the temple on the left to the temple on the right, and the incision should go up to the bone; move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move while eating; when the bone is exposed, suck all the blood with a sponge, then insert cotton between the two lips of the incision and sew it closed with linen thread; then place damp cloths soaked in wine and oil on top, take care to avoid abscessing hot; once removed, you must rub the bone until char begins to grow, then treat it with things that promote the growth of flesh.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster with it; apply it to these wounds in order to promote the growth of char everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stoppage of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Anything falling in the ears is one of the four things: grains, animals, stone or similar things like iron; seeds such as peas, lentils, beans; or something flowing like water and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls in the ear stone or another manner of thing that does not adjust itself to the ear, and does not heal in the ear, put the ear on the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see the stone, distill a little of purple oil or sage oil, then apply extraction; and make it vomit from conditon, and stop its nostrils when vomiting comes, and place around the ear pieces of fabric or wool; and hold it above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Many times it causes farting with this cure; and if it does not cause farting, apply extraction using fine tweezers, in which case the form is:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps at the hinges, that is good; if not, bring forth extraction with subtle thin forceps of small double curvature; and if it does not jump by this means, make a fishhook of wax and thrust its tip into the ear strongly, and stop up that which is around the hook with soft wax so that the vein cannot enter with the hook; then pull it forth, for it often comes forth as we have said; and if it does not come forth in this manner, take glue of that and take the birds, and put any instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or something else, and pull it forth.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not jump in any of the ways we have said, hurry to cut the ear so that abscess pus and spasm come out; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient sneeze from the cephalic vein, and draw blood according to the measure of its power, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small cut in the root of the ear where the fat or flesh depends; let the cut be like a moon until you reach the bone, then break it according to your power, and suck it out quickly with your mouth; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer one thin, subtle spatula according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not do that when you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many cuts; then extract it with fine tweezers and apply suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 Then, when pus falls into the ear, the patient should use warm compresses first, and stuff the ear with soft cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And lie there on that very ear where the pus is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it jumps out because of this, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If it does not jump out, take many small and light pebbles according to the size of your thumbnail and heat them slightly in the fire; then make the patient hold a cotton-wool swab or piece of cloth in their ear, and press one stone on the other side, and strike another stone against the stone that is in the ear; continue this process of stone against stone until the pus has completely drained out and jumps out entirely; if you see, take a thin stick, and push one cheek in the ear, and hold the other cheek with fire until the thinnest part is burnt; then do the same with other sticks until the pus has completely drained out, as we have said earlier.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of a beast (insect) that is small like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the previous section; but if it is large and can be felt, make an extraction using tweezers; it is the lighter things that are easier to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and where to treat distillations, if the treatment does not help, then you should look at the ear in the sun: if any worms open, you should take them with subtle tweezers, and if they do not open, then you should take the cane of which this form is.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And narrow underneath and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And insert the small head into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient has, then suck out all the canine teeth; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not come out, stop the canine tooth with cotton as I said in the earlier section; and if they protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in removing worms. You will find or treat the distillations here. Distil your oils and medicines into the ear with this equipment as shown:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be narrow inside and wide outside made of silver or lead with one small hole, and above a distillation chamber for distilling; and to press the distillation within this device made of lead, and if you see that you need a scraper, you should wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you have into the cane, which is in the ear; then push the scraper into all the cotton and press your hand evenly until the oil distills or moves from the ear; let the patient smell inside, and the distillations should be about one spoonful heated in fire thus it is distilled in the ear; make sure that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stoppage of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have any birth defects in the ears; and this same thing happens to adults through ear stoppage caused by pus or pus inside the ear, and this stoppage can sometimes be deep within the ear, which cannot be seen; and sometimes it causes one of the eardrums to move out, which is easily visible.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, if it cannot be seen deep within the ear, it is a serious condition in many cases, and in this case you must put the sick person's ear in the sun; look inside: if you see the accumulation clearly, you should use the spatula shaped like this one to remove it:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be sharp and incisive all around, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the opening is of soft flesh or cartilage of the ear, hold it with subtle tweezers and strike gently until all the flesh is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the swelling is entirely in the ear, take the fine razor and slightly heat it over fire, then place it in the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If the patient feels swelling that causes pain in the ear, make a small incision carefully, ensuring not to harm the nerve of the ear; then insert a tube according to the size of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a plug and moisten it with rosewater, add powdered vitriol; if you see the ear swell, then it is necessary to draw out the plug and insert another plug moistened with roset oil and beeswax until the swelling disappears; then let it heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cold water in it, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the bark of poplars
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the method that comes in papers from the eyes when they are moist and dry; it must be stretched with tongs and tweezers, and then struck with a spatula at its roots; then place it on the side of vitriol powder.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if not dressed (cauterized), the subtle lenticular cautery should be applied to it, and afterwards the cauterization following the incision is worthwhile; and they often heal, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the hailstorm
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Often, in papers, there come things that appear like hail in shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hail", and it is a collection of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the procedure is as follows: watch carefully if the hail becomes silent from both sides, and it is an easy matter to know; then make a large opening, then peel off each side gently, then take hold of it with pincers, and squeeze.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot cover it with something and pierce a little of the paper, nothing hurts the patient; and if the tear is large, assemble it with a stitch and cure it until it heals; and if it is small, do not force it because the oil heals it soon enough.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the pus is descending within the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper over, and grasp the pus with forceps, then press it from both sides; and if the paper is pushed away by the incision, it does not matter; and when the pus is pressed, apply salty oil to the area where the patient has an infection until the patient recovers.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 External ointment is applied on the papers of children more than with adults, and it hurts their eyes very much, and they come down with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot bear to look at the light of the sun because tears run into their eyes quickly; therefore they lie on their faces immediately, sleep, and keep their papers moist under their eyelids that the excrement and appearance are covered by the ointment which spreads in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the dislocation coming between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of work is that the patient places their head in your lap; and then takes one piece of linen cloth, and prepares a tent in the shape of a circle according to the size that contains exirnach for each part, then puts it on top; and presses with both hands from one side and another, so that the exirnach is assembled within the circle; then makes an incision in the middle of the moisture with a pointed spatula cutting a slit wide, but not larger than the wound made at the vein opening; and cuts the skin completely until you can see the exirnach; and in various positions, the exirnach comes out from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then, place a piece of linen cloth between your hands and spread it apart; and make sure you do not displace the spatula in the slit, go up to the oil but do not pierce or cut it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the exirnach does not open at the beginning of the slit, slightly enlarge the slit until it appears; then pull as previously stated, moisten cloth in oil and water, place it on top, and hold with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And to those who grind seeds and put it on top to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal it until it is sound.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If an abscess comes to the joint which is hot, heal it with plasters softening it until it is sound.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of the paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper hairs grow other than naturally and are nurtured, they harm the eyes and bring on various diseases such as common eye ailments like tears and swelling of the paper and albugine, which cause the destruction of the eyes; and there are four ways to cure it: either by cautery with fire, or with medicine ointment according to what is stated in the previous chapter about cautery, and this is done either by incision and stitching, or with canes, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is required that you place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of oil on your left hand; if it has been converted, that is good; if not, push a needle through one thread above it; and it should be pierced where the edge of the paper meets the hairs, or where the hairs grow from those hairs, and pull one thread across the whole paper, and turn to the razor; then make in the part beneath the paper, under the hairs adjacent, as wide as a spatula, from the large blister until the small one; then pull one thread, and place a small tent of cotton and linen underneath the paper, then mark on the paper a sign of a thorn, as a bunch of myrtle, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you wish to lift the paper which has been designated for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 If the wound requires much paper according to how the paper is softened; then take all the space of two lines that you have marked, and start from the large tear until it becomes small; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root; then insert an onion into one of the two angles; then peel everything off; then bring the two lips together to a suture with a needle and all fine linen thread, drain the blood, and make the excess threads sticky using any glueing substance if you want to do this; but if not, do not have any care, leave the suture and threads for three or four days; then heal the wound without sutures using drying and tightening substances, because the paper revives at the edge of the wound and its assembly, but the suture is rotten (as the ancients say), and this is a job without fear; and there is another way: it is to sign the paper with a figure like the leaves of myrtle, as we have told you, using three onions cut in the form that is shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then bind equally with cords, according to the shape shown below:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the object is not even, take a needle with thread, and insert it into the opening; then insert another thread through the large incision, and the third thread through the small, and arrange the threads equally between your hands; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin as you have described, then sew up the edges of the wound using stitches, and treat it until it is healed; if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointment and similar healing balms; and sometimes the hair from the wound may turn inwards: in this case you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one or the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for bites is as follows: You are to fold the paper and place it inside as I have said, and then make 2 stitches with art, and 2 subtle threads of the same length as the paper and width of the spatula; take 2 pieces of each piece where you hold the threads; then bring together one and the other delicately on top of the paper oil, and bind the 2 stitches of the 2 parts; leave it for some days, and the skin that is bound will rot and die, until it dries up.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it takes a long time [for the wound to heal], if he strikes with force, then cure him until he is healthy; and when the wound is sutured, and the paper is raised, and the hairs will not grow there anymore; this is the shape of the two wounds that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you take a subtle needle and insert one thread of fine silk; then assemble the pieces and join them delicately, and let the length of the threads be about a span; then arrange another fine silk thread briefly, tie the threads together; then make the patient put his head in your healthy one; and place it in the sun so that the work is exposed, for this is a subtle and delicate work, then insert the needle all along the root of the hair next to it, and pierce through the paper quickly until you pull up the natural hair above; then pull out the hair up to the needle, if there are one or two or three or more hairs; then hold your hand until the hairs come out fully with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the wound is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, you shall draw out the arrow beneath to its full length that you have ordered, until the arrow comes forth from the flesh above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you shall draw out the arrow and the string, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and new flesh is formed; and if the hairs are small, one long hair of a goat's beard should accompany it, and let it be raised with this until it is distanced and then cleanse it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the boils on the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease called "alecratis" or the eruption comes in the eye, it can occur in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or from cutting or cauterization, or similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And the method of work is to cut that suture and separate the edges, and put inside threads of flax, and tie it until it is healed; and you should not use drying or constricting agents in its treatment.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 If you do this, the disease will worsen more than before; but if you work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and the broth of water or milk and flax seeds are cooked, and then clarified in any oil, and it is wrapped in a cloth, and it is cured using it.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your care is that you do not allow it to heal in its previous form; and this treatment that we have said is only appropriate for correcting this disease, so that it does not return in its previous form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the fat that comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident is due to wounds and cuts and cauterizations and similar things; and the work procedure in it is that you take a needle with double thread, and stick it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyebrow to the right one, so that the threads come out at both cheeks of the flesh; then lift the flesh over the whole needle, and apply the spatula wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that's good; if not, take the razor and place it in the cut, turn the paper, and make two cuts where the bone protrudes inside the paper; let the edges of the two cuts be the angles of the incision you made, and form an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the letter 'I greek'; then remove that cartilage, according to its thickness that its sides are pointed beneath the paper, then join the two separated parts with a linen thread; then treat it with the medicine for softening and healing as we have said before, until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a fracture or sewing or cauterization, then you must make a full incision under the hair of the paper, as mentioned before; then separate between the two leaves of a bandage, as I have said; and it is necessary to do the work according to the shape of the illness, because it is very diverse in shape, and the wise masters prepare devices with all possible skill to bring the figure back to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what is required for the work and instruments in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	swiftly of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this adhesion occurs in the hands of men in such a way that the paper above is glued with white oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, it is necessary to insert the tip of a razor beneath the paper, lift it up; and hold it with pincers until you reach the cartilage that is subtle, which should not be too sharp nor too jagged, so that the patient does not suffer from too sharp spatula piercing the oil; and make your incision, from which you scrape the assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and the entire assembly heals, and sometimes becomes infected with foul oil, and lifts of sweet oil and colirium; then place between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put on the oil wool moistened abundantly with egg; and after the third day use the colirium and other healing substances until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is of two kinds: it is nerve-like and resembles a hard horn, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles white solidified moisture, such that when it is touched by iron and boiled with pincers, it cannot be moved; and both seem to start from the great root, and grow little by little until it covers the whole eye and light and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient places his head in your hand, then you open the eyes; take paper into your hand, then hold the nail with small pincers and lift it up; then take a needle, put one hair from a horse or cow or ox, and a strong thread; bend the tip of the needle slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing it all the way through, and tie the nail with the thread and lift it up; then scrape off all the hair on the side of the nail that follows the root and the silk to the hair until the skin, then cut the remaining part in the root of the finger as finely as possible with a small knife or tweezers, leaving the natural flesh at the root of the finger so that by the incision no blood comes out as usual; and sometimes the nail is held only on the end, and along the thread, as we have said; then scrape off all the soft tissue of this shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the soft tissue does not touch the flesh and tear it, and that the pulp is not pierced; and after the incision pour oil a little bit of broken sebum, and let it sit until the next day; then treat it as necessary until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveous and you cannot insert the needle, and the unguents cannot enter, many times this appearance of the nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, it works the oil of the sick person, and take the spatumile lightly pointed according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Gently press the nail upwards, and if you see that it does not shrink at all and the reason persists, distill from your mouth into the collyrium oil made of litargyre and red collyrium powder, and strain the oil until the next day; then repeat the work according to this same procedure until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing goes against you in the oil, as a general rule of abscesses, then milk it, and first heal the abscess hot until it is healed, then repeat the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh at the wound worsens greatly in oil, suspend it on a hook, and cut off a part but not all, so that tears do not come forth; then distill in the oil collyrium made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	And if the growth arises on the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 When certain men's nails grow red and cover the nail bed, they swell up on paper and turn towards the fingers, resembling a rosebud; and in such cases, the patient should place their head on your lap, then you should cut the nails, and as all that reddened flesh is conveniently reached, hold it with force; then strike the first piece of flesh, and keep striking until smooth to the end, taking care not to pierce the oil at the incision; and make the incision with a spatula as we have said in the nail incision and small forces similar to that used to remove the skin, as the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, use oil of sulphur or distill red collyrium and medicines corrosive, spread cotton with egg white on top to ensure the wound heals properly; if anything remains, let it heal by itself, and should doubt arise about proper healing, leave the oil and treat the wound with soothing substances for proper healing; then return to your work when the wound is healed, and do this for every nail that grows red in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But you must alleviate the cure of each oil with weak natural remedies; and in the work of iron, alleviate with hot remedies; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is strong enough for that work.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Should be red veins covered by oil that are visible to the eye, and they hinder their work and weaken the oil every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Therefore, the first thing to do is to examine if there is oil, in which case there is no other disease except sebel; then treat it as follows: instruct the patient to lower their head and press those veins all along for a while according to their wisdom, and let the pressure be subtle double, following this shape:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And be two incisions by degree in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then squeeze those veins gently, and suck out the blood hour after hour until you see them move away from the oil; and be careful not to prick the oil with the points of the spatula, and perform this task at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so that you do not cut anything but those veins; and when you have done this, if it distills green and red collector oil for correcting those remaining with the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to hold it all in that hour, apply a plaster over oil of soothing things on the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and assured of abscess healing, then resume as before until it is healed; this is the form of strength.
de la fistule de l’oil	And from the fistula of oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror is named "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and burning medicine as I have previously said, and it is not healed, there is an engine in it that you cut open above the abscess where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackness, if it requires all the tools as stated here; it is called "rough head", and one should make a hole in it, exactly round, and point it like a chisel as shown in the current form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the tool on top of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your hands and press your hand slightly so you know that the corruption is removed; do this once, then restore the position of the medicinal tool.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the shoulder joint is fused, and char (pus) arises, and the body of the humerus (arm bone) is also fused, and remains like this for 40 days without healing or becoming inflamed, and no serious accident occurs, it is known to be healthy; if not, there is no other remedy but to return the fistula (a tunnel-like passage) to its original position according to this form: and it is that you expose the bone a second time with iron, and with hot medicines, and when it is exposed, take the iron as shown here: and the iron should have three angles, and the shaft should be attenuated (thinned) up to the head as you can see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place it on the bone next to the ligament, and move your hand away from the oil hole, then turn the iron completely so that it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the vein if he holds his hand above his neck; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when pus arises and hardens the joint, the matter goes to the neck; it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the oil issue
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are wide open all around and there is no dislocation or decrease in size, it is necessary to hold the patient; then clean it, apply leeches or cauterize to aid healing, then place oil made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcolaxis on it, and tie it with a bandage, and then wrap it with strips and cloths; the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, fold each one in four, and then put one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes require; then bind it with a durable bandage form and repeat the leeches or cauterization without cutting again; then remove the leeches and leave the tied oil for a day and night, and if the lien becomes loose, you must tighten it; then remove the lien after the day and night, and if you see the oil healing, that is good; if not, repeat the application of the poultice and cloths and the lien and the leeches until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The broken separation of a ruptured membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the ruptured membrane, it opens and is forced out like grains of paper, which are frightening to see; then you cover it over. The procedure for this is that you insert an awl into the root of the affected area up to where it ends above, followed by another awl or a double-threaded needle from the tear edge; and make it perforate, leaving the first awl as it was; then hold the eye of the double thread and tie a part of the umbilical cord around it, tighten it well, then remove the awl and apply moistened linen oil over it; and let it remain until the threads adhere to the umbilical cord, then treat the oil with soothing things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the umbilical cord on both sides of a circular piece of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear large, pierce with a fine spatula that comes from oil, and remove the moisture and soften the eyes, then insert it immediately; then pull it out when it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the bone of the oil [it is made]
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease called "alcunnati" is not foreign but it assembles in oil, resembling an abscess draining, and yet it is not an abscess; and the appearance of its work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared chair and straight, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the abscess come up to your eyes; then it should be lanced, and do not drain and let the light out, and let the patient see things as he is used to; and if it does not drain under, know that it is an abscess, and if the draining of the abscess is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Place the patient sitting between your hands, then take the thin spatula and make it pass through the corneal membrane hole with the cornea and the crown as it moves; and when it comes out, distill it into sharp hot oil mixed with honey or boil water, fenugreek and honey, afterwards treat it with another cure until it heals.
des aigues de l’oil	From the waters of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have found the similarity of hot waters in the division, and that which is necessary for piercing; do as it suits health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you place the patient sitting cross-legged, away from light for the sun, and hold the oil clean and press it very tightly; then take the paper of the oil with your left hand if the eyes are on the left side, or with your right hand if they are on the right side; then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the eyes are on the left side, or in your left hand if they are on the right side; then place the point of the instrument near the cornea by a quarter inch in that part of the oil at the smaller tear duct, then push the almagda instrument skillfully and keep your hand steady until it pierces through the oil, and you will feel that almagda comes to the empty place; and the measure of the path of the almagda should be at the full extent of the space from the pupil to the end of the iris; this is the cornea of the oil; then you will see the bone through the paper due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, and afterwards place the instrument until it reaches the bone or the water, then press it forcefully down a channel after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If it burns now, then the patient sees it before him and the instrument in its oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After a short rest, if the burn rises again on the second path, set the fire with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise further, gently move your hand around it a little; then apply another small amount of gemstone oil inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then pour on the ointment made of flax cloth soaked in rose oil and egg, and bind it with the healing oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We and those of our time apply on it a mixture made with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, for there are some people who have excessively hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is as follows:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 Therefore, only pierce the conjunctive and do not go too deep, but make it subtle; then apply a little pressure as we have said; and when the work is complete, arrange the patient lying on his back in a dark place where he can sleep; and be careful of all movements, and give him light foods, and do not move his head to either side, and bind him according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in the same dark place, test his vision, and make him see some things, and then re-bind him for seven more days; and it should not be done during the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it should be done when the burn subsides quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If an abscess swells up, you should lance the oil before the seventh day, and pay attention to those who soothe the abscess; and when it is soothed, you should then lance the eye (of the abscess) and place the ointment on its surface to cover for any day, and stay in that dark room immediately.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And then go little by little from the house and convert to your chamber; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Iriha, who told us that in his country people pierce alum, so that the pain subsides, but I have never seen anyone do it on our land, nor have I ever read it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of forms of almadga, for this reason those who do not recognize them will see them; and they are of iron properly speaking:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And their heads are of the same subtlety, and the points in four angles are sharp.
de la char sor le neis	Of the flesh on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 Sometimes are born or born cysts of various sorts, and there are some that resemble scorpions with many feet; and if there are such cysts whose skin is darkened by pus, and if the cyst is hard from the bone.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In such a case of soft and not hard char, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; open his nostrils, and pour the onion juice onto those chars, and draw them out; then grip what you can support with a sharp and subtle spatula from one side, until you know that that char is entirely stopped.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any matter which cannot be covered, open it all with subtle and light instruments, so that nothing remains; and if without your protection or abscess covering, it should break, assist it as necessary; and if the abscess is malignant, hurry and cauterize it until the pus is drained and all the charring is removed, then pour in oil or warm water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If it does not open and moisture comes up to the palace (nasal cavity), know that it is healthy; if moisture does not perforate as necessary, know that there is a char bone growing in the bone above, to which the instrument does not come to cut: then bind a thread, somewhat thick but not too large, with your hands and at each knot allow the required space; put the patient's head into the thread at its widest part, and draw it out while smelling (applying pressure) until it comes down through the nose to the mouth; and many times children in school do this, and it is easy for whoever wants to perform it; then hold the chief (bone) coming from the nose with one hand, and the other chief coming from the mouth with the other hand, and know which one follows the other while we who are the thread pull.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Perform this action as you know that the nerves have been corrupted in that flesh. Draw out the thread, squeeze the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, then replace it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has corroded everything that remains of the flesh. Afterwards, place a plank splint on the nose for some days until it is healed, and if there is a need for drying medicines, use them; this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, as one distills oils and medicines in the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it is made of silver or brass, resembling a lamp with an open top, like a funnel, and guide it in this way; and if you see, make a closed funnel, and have the instruments full for purging the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	Of the flesh on the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the head of the neck, which grows and becomes large enough to see; and because of this, you must cut it at the beginning, excise all of it, then put fire cautery or burning medicine on the place; if it is delayed until it becomes large, if it is hard, blackish, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron as it is an enlarged abscess, for when it is cut once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not blackish, and you can cover it, then empty the patient and cauterize with fear, and treat the place with drying and constricting agents.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is cut and sewn up
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when continuous solution comes into one of these cartilage joints, it benefits little, unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, when this happens to anyone, look if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring together the two lips to a stitch, then heal it until it is healed; and if the lips have already separated from one side and the other, you must cauterize all the edges of their wound until they heal, then bring together the two lips to a stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood on powdered incense, and apply some plaster of strong or other plaster, and leave it until it dries, then heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of stitching is that you bring the solution together: either with needles, as we have said in the abdomen stitch; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the hands of men, there often forms an abscess deep within the lips, resembling grains of wheat, smaller or larger; then you must turn the lips, and cut open each side, take it with tweezers and squeeze in each part; then apply the powdered vitriol to the wound until the pus is drained; and then apply alum to the wound, and treat the wound with dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	of the gums (of the teeth)
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a pimple appears on the gums, which the ancients called “albulus”; then you must hold it with tweezers, and squeeze its root, and let the blood flow; then apply vitriol powder or other powders that restrain and dry it; and if the pimple returns after the incision, and this happens often, then squeeze it again and cauterize it; it will not return after the cautery; and these are the instruments to cover (the wound).
des sordens	The sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are sores around the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh sores; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and decaying when corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head should be in your lap, and you should remove the sores or the roughness that appear, until nothing remains; and do the same for the blackness and greenness, and the yellow and other spots, until they are cleaned; and if you remove what is there at first sight, it is good; but if not, start again on the second day and third, as long as you have completely cleaned them; and know that the teeth need different forms of instruments for cleaning, according to what the work demonstrates, because the instrument used to clean the teeth has other forms than that used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay drawing it out as much as possible, for this should not be done at all; for this is a very high substance up to which there is no excuse for scraping.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 When the patient must draw the tooth, you must be certain of the root direction.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Many times, the patient experiences pain and believes it to be toothache, and draws out the bad tooth; however, the pain does not subside until the rotten part is removed, for we have seen this happen with these people; and when you are certain about the tooth that needs to be pulled, you must first scrape around the tooth thoroughly with a strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides; then press it with your fingers or delicate pliers at the base of the tooth, little by little, until it is completely loosened, then tighten the pliers firmly; and keep the patient's head between your knees so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After pulling the tooth correctly to break it, if it does not come out by itself, take one of these instruments and gently push it from each side, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if the tooth is pierced and eaten, you must fill it with cloths where the holes are; and if you pull it gently with the pliers so as not to break while pulling; and very carefully operate around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 Make sure you do not break it and leave a part behind, because the patient will suffer greater pains from the root later due to the injury.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And beware that you do not act like ignorant lords who in their haste and recklessness often break the cart (teeth), and they do not bring what we have mentioned; but they sometimes cause great disease for the roots that remain or for the broken tooth, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the area with wine or water and oil, and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, use vitriol powder; and if it does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, with which one silences the teeth first, should have long points and large handles, so they do not double when you extract the tooth; and these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And should be large handles so they do not bend when pulling, and made of good iron, and have teeth for holding on.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains at traction, you must put cotton soaked in butter on it for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 while the joints are softened, then insert the pliers called "algefri", making the head look like a beak of a pincer; and inside make it as smooth as a chisel, which is its shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tools, then you must expose the flesh entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as palancha, of this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be thick and large so as not to break it, and if the root jumps out through those tools, that is good; if not, help with all the instruments, from which the shapes come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use an instrument with two prongs, of this form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are before the teeth, and of this tool that seems like large pincers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And it should not break, and know that many instruments of the teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters find their tools by themselves, according to what their work and the illness indicate, for there are such diseases where the old masters did not teach any tool because of the diversity of ailments, and if it breaks a chariot or another bone, or if it could, then seek the instruments that are required, which I have told you, and help with gestures, as follows:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be large and sturdy to hold the bone and not slip, but it can hold and extract; then restore the joint with appropriate medicines, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, use this entire instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When teeth appear not according to natural shape, and the form is ugly, even in girls, you should know that if the tooth is not born after the gum, and it is not correctly positioned, and cannot be straightened or filed: drill (it); and if it is exposed with the tooth, take this tool whose shape is like a small beak, made of hard steel at the tip:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the handle of the copper instrument is held for long hours due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others; if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a small flat file like this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is similar to the file used to make needles; and file the tooth gently for long hours until it stops hurting; then plane the end with any rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and bites the tongue, you must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth fall out
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the teeth are about to loosen, either by percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot press up on it when they eat, making them fall out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, but that does not help; then they must be held in place with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes; and the gold thread should be medium-sized neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth moving, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then insert the pliers between the loose teeth, if there are one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue covering up until the part where you started, and hold your hand gently but firmly so it does not move; and tie the thread to the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then thread the shoulders with a wire using pliers, and align them, and put them back in their proper place so they do not cause bleeding; then leave it as tight as it can stay in place, and if it dislocates or the wires break, hold it in place with another wire; if it stays and serves for that time, and this is the form of teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth and the two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes the shape of a bone tooth is made and placed where the lack exists, and hold it together as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 There is sometimes a ligament that comes beneath the tongue or is born in this way; or by accident of sutured wounds; and the operation is such that you open the mouth of the patient, hold his head steady, and lift the tongue; then take hold of the nervous ligament with a wide grip, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if it is hard or swollen, and this is due to sutured wounds, put in an uncine and widen the grip on the ligament; and make sure that the incision is not too deep, for the artery that is below; and when you have done this, lift the limb from warm water and oil, then place a linen tent under the tongue; and tighten the patient's limbs each night so they do not heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And if blood flow comes out, put on it vitriol powder; and if the wound bleeds, cauterize it with the slow cautery (or cauterizing iron), which is good for this purpose; then cure it with another remedy until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see it (the wound) of pale color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a cancer; and if it is declining towards a blister and there is moisture, pour unguent onto it, and loosen it from both sides with a thin spatula; and if the wound weeps at your work, apply vitriol powder until it is drained, then return to your work until you drain all of it; then lift fresh lambskin or silk and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Sometimes inside the throat there come swellings called "godath", which are properly called almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful: if it is a hard abscess of small size and pale color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also because of blood flow; but let it be until it becomes soft, and then you will separate it, or it will break by itself; and if it is of white color round, and the root is slender, prepare the instrument for covering, but first examine whether the abscess has cooled down and been soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his shoulders be healthy, and he opens his mouth wide and the servant takes hold of it between his hands, pressing the tongue down to the instrument, as shown here; and it should be made of silver or thin bronze, like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue with the whole instrument, and you see the abscess, take the hook and pierce it into the mandible, and draw it upwards more than you can; and draw any cloth away from it, then strike with the instrument, which is its form, resembling a spear; but be aware that the head is curved, one end towards the other, and they are very sharp, made of iron or bronze:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the object with pliers, of which shape is as follows:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the object with pincers, of which shape is as follows:
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I treated a woman of an abscess that was inside the throat, to wit an abscess of small size; and I had tightly closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the constricted passage, nor eat or drink, and she would have died if she had remained in that state for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 The abscess was so high that it had to be cut into two through the two passages of the throat.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 I immediately thrust it then, and pierced through one side, afterwards pulled it far away, and through that great hole in the bowel; afterwards I set right the other wound near the nose, and opened his mouth and pressed his tongue; afterward I pierced through that side into the abscesses, and cut off a part of it, and no more blood came out but a little; and thus the throat of the woman was detached, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting off from that abscess for long times; and the abscesss grew again immediately, and filled up the hole I had made, so much so that it became very large; therefore I tricked him and cauterized inside his throat. Thus it remained without growing; and I left those parts, and only God did something with them after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When it protrudes at the eye and is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round beneath, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not improve, and you see that the abscesses are eased, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and that which is round and gathered but not long; and it is bloody or of thin color or black, then you should avoid cutting it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it (the eye), as I have said in the manner, of its bladder and length, you must make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned before; then pierce the onion into the eye, and pull it out, and cut it at the two places (2-3 millimeters) that I have said in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And you must not cover any more than the surplus that is beyond the natural limit; for if you do so, it harms the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what has been said in the incision of the two anuses, and cure it until it heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient fears covering [the affected area], then you must use an instrument for the cauterization to alleviate his fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The manner of cautery is sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 The patient must place his head in your lap, and then press his tongue against the instrument mentioned in the cauterization chapter, and hold it with sharp hot iron, but not too thick or too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, which is shaped as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And have a hair or a piece of cloth where medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument completely over the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flows from his mouth into the medicine, but does not go down the throat or nose; then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it on the eye, for about half an hour, until you see the swelling and pain of the medicine subside; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the sheath above, so that the cotton adheres to the eye; and do this frequently, until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and wait for four or five days. And if you need to reapply the cauterization of the medicine, do so, and after the cauterization rinse around the eye with a cotton swab dipped in warm water, and clean what is around the medicine; and apply cool water and gargle until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more effective than incision, not the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take camomile and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and put them all together or any of them in one pot, and place it on a fire; and let the pot be well sealed with strong earth, and in the pot have one instrument hairy according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And it shall be silver or lead, and one of the heads pushed into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is putrefied; afterwards it frequently recurs, until the eye dries up, and ensure that you do not perform this at the beginning of the abscess's eruption, for many things happen; and do not do it unless during the decline of the abscess's eruption.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 If this is not present, take a canal and put an eggshell crack into the patient's head so that the mouth does not get too hot; for the eggshell does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and it is good healing together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times an eel or spine of fish, or something else is lodged in the throat; therefore, you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with the entire instrument so that you can see movement; and if it does not open and is pushed back into the throat, the patient should vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance, this may dislodge the thing. Or, the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of soap, or a radish root, or one morsel of dry bread; tie one thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will stick, and you will draw it out again. And if it does not come out as we have said, take a splint of wood according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and raise the head high; and watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, as it would die or push the bone inside; it is better if the patient pushes the instrument, because he will move or the thing is loosened; if he pushes downwards, or pull it out completely to equalize the instrument, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	the windpipe of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 At no time is the saliva of the patient considered as medicine, as I mentioned in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when it does not benefit, then look at the throat of the sick person in the sunlight, since you press the tongue with the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see the saliva, draw it out very carefully with a small spoon or delicate tweezers suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that does not work, take a heated iron and put it in the throat of the sick person, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And anoint the patient with water all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in to rinse, moving it with your hand frequently; and as soon as the saliva senses the water, it falls out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 And if it does not fall as we have said, you should sedate the patient with anesthetic, using the instrument that I mentioned for anesthetizing the eye; do this many times, for it will surely bleed.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The method of anesthesia is as follows: you take the pot that has charcoal in it and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and place the head of the instrument inside it; then pour your anesthetic, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape but comes up to his nose; and the smoke will now make him sleep, and if he does not fall asleep, you should repeat the anesthesia many times; let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and alkaline things and drink nothing; and then it will be necessary for him to release urine through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument with which to treat the snake, is such that when it can be seen, resembles curved pincers for entering the throat; and has the shape of a syringe's tip, and it should have a liming sharpness so that what it takes, it cannot lose; and here is its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 Many abscess-like symptoms appear, as remembered below in this book from one and the other; they are different in perforation and incision; and it is in two ways that one resembles its likeness, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is for the lymph nodes that are within the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 For abscesses in the head are different than those in the body, and abscesses of the charntre (lymph nodes) are different from those that come in the joints; each should be judged separately in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if there are abscesses that should not be pierced until the bowel is ripe according to its completion; and those of such kind that it is necessary to pierce when they are hardened, but do not die according to their completion, as abscesses that come near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 For when an abscess comes from a joint, and it is left until it bursts on its own, possibly the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, causing contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 For when an abscess comes from the main body part and you delay the perforation until it has ripened, this will damage the main body part; or if it is located at the base, one should pierce it as soon as it has ripened; and should not perforate an abscess without complete digestion, except when it is located at the base, which cannot be opened fully, and become elongated inside, and a fistula forms, and cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the time of piercing the abscess that is ripe according to its completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure of the fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the swelling and movement of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should make the piercing sit where the abscess depends more closely, and where it has opened; and let the piercing be long in the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all even places where there is no plaque.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that fall, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in a charned place, it is beneficial to leave the perforation until it is confirmed by complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce it beforehand, the body will flow from it, and it will be full of much filth; and by chance, the lips may harden and it will become sealed off.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if there is any abscess that needs to be pierced according to the size of the body, as required by the limb.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And it is necessary to make small incisions for small abscesses and large incisions for large abscesses, and many cuts according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where caution is required, they should be covered; when they have become as a cloth and swollen, it should be treated in the same way as for babies: and if there are those that are cut into three angles or such that are covered like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the joints; and if there are such where a round incision is made and other incisions, they should be treated accordingly.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 Who have no head, as an abscess superficially, it should be pierced fully; and when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but only a part; stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing crooked; do this many times gradually, until the pus disappears; likewise, if the patient is weak or a woman bearing, or small children, or old men debilitated.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 The pus sometimes spasms with the release of the pus, which may accidentally cause the death of the patient, but you need not worry about it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, be extremely careful with this chapter, and when you have opened your abscess, drain the wound, and check if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a large one, bring linen or old cotton bandages; and if it is a large abscess and there is much pus, you must place a bandage in each one so that they come against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, you must fill it with old cotton or linen gauze without moisture, tie it until the third day; then open it, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs in your work, apply cold water and linen, wet the cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the bleeding persists, provide treatment and care, and the powders I have mentioned in this book should be used on the wounds or abscesses; if it is winter, or the wound or abscess is very nervous, then you must place hot towels and cloths soaked in wine and oil on top of them; if it is summer, and the wound is fleshy, then you must place hot cloths soaked in water and oil, or cold water and oil, for three days as we have said; then drain the abscess, dress it, and cure it until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Again, do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like, "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
des soros	This means "of sores".
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 For small abscesses at the head, there are ways known to us that are in cloths, as the gardener of a linen plant, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are some fat and similar ones that have moisture like pulses; and there are some hard and stony ones in the cutting, without any doubt that the arteries do not oppose it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of cutting is that you prove with all instruments called "entre-missoire", from which the form comes afterwards, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 If it contains moisture, they do it above the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is emptied, they scrape without leaving any hair that contains the moisture, because it returns immediately if left; then put cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in vinegar and oil, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who are delayed at night will be healed.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then repeat the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know it does not stay in place; then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 If the abscess is hard and swollen, squeeze it in this manner, longways; pour out your urine, peel off all the skin, and apply all your care to draw pus from beneath the cloth where it lies; and if the arteries oppose you, do as I have told you afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And similarly treat the abscess if it is pustular, and cut it open and cure it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 Cut open the pustular abscess and moisten it, for it is easier because there is a little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if in any of these abscesses or head, there is no moisture, and those were the abscesses that I treated or the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had pierced it with anything, one would have made a wound like from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses coming or heads, such as those that come from children's heads and the roots of ears, they should be opened all the time according to need, in order to let out pus; and treat them as necessary.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Often this abscess occurs at the neck, under the jawbones, in hollows, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, and they are large and are connected to each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And each scrofula is properly within its side, as the neck and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities to these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 Some contain moisture, and some are malicious ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In the one that you see with good position on the shoulder, and resembling the color of the body, and mute in every part and not pierced by the neck or the artery or the vein, and not rotten; you must cut it from above, peel off each side, and place the two lips of the incision as close together as possible, if you need to, as we have said about the abscesses of the head; and draw it out little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and do not use the spatula or lancet too deep, so that the hand does not slip, and look carefully before you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you open the vein or artery and it does not yield, put vitriol powder into the wound, or some powders that stop blood, and hold the wound; let it remain until the abscess is pacified, and the wound softened and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the pus dries up, return to your work until you are finished; then look for any small scrofulas that remain, if you find them, cut and wash them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 If there is a vein running deep in the root of the scrofula, it is not necessary that you cut the scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang, without harm; then treat the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you excise the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and stitch them now because there should be no excess remaining due to the largeness of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 It is necessary that you understand how to cover the root of it and draw out pus, and stitch it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those scrofulas with excess, pierce there where the pus has accumulated; and pierce it as described earlier, on that spot, then introduce lints with ointment and similar things so that they corrode what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with healing ointment until it heals.
de squinance	And if you lancet a sciatic vein (swelling in the lower limb), you must cauterize the opening with a hot iron and bind it up, then keep the leg raised for seven days without moving it; otherwise there will be excessive bleeding.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the measurement of the throat, but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinancy, it is necessary that the throat slit called "epiglote" should be opened; and no aid should be given by these, because all the veins and the pore of the sick person are in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the channel of the pore, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it should be cut below three circles or four small slits across, between two circles or by the size of the incision without damaging the cartilage; and these parts are suitable for cutting the epiglottis such that there is no cartilage present, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 If the master is afraid, he must stretch out the skin of the throat to its full length, then cut the neck until it reaches the windpipe; and cut away any blood vessels that you see, and then chop the cartilage as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the sectioning of the gland in the windpipe that jumps out when the throat is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hour has passed in which there is doubt about strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound with care, and sew it all around the cartilage; then administer medications that cause pus to form, until it heals.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuscasis says that this should not be done until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient has been judged to be dead, and the bird removed from him.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then you should press on the throat because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death; and for this, the ancients instruct to keep the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, which it does in three or four days. And then they would command to sew up the wound and cure it when it was cured; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 I saw a young woman take the knife and thrust it into her throat and sew part of her windpipe; and I was called to treat her, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I found the wound, and saw the blood flowing from it, and knew that she had not coughed or breathed except through the throat, and the wind passed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I quickly sewed up the wound and cured it until she was well; and no harm came to the woman except that her voice was hoarse, and she returned to her normal state; for this reason I say that in such a situation of the throat one should not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	from the thick throat   (in this context, "gorge" refers to the neck)
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in color like a bladder, and it is most common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural, and accidental; where natural has no artificial cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And the accidental is also of two types, one resembling fatty lumps and the other resembling an abscess that comes from an artery; and there should be fear, and no force should be applied except in small ones, and it must be proven and searched through the intromissoire: if you find it as hard as fat, and it does not yield to any pressure, if you squeeze it, as one squeezes lumps, and pull it out completely, if there is any; and surround it well, and cure it as necessary until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	The bones   (the affected area being the bones)
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 Many ways of us are, which I will describe all their similarities; and now it is necessary that I say the entire difference between a notch and an opening.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an ulcer is heat and continuous fever until the eruption has passed, and the purulent matter has been completed; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 A notch has no heat, fever, or pain, and contains a cyst that is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like an ulcer, and becomes large; and it is similar in two ways, either fatty, or moist, and they are mostly colored as I have said in division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the knot, that you test and inquire first about all the instrument called "entromissoire", according to its form or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 And the method of the incision of the abscesses is to take the moistest place you find in the abscess and turn your fingers little by little until you feel that the straw has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess; then remove the contents, and be careful not to let it burst.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If moisture flows from the wound, let it be colored as I have said for other abscesses; and if afterwards no moisture comes out of the opening, know that it is filled with pus, then make a cross-shaped incision, take hold with the forceps, peel it gently on both sides and pull the affected area where it lies, ensuring you remove it whole along with the thread; and if you cannot remove it whole, remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If something remains, it returns many times and if a small amount remains and troubles you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, hold it closed, apply warm things to alleviate the abscess, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed; and if it grows large, cut it in two at the edge of the wound and treat the surrounding flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beats against you or otherwise is in opposition and you hurry and use vitriol powder, leave it lying for 2 to 4 days, until the wound heals, and let the inflammation of the blood subside; then apply the ointment where it has remained unhealed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Behold the shapes of the probing instruments, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; and within them are three cross-shaped ones called "albarets," and one called "breb," and there are also three kinds for encircling abscesses: large, medium, and small; they resemble the needles used to sew shirts, and are made of citron wood, iron, or silver; those that are yellow are more valuable, and are sharper for encircling fistula openings; they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The shapes of these forceps are in many forms as you see here: large, medium, and small; they also have forceps with two prongs in three ways; they have forceps with three prongs, in three ways; they also have forceps with two prongs, and some have only one prong, and there are three types of each. All these are necessary for their use.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The first part of the shoulder that is cut into is sharp, and those who do not cut deep from one side only are at risk of injuring the vein or nerve; and in these cases, the arteries are tied off before they are cut, so that the patient does not feel pain when abscesses are opened; and there are three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and they are not used anywhere except in charnut regions, such as legs, arms, breasts, and groins, and sometimes a smaller tool is used, similar to fistula scissors, according to this shape, for draining blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed at times on the joint that heals from veins, and arteries, and sometimes it returns in this large shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they start to decay, until they resemble female breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen. Whoever wants to treat them must do so according to this form from line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then cut the fat, apply medicine to the wound with soothing herbs, then bring together the two edges of the wound and sew them shut, and let it heal until it is healed; if it swells downwards and is flattened by its size as happens with women, make two incisions above it, in the shape of two fissures; so that one remains attached to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.; then cut the skin between the two edges, remove the fat, and bring what we have said about sewing and powders, and whatever is necessary for the cure, until it heals; if it does not heal or the incision is not complete because the patient does not want to rest or due to bleeding, you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; leave it until it softens the remaining fat and wound, then let it heal until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses on the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come beneath the buttocks are handled as hard scrofulas where there is a hardness, and if they contain moisture within them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire cavity in the abscess is emptied, you should use old cotton on the wound and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment to it until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, you should treat it as we have said in cutting scrofula, and if the wound forms a cavity, you should apply a fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes attached, there are often abscesses, and the same happens with a swollen vein and an abscess; if one recognizes it by the artery, the abscess is long in depth; when you feel it with your fingers, you should feel it tightly; and when it is due to the vein, it appears round on the outside; it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the joints and angles, and when it is at the neck and near other important places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. Therefore, the treatment with iron must be avoided for one who is ill and for the one at the head, as well as in one who has a swelling of an artery beneath the skin; then open the abdomen in a regular fashion, cut out the artery carefully from the layers, until it is exposed; then place an awl under it and pierce it to the opposite side, and bind the artery with a double thread as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then hold the part between the two ligaments with an intromissoire until the swelling subsides which is there, and cut off the abscess; then apply the treatment of a bowstring, until the ligament gives way; then treat it with ointment as needed, until it heals; and if the abscess is due to a vein opening, then you should mark your hand with the color of the abscess over the entire skin, then pierce the awl under the part which you hold in your hand, and let it penetrate, and have the thread double, so that you draw it from the opposite side; then tie the abscess as I said, or a ligament of one of the two sides with the thread; and if you doubt whether the threads will pass through, then insert another awl along the entire length of the thread under the abscess at the incision of the first awl, and bind the threads in four places; then compress the abscess until the excess subsides, then compress the excess and leave what is bound; then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	From abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come in the artery and the vein, so abscesses come to the nerves when they are wounded or from too great work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And this often occurs in the shoulder and the thumb and in all joints where there are joints, and it is called an abscess, and its color appears similar to that of the body, and it is in various positions causing pain; and when it is forcibly squeezed, the patient feels pain, and it is not entirely within the body, but beneath the skin; and it is quiet in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, neither under nor over, and the one who is in joints should not be covered with iron: perhaps contraction would occur; and if it is in the head or the forehead, cut open the skin.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and strike its root; if it is large, pierce it at the edge, peel off the skin, then bone and close the wound with stitches, and let it heal until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	Large lumps hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "funge," resembling mushrooms, and it has subtle roots and large heads; and there are small and very large ones; and I have seen a man who had two bellies that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had fine roots, and were cut open, and moisture flowed from them continuously.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I weighed and found one at 18 ounces, the other at 6 pounds, and when the incision is made you can see if the patient is moist, and the color of the internal organ is pale and wet with a fine root; if you cut it widely, have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 For in the thigh there often come very large hemorrhages of blood, and if it overwhelms [the patient], then hurry to cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the iron incision, take fine thread carefully made, tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then tighten it, and do not stop tightening the thread until it stops the flow, and feels a hard pressure; and if the roots are large, be cautious about pressing it completely due to the stomach, but you can certainly press half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and make sure you do not cauterize the part which is of dark color and poor sensation and milky eyesight.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this abscess has grown large, and I will come to treat this syphilis afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil is mature
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of a wound or a fissure in the bladder, and it is above the abdomen and in some of the testicles, as happens in other routes, or from blood that leaks from veins or arteries, according to what is beforehand, or due to windiness; and if it comes through the route of the bladder and through the exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and wide in various openings.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed with hands, it returns and comes back again, and in some cases may become hardened, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and through heavy labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing and wide when you press it with your hand, but do not constrain it; and if it is due to blood, the abscesses are large and hard, and are filled according to a quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work indicates that you look to see if the appearance is due to the blood of an artery or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 It is necessary to let the treatment rest.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, about the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is due to the intestine or bowel, you must command the patient to strain his anus, and stretch out straight, then lean down all around the belly; then command him to press gently between your hands, then go around the place that you have signaled with a spatula, then extend half of the abscess above the great spoon; then tie it tightly with a strong thread or a strong cord made of strong silk, and leave the patient to hold onto the string; then open half of the extended abscess over the string, and insert your finger, and search for the intestine; if you find it caught by the string, release it, and push the intestine out of the belly; and if you find a bowel, take it with the spoon, and cut off the superfluous part; and if the artery or vein opposes, go around carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two sharp points, and place them around what you have made in the shape of a cross that you pierce; then press the abscess for four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place as it is until it becomes soft, and cut the dead flesh as it becomes soft and can be removed, then cure it according to what is necessary, and close the abscess as we have said; and draw out the pus or moisture that you find, then cure the place according to what is necessary, and stitch the place.
dou chancre	The pustule
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the likenesses of pustules, and how one should treat them with medicines, and how one should choose the cure of iron; and we shall say what a pustule is, and great caution must be taken in its cure, and the ancients said that when pustules are in a place where they can be shaved like a pustule on a mamel, and in the thigh, and in similar places, one should remove it completely when it begins; and when it is large and old, it is not good to approach it, for I never knew anyone who could heal it; nor has anyone healed it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, are that you purge the patient once with black bile; then make him purge if there is manifest distention, then shave the patient one good length for the operation; then take your lancet or pustule, and shave off all hair and flesh from all parts, leaving nothing remaining; and allow the blood to flow freely, and anoint the wound well with your hand or something else, and if the discharge of blood makes you hesitate about incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the wound is cauterized; then treat it with other medicines until it is healed.
de ydropisie	Of hydropisy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 We have said in the division the resemblances of edema, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment with medicines, and that which is treated with iron: these are only disclosed; one should not use iron in these two resemblances: namely, tympanites and ypsarche, for it is a deadly thing. Therefore, when you treat this edema resemblance called "edema" with medicines, and the cure does not help, observe whether the patient is weak or if he has other diseases besides edema, such as dropsy of the abdomen and similar things; in that case, do not use iron because there is doubt. And if you see the patient strong and having only edema without other diseases, and he is neither too young nor too old, then operate thus: lay the patient on his back on your hands, and the assistant presses the abdomen forcing the water to the lowest part of the bladder; then take the pointed spatula according to this shape.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And cut through it from both sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 Then make a cut from both sides, but not too deep that it reaches the intestines when it is pierced; and make sure the urinary bladder is not punctured towards the intestines. If so, you must make an incision to the right side of the third rib above the navel; if it's due to liver disease, it should be on the left side, and if it's due to constipation, on the right side. The patient should not lie down on the incision so that excess fluid does not flow into that weak place. Then pierce the skin with an instrument, push it, and hold your hand on the entire spatula between the skin and the bladder as when you are unscrewing a nut or key to the amount of one nail or around. Then pierce the bladder until the spatula reaches the water level, and this is the bladder's bottom, then pull it out, and place this instrument in the shape shown here:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And it resembles a silver needle, thin and made of lead or light thread, and in its lower part, there are three holes; on one side, there are two holes; and on the other side, one hole; and the head of the needle is cut like a feather quill, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make when cutting the feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 At the top is the alembic, so when the instrument comes to the boiling point, now lower it onto the instrument; empty it then of either half or a third, for if you empty more than necessary in that hour, possibly the patient may die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls down, approaches death; but empty according to its potency, and according to what the patient's condition and pulse indicate; then draw out the instrument and hold the boiling water, it is now held back by the cork that seals the opening where you pierce, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then begin the instrument again the next day if you see the patient suffering from this, and draw out a small amount of boiling water; do this each day, and be careful not to let it sit too long but only a little bit of boiling water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And if you doubt about the patient and leave much water on him, cure him with burial or hot sand, and by sweating or bathing and to the sun, and anoint him with wine; and cure him with medicines drying while he is still sick, and cauterize on the stomach and the liver and the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the member
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Occasionally children are born without foreskin in the penis, or the foreskin is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it is necessary to perforate at all the spittle extremely thin according to this shape:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 then place the thin foreskin of wood, tie and hold it for three or four hours, or until he wants to urinate, if it is removed, make him urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps there is no need for this, because the urine that comes out does not close it.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 The patient with a small ulcer is to be treated with cloth of plaster, as we have said, it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those without an ulcer in their place are bled, because no one is born with an ulcer at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting the penis up; and they cannot ejaculate due to the matter not being able to reach the opening, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The method of the work is that the patient lies on their back with the penis and scrotum positioned as the width of a feather, so that the foreskin can be easily drawn back, as necessary; you should also avoid the discharge of blood that often occurs, and if it happens, drain the bleeding area and heal the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	boils of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often this boil appears on the penis, it is an ugly appearance of pus; and among them there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; you must pick them once a week with a thin instrument, strike and clean them all, then put damp cotton in Egyptian ointment over them; then heal them with diaphinicon ointment until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the abscess is evil-smelling and suppurating, you must apply a cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have cut it (the abscess), and if it is on the penis and has part inside the skin and part outside, you must first remove the abscess that is inside; and when it is sutured, cure the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you treat the shoulder, it is not certain that the bones of the thigh will not be pierced; blackness and corruption come into its thigh and leg. If this occurs, everything that is black and corrupted should be cut away, then apply a plaster made from honey and flour (made from the peel of pomegranate rinds and vinegar) to it, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this shape:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cauteries aid in the following conditions together: this refers to the discharge of blood and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you introduce or guide a cane made of yew into the penis, and make the patient urinate; and when the hair is exposed at the tip of the penis which happens in those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary to shave it with a razor, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis is relieved from all sides; and if this is difficult to discuss, then it is necessary to shave it slightly near the tip of the penis and the pubic hair; then wash thoroughly between them, and place a fine linen cloth dampened with cold water on it, so that it does not stick again.
de la circoncision	circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a simple continuation like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own volition and specifically on children, it is necessary that we do the best and easiest job for their salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the majority of masters and lords who perform circumcision to be around one day old, and to use force if necessary, and always with a new knife; however, the foreskin is twice as thick, and sometimes it cuts the upper part and leaves the lower.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the dislocation should be covered, and the pain is doubled; at the amputation which is near the joint is not assured the tip of the limb; and at the amputation of the nail by accident escapes the iron, and spoils the work, and many times it happens as if there was no need for amputation and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the amputation which is made at the joint of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the threads cut equally well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, you should cut it evenly all the time; but ensure that the child is tightly closed around the skin; and the method of the first operation is such that you make the child understand, if he can, that you do not force him to tie the thread around the rod except for that purpose, and then allow him to rest in all possible ways; then make it stand upright between your hands, and reposition the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then push your hand against the rod and blow or say "cut", and draw it up until the head of the rod is in; then clean it well of the dirt that has accumulated there, then tie the joint signet with a double thread, then tie one end to another with the same thread; and hold it with the second knot at the thumb and index finger, and pull between the two threads, then quickly untie the knot and draw the head of the rod up; then let the pus flow out and out, for this is the pus; and put powder on top and above the powder spread a mixture of egg yolk boiled in rosewater, confectioned with fresh rose oil, and leave it there until the next day, and cure it with other care until it heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces for cleansing is as follows: the two heads should be tender and sharp, and they should also be as large as the middle finger equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the amputation occurs when the cartilage within is incised; therefore, it should be extended to your fingernail so that the bone protrudes equally; and strike it evenly. If you cannot hold it with your fingernail, grasp it with pliers, and then strike it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it lasts more than three days and the area below the verge swells, let it be until the abscess has calmed down and the scab has formed; then gently scrape it off; strike it as much as you can move it, but avoid hitting the part of the verge, this will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the bone of things submerged in a wound with powder, as we have said or treated powders, and if it is struck too harshly and goes above, it will not harm; therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is due to a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or frozen semen, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained by a stone which is in the urethra or neck of the bladder, then you must make the patient bend forward on their knees; and the feet should be placed on the back, and the abdomen should be extended from above the lower back, and restrain the patient as much as they can; and then you should forcefully express the stone in the urethra towards the top, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, you must administer extraction with all the instruments called "syringe", of which this is the form: and it should be made of thin silver with a light feather-like tip, like a bird's pen; and the tube should be one and a half palm lengths long, and should be thin at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And the manner of the issue of the urine is that you take a double thread, tie one end to the head of a cotton or linen string, and push the head of the string into the syringe; then knot the excess length of the string and push it to the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on the chair, and anoint the bladder and penis with oil moistened and olive oil and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the buttock; then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and let the patient feel the urine come to the empty container, and this is not done according to this order unless because the guide through which it goes is twisted; then tie the thread to all the string ends, and the urine follows the string, then pull out the string, and correct the urine; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient's pain is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorching or blood comes to the bladder, or pus is assembled there and you see it exuding acids and medications, then do with all the apparatus that is called "clepsydra," and this is its shape:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed, and has three openings: two of them, one on each side as you can see; and the channels lead to such a point that the medicine reaches the worm quickly without addition, if it can draw out the moisture, and push as needed; and when you wish to expel your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the cupping glass in the moisture, and draw gently while pulling; if you draw out the moisture with the cupping glass, then forcefully push the glass back while still pulling; the moisture will enter the cup, and will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of subtle enema with which one enema's the bladder: here it is.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And it is made of silver or iron, and the head is higher; and beneath it lies the breast or the loins; then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture that you use to cleanse the bladder; next, form two strings from it between the two breasts; heat the moistened bladder over the fire; then insert the head of the clistere into the sheath, then place your hand on the bladder all around the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle with it, and poke a hole in the center; then push the strong string through these holes, assemble the circle like a bag, fill it with oil and moisture and water, place it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, press your hand on it until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of stone (in modern English)
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have told in the division the ways of stone, and extraction along with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone embedded in the flesh, and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder occurs more often in children, and this is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; it opens a small hole, and the patient's penis swells, and it pains him many times, and then wraps itself up again; and often the foundation of these jumps causes the stone to move downwards; and the healing of children is quick until they reach four years old, and it is very difficult in the elderly, and it is among the middle-aged, for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient by enema, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it sometimes blocks the stone from being sought after.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by the feet, bend and move them downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes upwards a little; then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be below his hips, so that the bladder is completely declined downwards; then grasp it and feel inside; if you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not fall to the touch, you should anoint your left hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or use your finger, if the patient is an adult; and push it into its foundation, feel for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, make it go towards the neck of the bladder; then press upwards with your finger, and push it out in the direction where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand above the testicles, and with his left hand push aside the skin that is below the testicles in the area where they make the incision; then insert the spatula, which is shaped like this:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And they make it between what is between the coccyx and the sacrum, not in the middle but on the left side of the lower back; and it should be straight above the pelvis, and your hands should be at its base or the pelvis, and let the opening be wide along the length but narrow within, according to the size of the bone, not too large; by chance, the hand that is at the base might press, causing it to jump out unexpectedly; and know that there is such a bone or it has angles and edges: it is groin-like to be extracted; and if it is rounded, like a plum stone, and convex, from where the opening is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 Then if it has edges and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump out, you must pull on pliers that resemble a chisel at the tip to force the bone back into place; or you press down with a subtle curved instrument at the tip; and if you cannot maneuver it in this way, spread open the wound slightly, and scrape it with vitriol; and if there are more than one bone, push on the largest one first near the bladder hole, then strike, pull it out, and remove the smaller ones afterwards.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, it must be made larger by making a bigger incision.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 There are two things that happen to the patient: either he dies or urine comes out constantly because the wound cannot heal; but despite this, try to drain it, or break the nails with pliers as you pull it apart piece by piece; and when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense, aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it up, and place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and cold rosewater and cold water, to cool the abscess; then make the patient lie down on his neck, and do not loosen the binding until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate [the limb], anoint it very well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of dyafinicon and ointment of basilicon until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And if abscesses boil up in the wound and corrode the flesh, and if blood congeals in the bladder, causing urine to be retained which is known in this way that without straining with urine: then put your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and the urine will flow; then lift up the wound from pus and pus-like matter and skin, and help in every possible way that you know until it heals; and it is necessary that all the wounds that you treat, that you tie them with two bandages, and place the medicines on top.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If the wound is small and it is conducted by the penis and pierced through, and urine cannot flow out of it; then treat it as I say before, that you cut it several times, or else the wound will not heal due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already experienced this way.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a piece of iron in this shape with four corners pierced into one thong:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take the thread and tie it around the base of the stone [inside the bladder], so that it does not come back into the bladder; then gently push the probe into the base of the stone; and gradually turn the probe in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; soon after, urine will come, then press your hand on those parts that remain inside the stone within the bladder.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is broken and falls out with the urine, the patient will be cured; if you cannot do this due to some obstacle, tie the thread under the stone and one above, then push the probe towards the stone between the two threads, pull it out, release the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	from the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that stones appear in women, and if it ever occurs, it is a serious matter, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that by chance the woman may be a virgin; and the second is because one cannot find a wise woman who reveals herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And the third method is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth method is that the stone of the woman is deeper than that of a man, therefore it requires a deeper incision, and much fear there is. If such necessity arises, then you must take a midwife who knows, and if one is not found, cast your subtle gaze; and present a wise matron in the art of women's matters, or a woman who knows some part of the craft, and command her to do as you command for the incision of the stone; and carefully observe whether the woman is a virgin: then you must put your thumb or bottom and seek the stone; and if she finds it, you should force it beneath her thumb, and command her to push with her hand on the left side of the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If it is found, you should move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below, all the way until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike on the stone in the root of the thigh near the round bone, where the bone is moving, and feel the stone in that part; do not move your hand above or below the stone, and make the first incision small; then press the opening tightly so that the stone can exit as easily as possible, and know that there are many types of stones: such as small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with rains.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 know the appearances to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 And if the bone protrudes, put vitriol powder on it and hold it in place for an hour until the bone stops bleeding; then return to your work, until the pain subsides, and have instruments that I told you about for the extraction of the stone in humans to assist you in your work; and if the bone protrudes again, and it is an artery that was cut, put powder on the area and hold it with tourniquets and bandages, do not continue this, and leave the bone and do not pull it out, as the patient might die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the heat of the blood has subsided and the limb can be moved, if the arrowhead is still in, return to your work until the arrowhead comes out by itself.
de hernie carnouse	of a hernia carnivorous
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	The first sentence to translate:
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the production of this ramice is due to weakness that comes from the kidneys, and the matter spreads out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 Sometimes there is percussion on the skull, and this moisture may have various colors: either it declines to yellow, or without redness, or black, or whitish, and this happens more often; and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white as we have said, it is a good abscess, long like an egg, and do not open the skull, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 And if there is moisture in the very cloth [bandage], it is believed that abscesses are reasoned with a part of the egg; and if the moisture is between the skin and the flesh, one can feel it well; therefore, to know the color of the moisture, probe it thoroughly, so you may know its form as described before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows after the incision, judge what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we treat the patient with fire [cautery], it is necessary that the patient be purified according to our ability and the fullness of their body; then place them on their back, on something slightly elevated, and lay many cloths under them; then sit on their left side, and command the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the arm at one of the two shoulders closest to the neck; then take the spatula, pierce the skin between them along its length until reaching the flesh white, and peel the skin subtly according to our ability; then pierce the white flesh deeply with water, drain all the water, then put your fingers, and close the white flesh above; do not touch the neck, but only the white flesh; strike everything or in pieces delicately the costal part of it, so that if you do not strike it correctly, the water will return; and if the egg bursts during your work, reset it to its place when you have completed the white flesh procedure; then stitch the two shoulders together at a suture, and treat the wound as others, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspended, being careful not to release the flow of blood; then cut the bone all around the suspension, and drain the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And if an injury is assembled into two parts together, know that these are the branches; if you strike the other part as you did the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put moistened linen in oil of roses into the wound; and put another moistened linen in wine and oil on it, and put the two cords on top, and put over them doubled fabrics, and tie it all with the string according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take the fabrics and use them with linen thread according to this shape and sew them into the girdle of the arm, and one of the heads takes hold beneath the foundation until the back, and the other at the hilt part; and the other two heads on the two angles, and the rest is restrained in the buckle of the lacer; and sometimes this branch of cautery is used instead of iron-cutting, and you should take the cauterizing knife and strike the skin of the cords, and it must be heated as we have said, so that the white pus that contains the water is exposed; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the pus pocket with onion-like holes, and scrape the pus with this hot cauter.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And the cup in all ways that you can, as long as it is heated; and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more effective; and be careful of the decorum of blood, and be aware of the operations of cutting; and if anything opposes you, or an abscess opens or flow of blood or something else, then cure what opposes you, according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 If the patient is afraid and does not wish to endure this operation due to its horribleness, then you shall perform perforation, as I tell you, and when you are certain by the signs we have said that ramice aquouse is present, you should make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the area below the whole spatumile wide, and put the perforation along the length of the body; and let the wounds be large, so that all the pus can come out; then place cotton on the wound, hold it, and let the remaining pus drain, then cure the wound until the lesion is healed; and if the whitened cloth does not allow the pus to issue from the mouth of the lesion, you must apply a pen or instrument for treating pus of hydrops, as its form has been described earlier; enlarge the opening of the lesion, know that the pus will return, and collect it after six months or thereabouts, and when it is collected as described before, then the patient's days will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess on the cheeks
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 Know that in the section of this ramie there is fear in many positions, which is why it seems to me that one should leave it [the ramie]; and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, I say that many abscesses come from the body or from the kidneys; and this is often so.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 It is to be known by sour and acrid superfluity which spreads in the joints or from blows; it [the abscess] takes on the color of the body; there is no pain found, and the abscess is serious; and sometimes an abscess may be swollen and hard, and of this color, and at times comes from arteries, or from inflammation of veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is from an artery, it can be known by the abscess's hot position when you press it with your fingers; and one should not touch it [the abscess].
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 One who is swollen with tumor of vein is known by its disposition to the expression of the touch of the fingers, and he can well make the incision on this appearance, and on other diseases; it is that you cut the tip of the bones, then the yolk is above, and the tract deep into white, and delivers the suspensory from all parts of the yolk.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the yolk is already soft with these diseases arisen, then it is necessary that you draw out the yolk and cut it; if it is in the white or in that which is within the vessels, it is necessary that you deliver all of that tender part and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the birth of the boil is on the backside, you must cut it all off and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, apply linen moistened in rose oil and wine to the wound, then heal it with other remedies until it heals completely.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess on the cheeks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess enclosed by a covering resembling a boil, with the softening of bones, and the patient groans greatly as he goes; and the cure for this disease is as dangerous as that mentioned before, and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is required that you make the patient sit on the elevated seat, then push the suspension of the testicles downward toward your hands, at all parts near to the penis, and touch them with the master's hands and stretch them out properly; then pierce the sponge with a sharp tool wide enough to reach the testes, until they are exposed, and then peel off from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples; then insert a double-threaded needle and tie it at the first place where blood comes out, and then tie it directly at the other end; then pierce them straightly in the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove corrupt fluids; then heal the wound as one would heal a bowl-shaped wound, so that no testicle shrinks from being nourished by either of the testicles; for this will cause no harm. If all the testes come out in blood, it is necessary to tie the testicles at all the testes; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the testicles, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the breaking of the saffron
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The extension of this incision occurs due to a tear that comes from the perforation or the expansion on the abdomen in the area of the intestines; for which reason the intestines descend through that tear at one of the openings; and this tear can be either from the perforation, or from the expansion, and these two types of tears occur due to multiple causes: either by impact, jump, fall, sudden movement, or similar things; and the signs when it is from the extension of the perforation, are that it occurs gradually over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are evenly distributed up to the full extent, because the perforation follows the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section through the abscess, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and there appear various abscesses under the skin close to, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body expelling through the abscess.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines protrude through the abscess and are retained inside, causing great pain to endure by the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, where there is fear, therefore it is necessary to escape from them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 And the method of work is that you instruct the patient to pull the intestine with their hand inside through the wound if it can enter; then put your hands on his neck, raise the legs; then lift the thighs up and remove all the skin from the hips; then make a cut along the length of the buttocks; then push your index finger into the groin area, where the white flesh is located, and the second layer of flesh, and separate the area behind the anus, and between the second layer of flesh; and then move the hand to the right inside the hip bones, and bring the white flesh up towards your left hand, and lift the anus towards the tailbone; and instruct the assistant to stretch the anus outwards, and untie the area that is behind the ligament; and query with your fingers if there is any intestine enveloped or hardened white flesh, and if you find anything, push it into the abdomen below; then take a needle with a thick thread made of twelve threads, and insert it in the back part of the flesh, which is after the hips; after the tailbone, then sew the hips together where the threads appear, until there are four threads; then assemble them one above the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the flesh, which we have said is under the skin of the hips, with a strong ligament of two fingers width; then wrap the threads around the hips, and tie them firmly so that no vassals who nurse it can enter, except an apostate will not come; and straighten the ligament according to the first ligament length, and after these two ligaments leave the flesh which is under the hip bones a great distance of one finger; and after all in the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the area that is under the skin of the hips, as much as it is necessary, and bend it, as we have said before; then introduce moistened linen into the wounds, and place the ligament that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes white cancers are cauterized as we have said, after incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 For it happens often, and let the ligament remain until it has healed by itself; and if it delays falling off, you should moisten with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it has healed; then treat the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a hernia carnivorous
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to heal with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is made like a graft that is attached to the bone, in this manner you tie the vessels, after cutting them lightly below; then grind together, and treat the abscess of those who work on it, until the vessels have healed; and heal as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Sometimes rot is found in the inguinal region, as we have said, and do not undo any of the intestines in the groin, and if some are undone, it is a mistake, and repair hourly; and even so if it remains too long in this place, the wound or syphac grows, until the intestines undo; and this happens by the extension of the syphac that is in the inguinal region, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and swollen are the inguinal regions and opened; and the healing is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes the healing is by iron in this manner: and the patient lies down on their back between your hands, then grind the inflamed inguinal region with a large sword according to the size of three fingers; and then pull out the syphac that is under the skin that surrounds it, then take the right hand and put it on the apparent syphac; and press deeply into the abdomen, then cut the two apparent syphacs of the syphac towards the head of the sword, and cut one and the other; then pull out the head of the sword, and do not cover or extend the wound or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the intestinal graft; then heal by the wounds treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads (sutures), if they break and heal the wound, let it remain open until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The ribs are constricted and have no appearance in the wound, and the cauterizations are made in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	Of the softening of the skin around the eyes
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the eyes becomes soft in some men due to the moistening of the glands that are inside, and it can be seen; and it is necessary when you see this, to cure it, to make the patient lie on his back, and strike the softened skin on the natural skin; then join together the two lips at a suture, and if you see, sew first the superfluous skin that has been moistened with four or five stitches firmly; then strike between the sutures, and the cure is done as for other wounds, until it heals, and bind the thread.
dou chastrement	of the lancing
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 Furthermore, cauterizing is explained in our law, and for this reason I do not wish to speak about it in this book; nor is it necessary but for two reasons: the first being that the mirrors respond when asked about sutures and their cure; and the second, because we often need cauterization of certain animals to help us, such as with goats, sheep, cats, and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 Therefore, I say that cauterizing is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the method by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until its privates are softened and heated; then grasp it with your hand until it is returned to its place and you no longer feel it.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 For the branding of size: you must dye the animal, and press the hide of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and strike each one with the iron rod as needed; when you have well burned them; leave any small amount of fat and subtle fat that is on the vessels; and this method of branding is dry compared to the one made by attraction, because at attraction something from the testicles may remain by accident, causing the animal to desire lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 Hermaphroditism is according to the two ways of men: one is when between the two testicles an opening appears as in the figure of woman's nature, having hair, and sometimes in court the urine flows.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And another way it is in women, and it has on top of the belly as a rod and they pierce it.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment of men and women is that you cut all the affected hernias, and treat them as other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of the scrotum, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the tension
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 A hernia is a swelling located naturally on the body part that is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 You must moisten the excess of the hernia with your hand or onions, and cut it lightly; do not go too deep, so that blood does not come out, then treat it with other cures until it is healed; for another hernia that comes from the mouth of the vagina, and breaks out and may jump, and it resembles a cow, and because of this they are called by the ancients "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 It is necessary to cut it (the affected area), as we have said in the treatment, until it heals.
de erratique	Of the erratic growth
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 If the nature of a woman is not understood or it is small, it can be either natural or an accident due to disease that occurs; or caused by a hard or subtle injury during intercourse, from penetrating deep within her body, or from outside; and they must be careful to conceive, give birth, and have flowers (children), and the knowledge of this is through the examination of the womb.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If there is an effusion (swelling) near to the surface, it can be felt with your fingers or hand.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If the injury is subtle and near to the surface, then you should hurry up and proceed as follows: place your two index fingers together, have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the two fingers so that the subtle swelling is rounded, and press on it (the swelling); then take linen and wet it in oil, and place it on the area, and make the woman rest for a day or two so that it does not harden.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the dislocated joint is hard and thick, you should cut it with an instrument resembling a mirror leaf (splint).
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the dislocation is of cartilage, suspend it with a ligature and compress; apply healing substances such as camphor, dragon's blood, frankincense, and eggs; then introduce a large bandage to prevent the wound from healing; let it remain for a long time; and then provide other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when cartilage comes in marriage (wound), it should be covered in this manner if it is not abscessed.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For an abscess that has formed within the wound, no treatment should be done.
des emorroides	If the nature of a woman is not perceived or small; it may be natural at birth, or an accident due to illness that comes upon her; or it may be due to discharge, whether subtle or thick, and this occurs in the rectum, or on the side, or underneath, wherever it may be; they should be aware of it, and know when to treat and cure it; and knowledge of these things is by the observation of the physician. If the discharge is approaching, whether at your hand or in the rectum, if it is subtle, move quickly and follow these steps: put both hands together, and the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread apart; then the subtle discharge will form, as long as the thick discharge subsides; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the rectum, and have the woman lie down each day so that it does not heal. If the discharge is hard and thick, you should cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf. If the discharge is of blood, suspend it at the anus and cut; and apply medicines to stop the bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together with much egg; then place a large bandage around the wound so that it does not heal; and in this way it should be kept open for a long time, and you should also apply a linen tent; then treat her of other ailments until she is healthy. And when there is blood in the rectum, if necessary, cover it in this manner, unless it is an abscess that has grown. For an abscess that has grown in the rectum, one should not touch to treat.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Emorroidal openings are the outlets of veins that usually do not close by themselves, and when emorroids become old, they swell; and we have said in the division, their resemblances, and signs, and I will say here those which receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 When emorroids and swellings become completely closed, and they cannot be felt by touch, there is no cure except by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those at the mouth of the anus, which can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Therefore, you must put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the anus with tongs to its roots, then sprinkle medicinal powders that stop bleeding, such as acacia and dragon blood and incense, and similar things; then hold her legs apart for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs again, make her sit in a decoction of sumac bark, pomegranate rind, wild gale, and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make the plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it bleeds, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If it does not bleed, you should apply blisters to the back and breasts (chest) without hurting them; then take linen, moisten it in the juice of onions or marigold with old wine, and apply it to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the abscess subsides, you should treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, similar to a rough leaf, it must be covered as I have said in the manual; then you cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	openings of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many types of abscess come in marriage, such as sores, painful abscesses, herpes, stomach ailments, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 Therefore, I shall say in this treatise about the abscess that comes in the marriage (meaning a boil) which is not the same as those that wrap around; and if you want to know the work of iron, observe whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Therefore, do not hurry to pierce it, but let it heal as much as the pain subsides; and then make the patient sit on a stool, and have two stools or he leans, and support his back and gather his feet at the parts opposite the leg; and let his thighs be spread out, and place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good rope; then press the pus towards the right side of the abscess, and bring the instrument to open the mouth of the boil, from which follows the form; and it is necessary that when you bring this instrument, you pierce the rod first inside to know the depth of the boil, so that what enters inside of the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not burn the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the boil with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt him; and it is necessary that he puts the mouthpiece of the instrument above, and marks the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 And when the abscess is opened and it is treated with soft hands, it must be covered with a lint cloth; and when the boil is empty, you must put dampened, oiled cotton wool or green dry oiled wool in the wound; place the damp wool on the full side of the wound and on top of the wool, clean, damp linen cloth over it; then cure for two days with ointment afterwards until it heals; and sometimes lift the boil and the wound with a water and honey enema, and then water or longis and aristolochia roots cooked; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is healed in the sea, you must avoid heating with iron, but heal it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 First, it is necessary for the midwife to recognize the figure of natural childbirth and its signs when she sees the woman after labor and desires to push; then hasten the birth of the infant; afterward, know that this birth is according to the natural figure and the issue comes out of its head, and the second follows with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press on her abdomen so that the infant is born quickly; for when it descends toward its head, the afterbirth also comes forth with it, and the sea is cleansed of its superfluities by good purification; and one who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 Sometimes it happens on the feet, or the body swells or the shoulders, or the hands, or it occurs on the abdomen, or elsewhere, and by chance it is turned around the neck, or in other evil ways; therefore, it is necessary that the woman who bails be wise and skilled in these things, and she must avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures on how to help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes out through its head naturally and the woman is laboring intensely with weak vitality, let her sit on a saddle or have women hold her; then apply oil or fenugreek that has been cooked to her nature. Then insert the small spatula-shaped instrument shown here between her fingers.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And cut the second birth canal, and strike its claw until the water that is within it goes out; and grasp the woman's abdomen until the child comes out, and if it does not come out, you must administer a poultice of fennel with camomile oil to the woman; then make her take emetics and purge herself with cathartics, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will come.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two hands come out, you should reset them gently bit by bit; and if they cannot be put back, place a woman on the seat, lift her legs up; then tilt the seat onto the ground, and hold the woman so she does not cry out during the tilting; and if the hands cannot be put back, and the child dies, cut open the mother with the knife that is placed in front of you, extract the child, and reset gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 of the birth of the child on his legs
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes out on his legs, you must push him upwards; and then turn him bit by bit, until he is straight; then take one of his legs and stretch it bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 The shoulder cannot jump up to anyone's knees, if it is commanded to leap, it makes him vomit in fright; if it jumps, let it be as God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, it should be turned bit by bit, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	And therefore it should be done gently.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if it does not jump as we have described, say that you give a potion of strong musk, oil of ambergris, and melted gum, grind everything together in a mortar; then put the nature of a woman within this ointment and apply it externally; then make her sit in hot steam until she is below the ribs; and when she becomes softened below, let him apply the collyrium of myrrh and put it on, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her vomit and hold her mouth and nose shut, and gently press her abdomen, because the infant is now moving.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the birth of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this form, place its feet on the floor one by one; then lay it on its back, and let its legs hang down, and lie it on the bed; and fold its hands one by one, and then take hold of its hands above the stomach, and press the hips underneath, until it is arranged below; and if the child does not come out, grab its feet and push them forward, then push its belly upwards, then put your hands in; and handle the child hand by hand; and command the woman to seize herself until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	The issue of the child coming through one hand wide;
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It is necessary to find a way to pull back the hand: if you cannot pull it back, then make the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the bed, spread her legs widely; then bring the mustard plaster that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the chair, then try to pull back the hand; and handle the child according to its natural shape, and make her vomit, and command her to hold herself until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Hold the issue of the child by its neck, and spread your hands wide apart, turning your body towards the back of its mother;
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the servant grip his hand, then turn it little by little and gently; and when it is equalized, place upon it a plaster of alum and oil, as we have said, then command it to move little by little; and when you have done this, make him sit on the seat, and command him to grab it; and make him vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner, apply the remedy to all the others.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When it comes to push the afterbirth in this manner completely, grip the afterbirth with your nail until the moisture is emptied; and if the child presses on his face and neck, strike it from the buttock so that it is not retained, and the child dies; then push the child inside as much as you need to, and command the woman to grab it slightly: then it will slip out easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	of twin births
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not strange and rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 Two are strange things, and do not live unless they are named; I know what they are, namely multiplied ones, and they are desired by the one who divines them, who is linked to the devil; and sometimes they arise naturally like snakes under a tree, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they come out with groans, the treatment is as we have said, and let the bailiff be subtle, and do quickly and lightly whatever it does; and do as much as possible to its advantage.
de plusors enfans	of many children.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they are all shaped like a child by the measurement of the wise glorious one, and it is necessary that the bailiff knows this, for by chance similar things happen; do as required.
de l’enfant mort	of a dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you are treating a woman for a stillborn child or an unborn baby, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to perform surgery by hand; then you must know if the woman is of pure virtue, and has no accident or fear of death; then the woman should lie on her back, with her hips inclined downward and her legs raised; and the assistant should press her two parts, or tie her to the bed so she is not treated in the evacuation of the child; then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils with musk and fenugreek and linseed; then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and these musks; then insert them gently into the mother, then seek the place where she pushes the childbirth contractions that are necessary for this purpose, and be careful if the child is presented on top of its head; then pierce the child in its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the navel or near the sides or near the ribs, and if the evacuation is through the feet, pierce or squeeze it gently at the mid-ribs; and hold the umbilical cord with the right hand, and put the crook between your left thumb and index finger, and press gently to the place where you have pierced, and insert the umbilical cord in any of these places until it reaches an empty place; and this is the shape of the umbilical cord:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then pierce it against the other one, if necessary, so that the extraction is even; and then equalize it by moving from both sides to make it move, and make the points sharp for holding it in place, as shown in the figure:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 If there remains a part, then the ball will be pierced with oil from one of its fingers and pushed into that part, and draw out the other part; if it remains without part, then place this pin or higher and continue until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes before the other and it cannot be returned due to being held back, then you should wrap around a cloth until it comes out; then break it at the joint of the toes or near, and do the same with the other foot.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if the child's shoulder is large and it is narrow at the exit, or it has a severe assembly of the head, you must insert the spinal spatula between your fingers, and press the head and extract the ailment; or you may use the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the tools or chapter that follows this; and in the same way handle the natural large swelling; then pull out the bones with the pliers, and if the shoulder joint jumps out and it is tightened by force, it should be split as much as the moisture that is at a worse location; and if it cannot move out, strike it with pieces until you can. If it is swollen in the abdomen or beneath the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture comes out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on the feet, the treatment is light and the reduction to the mouth of the bladder is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And if it is strained in the belly or the thigh, you should stretch it with the cloth wrapped around your hand; and piercing the belly or the thigh, where the moisture is located; and if other limbs are dislocated, and the head remains, put your thumb in deeply into the wound, and pull it out to the mouth of the wound; then insert a splint or a pin, and pull further; and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to an abscess that has come, you should not work on it, instead administer moist and fat things; and apply plasters, and soak in warm, softening and moistening liquids.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if the infant is on its side, and you can make it straight, bring it back to its original position as we have said in the live child; and if you cannot do this, pull it apart piece by piece, leaving nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 When you have done this, bring it back to its original position as we have said in the abscesses that come in marriage; and if bleeding occurs, let it be put in a strong tightening and other treatments are applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb had a child die, then consulted another on it, and revived the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in the armpit, and swelled so much that it opened and began to rot.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned for treatment, and for a long time I thought about the wound, but could not heal it.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied powerful astringent, and an bone came out, then after several days another one did.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel greatly, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I cut the bone of the wound, as long as the woman is in a better position; and the woman lives for a long time in this way, and then after a little while, a small amount of pus comes out of the place; and I do not remember this chapter except because, when the master finds a strange thing, he knows how to help it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To remedy a dislocated joint to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here follows the form of the pressor, which we use in books; and to the two joints of the two chains at each turn.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 The shoulders are more subtle to be restrained, and should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the hole in the stick should be large, and the margins of the wood must be, and a palm and a half long; and between the two limbs should be two alignments of the same stick, which are fastened on one side and on the other, half a palm length or a little more; and these two alignments are inserted into the mouth of the marrow to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, should be made of a stick of ebony or boxwood, like the pliers; and to the two shoulders, there should be two alignments, as you see, a palm long, and two finger widths wide; and when you are about to open the marrow with all the instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging down and legs open, then insert the two alignments together into the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her knees; then work your hand with all the instrument as you have done with the pliers, according to the size that you see to open the mouth of the marrow, until the boy does what he wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is completely covered, and they are multiplied in their resemblances; and when the patient has arranged them, he works more quickly, and higher for men according to their size.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not unnecessarily discard the instrument you have prepared, for there is no excuse for its necessity.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold back her lochia, and then make her vomit with a mustard poultice, and hold your hands on her mouth and nose; if she jumps due to this, it's fine.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If it's not that [retained afterbirth], you should take peppermint, and either a mortar or a cup, fill it with herbs that can open the mouth of the mother, such as rue, anise, chamomile, calaminthe, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a spout or cup from the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the mother, and hold it until the vapors come inside the mother; then make her vomit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second one (the patient) jumps up quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 And if it remains after this treatment, and does not heal as instructed, command the woman to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or musk liniment of aloe, then apply it to nature, and find it again; when she has found it, take it and stretch it little by little straight, so that the husband does not resist the extraction; but you must move it gently right and left, and then pull; it will come out and release.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 If the mouth of the husband is stretched open, as we have said the cure for this condition is emetics and fumigation of herbs; if it does not improve with everything that has been said, make sure you do not force it to pull out; but whoever is at the husband's mouth, tie him to the woman's leg, then apply an ointment called tetrafarmaçon for clisterizing; he will recover and heal, but if she suffers from bad odor in her stomach and head, it will harm the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore it is necessary that appropriate fumigation is provided for this: no one of the ancients has tested fumigation with dill and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates a woman to retain flowers and her afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And it appears to be glass-like in shape, and the fine head is placed into its nature, and the broad sides above the fire; and let there be fumigation on the coals, and the tar until it is burned, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many children are born without a perforated foundation but have it stopped up with some thin wax; in such cases, it is necessary to pierce the wax at its proper place, and not too sharp with a pointed spatula; be careful that it does not touch the wound; then put moistened linen on it, then heal it with ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will reopen, put a plug of wood in it and leave it for several days, and let it be removed when the child wants to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess occurs; it should be covered: whether it is to be cauterized, as we have said about the lime of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the bottom
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas coming from below the foundation are nodules and larger ones that come out of the foundation's opening or between two parties, if there is one fistula or more; and when this nodule has become old, it swells up, and moisture causes a blister or thin bubble to form; at times these fistulas are persistent; they are recognized by those who know them for their discharge or windiness, as the patient has discharge, and sometimes urinates into the wound.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; they reach the joint of the thigh, and to the knee of the cow.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus one knows the fistula persistent at the base, but not persistently: and it is that you press your thumb or the base, and press a fine needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 If there is twisting, you press a thin reed or horsehair until you feel the reed or hair at your thumb; and if you do not feel it, and no pus, gas or worm comes out, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends to the bladder or the channel of urine, if it bursts and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is pierced to the joint of the knee, the reed comes up to the level; if there is no twisting and the pain disappears around it, it is that it has been pressed down, and there is no need for medicine or ointment; and in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure except labor, and folly of those who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In a woman who is not paralyzed and not old, with hope of healing by fire, as I have experienced, the patient lies between your hands on her back; then raise her legs up to her thighs, and have her thighs inclined towards her belly; next, thrust a probe made of iron or wood, if there is curvature, until you know where the probe enters.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels pain around the foundation (pelvis), then you must press your index finger there, and if it feels as if the probe has pierced through, then it will be discovered whether the probe enters the hollow or the flesh; then know that she is paralyzed; do not move it further, for it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 One should always understand that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely; and the aid one provides, it is that one heats the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as previously stated; and pushes it all hot into the fistula, until it comes out from the base; and do this II or III times, as long as you know that these charred pieces should be burned, which resemble a feather of an eye; and then heal with moistened tents in butter, until those charred pieces disappear, then heal with soothing ointment.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If it cannot be healed otherwise and if the tent enters but does not pierce until the point that is at its base, and between your hand and the tent, place a thick covering of skin or syfac, and you see the fistula under this cover; then press from the beginning of the fistula and push towards the tent, and then bring in the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the end of the tent; and the tent will be released, and charred; then remove those charred pieces that resemble a feather of an eye, and none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the sinew swells and splits apart, cauterize it with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 The cauteries of fire bring two good things: namely, the burning of these attached charms, and the stopping of blood and the healing of moisture; afterwards, they cure tents made moist with butter or cheese mashed up, until the limbs become cold, and the charred bones are buried in it; then, they heal the wound with hot ointments hard char and are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When it is treated, it heals and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula reaches down to the bottom of its foundation and is separated from the body, push your finger into it or its foundation, and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the wound, and between them is the cloth or skin or char, or it is about to be pierced, there should not be any other way except faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three ways: either you cauterize as we have said, or you strike it down to the bottom, or if you can, put tents on it and cure as before; do not go too deep so that you do not cover the foundation's support, and bring out the pus voluntarily; then cure, as we have said; by chance, it may heal, or you remove that covering and clean it when it is separated from the foundation, either with a tent or with another instrument pointed out; then examine the charred piece in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part farther away from the foundation: this would be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And sometimes there are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you bite the tent (or tip) into the fistula, and it is where the tent touches the foundation beneath the skin above, then take a pierced tent at its head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert one threaded wire in two, and insert the sheath to the entire length of the wire into the fistula until it reaches its end.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is located along the foundation within, then draw out the thread of that one, biting your tooth or foundation, and pull out the head of the thread, and bring together both ends, pulling them apart and leaving it for a day or two; and tighten it once, until the threads break the hard knots that are between them, and bleed; then heal the wound until it is sutured and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce itself, make it pierce in all possible ways, if it is not too full.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because it should not be covered too full for the ligation, and then healed as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The form of the spiny spatula for making a fistula is very sharp on one side and not on the other, so you should not touch what you should not touch, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	piles of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 Emordisms are of two types: they are within the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and on the outside there is blood, and there is one or more, and they are dislocated from the foundation and away from the base of the foundation; but those that are dislocated have little moisture, and immediately or soon there is a little bit of sour citron juice or blood, and they take on the color of the body. And the treatment for these that are within the foundation is to command the patient to strain in order to urinate in chambers, until the foundations move back into place, and this can be felt by the children; if you hurry, take hold of it with pliers or with your fingernail, then strike at its roots. And if the teeth cannot hold them due to moisture, take hold of them with cloth or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather; bind them with your hands, then strike, and powder some hot powders on top that are in place of cautery; or cauterize them as is said in the chapter of cautery. After they have healed, use other treatments until they become healthy. And if the foundations cannot move back into place, clisterize the patient with a bitter and sharp clisterium to clean what is within the foundation, so that it can come out easily; when the patient feels it, and the teeth are forced from the foundation, it is an easy cure; it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or pliers, strike them, heal them as we have said, until they become healthy, and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 You must apply the stitching in this manner: take twisted thread and insert it into a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from another side, and twist the two ends of the thread below the needle, making it long; and knot the thread, then sew the needle and make sure to leave space for the excess blood; then place the damp linen cloth soaked in rose oil or turpentine on the foundation, and place it on top, and instruct the patient to rest; then leave it until it bleeds, and when it stops bleeding, you should treat it with ointment and other treatments until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	the drying of the fire or foundation.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often, there is drying in the intestines due to fire and by the nature of constraint, and when the disease is old and medication does not work.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary that you cauterize the scab of a blister or your fingernail with a spatula or your finger tip, so as not to let it moisten; then heal it until it dries as required; and if it cannot heal, then shave more strongly than before, as much as it bleeds, and be cauterized; then heal it until it heals.
dou fremit	The trembling (or shuddering)
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 A boil is a small appearance on the body that grows much bigger; and sometimes it freezes and feels like death from shivering, and spreads throughout the body, especially in the hands more than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the cure is that you take a reed from an ostrich feather or a strong hen's feather and place the reed on the shivering, until the red circles the shivering completely; then turn your hand around the entire reed so as to cover it all over the shivering, and immerse it deeply, and pull out the shivering from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	If you wish, do it with a cane of iron or steel in this form and be subtle underneath and traverse above:   In the medieval context, "subtle underneath" probably means intricate or delicate, while "traverse above" likely refers to applying pressure from above. This sentence might imply making an instrument or device out of iron or steel that is designed for a specific medical procedure. However, this is just an educated guess as the text does not provide further context or explanation.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce, instead hold it tight and press. And if you wish, cauterize the quivering, as described in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	The form of the cluster.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes one makes the cluster of silver or iron, or melted tin or wax; and sometimes makes these tools small and large, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, the ones that are brought in the treatment of infants and those who are weak and suffering, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of a clister (small or large) is above wide, where the bellies are tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 And he should have an opening where the stomach is connected, as you see, and the chest inside pierced; it should have two holes on one side and one on the other; and fill the stomach with medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierce all around with small holes, and there should be space between each hole, then put strong thread made of twisted yarn through the holes in X or around, and tie the stomach like a sack; and when the medicine is inside, attach it to the instrument with a strong thread, then apply the plaster; this is the shape of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold, and apply oil or ointment of an egg white, or something similar, to the head with a cloth, then put it on gently; then the attendant should examine him with both hands until he is completely visible, then remove the cloth, and make the patient lie flat so the medicine can come out; if it leaks a little, squeeze it as much as possible; if he sleeps all night, it is more help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you plaster the patient with belly distention caused by intestinal blockage and the medicine starts to come out, renew it until it becomes healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if the hemorrhoids are ulcerated or abscessed, it is also necessary to use the enema, even as subtle as for a child. This is the form of the subtle enema where the skin is strained:
des plaies	wounds (plural)
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; and we shall tell you about the treatments of hands and medicines, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 The things that wounds are made of are by piercing with a sword, cutting with a knife or dagger, or lance, arrow, or similar things; or those made according to the laws of the body, such as a wound on the neck, head, chest, belly, liver, and similar limbs. I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because remembrance will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 I say that when a simple wound or abscess comes with no broken bones, beware if it is due to arrow penetration or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large; doubt the presence of an abscess strongly: let it drain immediately from the head itself if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let it drain in contrast to the damaged part; and let the patient empty himself of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it does not want to drain, let its food be reduced and do not drink wine or eat meat; and place on the wound if an abscess comes out, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in stiptic wine; and if no abscess comes out, place on the wound if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moving due to air, the following powder: and if fire has moved it, place some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	If the wound is large like a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by pressing, bring them together by stitching, as I shall say about abdominal wounds, in stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound exposes the bone, is open and does not hold together at all, close it; then treat the wound with medicine, put hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick foods, such as cooked heads (testes) and cooked wheat, also like pulses, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 If the skin or flesh rots away to the bone, and there is nothing left on the bone, close it all, and pour hot liquid on it, then treat it; if there are arteries in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped without cutting, cut it; and if you find a dislocation, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize (it).
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is light; place this powder on it as soon as the arsenic has made it harden.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; three parts of live coal, and grind the powder finely, apply it to the wound and press firmly until it dries well and joins completely with all its blood; then bind it well and leave it unbound, if it does not swell; because one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes they do this with only calcined substances, when they do not have incense or the blood of a dragon, but the wound has not healed.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the fire has burnt the wound, indeed if it has, do not put this powder on it; but apply some digestible ointments or barley flour paste made with water and honey until it heals; then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if the bone fracture comes with a small wound, then extract it with subtle forceps; I will tell you about head fractures afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	Of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound on the neck is simple and has no distinction from that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is a nerve, there is no other remedy than to let it heal and not put anything restraining, as this harms nerves and makes them retreat; do not place anything cold on the wound, because the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be warm, such as warm water washed with sweet vinegar and mixed with rose oil, and boiled water washed in the same way, and other such stones according to this method, and moist immediately.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, tie and bind it, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wounds are deep and swollen and filled with pus, pierce it or lower its position; if the arteries are cut, and blood flow comes out, stop it, ligate it, and cauterize as necessary; if the spines of the throat are cut, or the cartilages, and the windpipe is protected, so that the meat moves, if the cartilage rises above the throat's bone, but does not touch the throat, but rather return it according to its natural figure; then pull it gently, leave it for some days, then treat it with decayed onions until it heals; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, drain it; and if there are bone fragments, pull them all out if you can, and those that you cannot remove, leave until the wound dries up and is drained and aligned; if the wound is fresh, put powder on it as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the sword or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a sword or knife wound and the injury is deep, look to see if the patient bleeds spontaneously from the wound: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep and is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder immediately nor bind it for the blood that stops it may clot completely and return to the heart, and kill the patient; instead, apply attractant ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound for absorbing moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound 3 or 4 days, or more; if spasm or bad tremor of heart or other signs of bleeding do not appear; and when you see good conditions, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat it then with cauteries and other remedies while it is healthy; if it cannot heal and opens up, immediately recognize that there is a fistula; if so, treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 If the wound is an incision from a sword or knife, and it is simple, large or deep, treat it in front; if it is large, stitch it; if it is small, apply powder; if it penetrated the bone and broke it into pieces, open the wound and pull out the fragments if they are visible; if they are not visible, let the wound drain and align the extractions; and for other wounds in other parts of the body, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The dislocation of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The first dismemberment of the abdomen is great, medium and small; from a large wound, the intestines may fall out once or the intestine's nerves, causing the insertion of them; and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worth less than a large one, because it requires more effort to put the intestines back in, if not put in layer by layer; because the intestines swell suddenly when they feel cold, so they re-enter more forcefully, and therefore, medium wounds are more beneficial, because the intestines are reset at their place rather than others. And know that the rupture of the abdomen is according to four manners: the two common stitches occur in the abdominal stitch, and the stitches of other body wounds and two other specific ones are common for other wounds; and yet they are more appropriate with the abdominal stitch, and I will explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 I say that when the wound is small and nothing from the intestines protrudes from it, it is easy to reset, this is by one of the two methods: either because of the small size of the wound as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, heat it in one of these ways: soak a sponge or a piece of cloth in warm water only, or cook it in hot squill and cyperus and spike root, and massage the intestines until the swelling disappears; and sometimes do this with wine restraining, and it is necessary to move it away as you would soothe a sore.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling separate, massage the intestine with warm or hot and bitter medicines, for this closes the opening near nothing; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound using the instrument with which you cut hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to be soothed as the wound, we should not cut too deeply without great necessity; and this is the instrument to split: cut from within the curve and do not turn it, and look at its shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines fall out, you should put them back in their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power to do so, for it is necessary.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is in the part below the belly, you should make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his head; if it is in the part below the belly, then lift the head and feet higher than the parts below; and similarly, if the opening of the belly is in one of the two parts, then take care that the injured part is higher than the other; and in this way, you should apply what I say to large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 In small wounds, use what is appropriate, then take a person with skill who will cover the entire wound with his hand and bring the lips together; this is the common way of stitching, and you should take an awl or more than one, according to the width of the wound; leave a gap at the top of the wound and pierce it with an awl or with a strong thread; perforate the two skin layers with the two skin layers underneath, which is beneath the skin, as far as you can pierce from that side, and bring the two sides of the layer beneath together three times; then wrap a double thread around the awl in two parts, then bring the two skin layers of the wound together again, leave a gap, and pierce another awl; tie the thread as you did with the first awl, and continue to do so according to the number of awls needed until the entire wound is stitched; and let the awls be medium-sized, neither too fine nor too thick, for very thin needles pierce all the flesh, and overly thick needles cannot enter well: therefore, they should be medium-sized; and do not push the needles too far from the flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound before it is sutured; then sew the needles' heads so that they do not hurt the patient while sleeping, and put weights or bandages on the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed; this kind of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it needs only one needle or two as a second stitch, and is that you bring together the two skin layers and the two layers beneath with one needle or with a strong thread. I sewed a wound on a man who had a stomach, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and the intestines were about two palms wide, and the wound was in the stomach.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I returned the intestine as it had been twenty-four hours earlier, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and it was cured, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 They had judged that he would die, but it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with poultice, for I was in a place where no such thing or medicine was found; and I put old cotton over the wound twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Here I shall tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and pass it from the outside to the inside; when it has pierced through straight through, place the head of the sinew or thread where the needle is inserted, and pierce it again from the inside towards the outside; and the meaning of this stitching is that you sew as a tailor sews fur, and leave one side open, then take it up on the other side, until the stitching is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second manner of stitching, which Galen calls specifically, is as anyone does who join two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the suture to another end, in this manner: insert a needle or end of thread near the mirror image, and pierce only that spot; then turn the needle and pierce from the outer part towards the inner, through the two connected parts; then pierce both ends from the outer part towards the inner, in the two other threads that are on the opposite side; and this is the mending manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galiens said this word, and anyone can testify that the stomach should be sewn with two needles, having thread in each; and one needle must enter from one side, and the other from the opposite, in the manner of those who sew purses; and know that when the wound is within the stomach, the stitching is more painful than other parts of the stomach.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgement of the wound is similar to that of other wounds: and it is that when you probe the fresh wound with all its blood, as soon as the arrow has moved it, you should replace the intestine and the fat; then apply a powder healing charcoal, and if the arrow has moved, apply any ointment present on the wound until it closes; sew the flesh, and suture the sides, and the mirach; then treat the wound as other wounds, until it heals; and if you don't have medicines, put old cotton on it, and move it two times a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 You do not require any other medicine when the wounds are simple in many cases; and if you doubt whether the wound affects the principal members, then you must moisten light linen with warm oil (or rose oil), and place it around the joints, and under the saddle; and if there is pain or putrefaction in the joints, and this happens repeatedly, then cleanse them with black wine vinegar, and especially when putrefaction reaches the intestines; and pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is perforated, and this is due to the inflammation of the veins that are there, and the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 And if the hernia leaps from the wound, put it back in place just like the intestines when it is fresh; but if it becomes old and turns black, you must tie the part that has turned black so that blood does not come out there, because there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the hernia sac, and hang the two heads suspended from the part below the wound to straighten the extraction when the hernia falls, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the bladder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, because I saw that a man was pierced or stabbed in the stomach; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there were discharges and wind; I treated it according to what I knew, and did not stop subsiding until it healed, and the edges were sutured.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I saw it sutured, I suspected that the patient had trouble in his stomach; and there was no problem, but he stayed in better conditions, eating and drinking; and some experienced said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it should be sewn up in this manner: take strong breaths, then gather the edges of the wound, and when the breath has opened the mouth, place it on the two lips so that it stretches its mouth out; and then strike the head, and hold it so that it cannot disengage, then put another breath after in the same way, until the wound is completely seized; and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 If the head (of something) becomes inflamed in the intestine and brings no harm to the patient, it can be sewn with a thin thread made from the intestine of an animal, as follows: take the head of this intestinal thread that is quite sharp, then tie it to the head of a linen thread twisted tightly, next insert the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and mend in the opening; and this method of mending does not exceed the path of faith and hope. If the wound is large and wide, especially when it is one of the great intestines, there is no trick or health, except for subtleness.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that every wound or abscess, when it grows, is called universally "fistula", and the same when it opens up and becomes a boil.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 A fistula is according to truth a kind of hard and white nodule, where there is no pain felt, and it appears as a boil on a bird's feather; sometimes clear, and other times thick; sometimes small, and other times large; and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh inside, this is true except for one of the nine causes: namely, due to smallness of blood or body; or because of its malignancy; or because there is hard char within, and above the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or because there is too much pus; or the limb is paralyzed, and the matter inside is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for the cure; or because the corruption is a kind of plague; or because the region's property is slow in digestion and healing, and it naturally swells up; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and the cures with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Also, I will explain to you the treatment for fistula that is made by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or to the rectum, or intestines, or bladder, or one of the sides, or spine on the back, or any joints of hands or feet; and such as come to the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And all these fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is nothing except labor and ignorance; and if any fistula does not come to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in its cure, and you observe it, take a tent of lard or iron, if the fistula is straight, pierce it; and if the fistula is twisted, seek a thin tent of wood, for the splinters bend with the curvature; and if the fistula has holes and you cannot pierce it well with tents, cleanse it with one hole by lard, for moisture flows from one hole to another, and cleanses it; then pierce it skillfully in your power, so that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and if it is fully closed, ask the patient carefully about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and where he feels it; and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or in any of the places that I have said, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the foulness and rotten charcoal that are within; and then heal it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well penetrated from the right place, then you must cut completely, as much as you can, then put damp tents filled with medicinal oil inside, and push them to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluidity that remains in the bottom; and then put soothing ointments on healthy char, until it heals; and if it does not heal by this, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is rotten from the fistula, cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If a vein or nerve does not trouble nor the main limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, let it remain until all corruption is gone, then treat with healing salves until it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, and returns to bowed as before, know that you are not yet at the font: if you expose and dig as deep as you can, and remove all the decay, then restore the joint; and if it is thus healthy, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If the corruption is too deep that you cannot reach it; if there is no other means but to wait for nature; and if there is only a little decayed bone, and you can draw it with pliers, draw it as necessary for this purpose, and if there are many bones, draw them all out, do not leave any; and if the moisture opposes you and there is no mistake or fear, beat and press the moisture and heal the bone.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And if you cannot remove [the foreign body] within an hour, place something irritating pus on the wound, and let it stay until the flesh is pushed out around the bone; and then the bones will move more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as a thigh or leg bone, press on the corruption only until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a large part of the rotten tissue and it reaches the marrow of the bone, you must be careful and cover everything up to the corruption, and then let it heal until it is healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened in a man's leg, so that you may take an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 The young man was around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to an internal cause that brought the matter to his leg, and he had a large abscess, and there was no reason for it to heal; but they foolishly operated on the abscess so much that the abscess opened, and they flowed out a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and much pus came out that all ran from his body and moisture from his chest; and many people tried to cure him for two years, but no wise man was in the art of healing, until I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what flowed out through the sores at great speed; and the young man's body became red, and he had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I sewed up one of the wounds, and then searched all the wounds, and found that some came towards each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 I then hurried and sewed up one of the wounds as far as I discovered part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced; corruption came up to the bone within; I thought that only that corruption was present, except for what I left out; and I began to heal the wound with strong medicines for a long time, but could not close it; then I tried again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and removed it, and left it open, and tried to sew up the joint; but I was unable to do so more than around a palm's breadth of the bone, and it broke apart everywhere, then I healed it with medicines; and it became healthy and closed quickly, and no further work was needed except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure, and the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For it often bled due to the evacuation, but it was completely healed and a hard cyst grew in place of the bone, which had a good disposition and did not cause any harm or damage at all, neither in its location nor in its coming or going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if a bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated thus: take thread, and tie it at the open end of the bone, and command someone to pull it up; then take another thicker piece of thread and tie it over the cyst that is above the bone, and hold the chief so that you pull the corrupt cyst down into the bottom, and expose the healthy cyst on the place where you wish it to be, ensuring the corrupt cyst does not bleed; then put either a splint or a piece of wood under the bone to cover the corrupt cyst; and it should be thus until one can see and feel the corruption, and furthermore.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part, you must uncover all the flesh; then put iron under it, and then press from one side to another on the corruption, and hold the iron rod as long as the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, hit the corrupted joint, and hold the bone or part that contains it from the other side; and if the corruption is between two joints, there is no other way than to cut; and if the corruption is at the end of the hand or foot, it is a difficult matter, but you must investigate the corruption and find out how it opens; and clean it in all possible ways, but let neither veins nor nerves prevent you; and know that the instruments for cutting these bones are numerous, according to the type of bone and appearance of the wound, and its thickness and subtlety, and size and smallness, and hardness; and therefore you must prepare a tool for each type of work; and know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the signs of the diseases; and choose the instrument you need according to what is required.
dou feu	hot fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The shoulder may dislocate due to internal or external reasons; and when you have administered that corrosive medication for the treatment of the ailment, and it proves ineffective, then it is necessary to cover the affected limb up to where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient may suffer from death or severe damage to the limb due to its failure; and the signs are that the limbs become black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards they turn darker; this spreads from one member to another and affects the entire body. Hasten to cover it, and if it is caused by the sting of certain venomous creatures such as sea scorpions, snakes, and similar, cover the head of the affected limb, and do not give any space for the venom to reach up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 And if it reaches up to the hand, strike at the joint so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, strike at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and no remedy outside of the quantity of its virtue can save him; and thus act when the corrosion comes or falls: if it comes at the first joint, strike after the next joint; and if it comes or falls, strike the entire joint; and if it ascends to the leg, strike at the knee joint; and if it passes the knee, no remedy except making the patient weak and letting him die is available; and the method of striking or soothing the member is that you tie it above and below, extend one minister on one link below, and another minister on the upper link, and you separate the flesh which is between the two links with a spatter-stick wide, until the bone is exposed; then strike or soothe, and put linen cloths on each side to ensure that the hot iron does not touch healthy skin, and it brings the patient other lesions and abscesses.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	1. And when blood flow comes when you work, cauterize the area quickly, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the limb with a suitable ligature, and heal it until it heals; and I will tell you what happened to a man in my presence: he had a blackness that looked like a burn from fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his foot of the leg, until it consumed the entire leg; and when the man saw the corrosion, he scratched the leg to cover it, and it healed; and long afterwards the corrosion returned at the hand or one finger, and it came to me, and I gave him things repercussive after the purification of the body, but the corrosion could not be stopped; and he asked that I amputate his hand, and I did not want, because I had hope of repercussing the matter; and also feared that if I amputated his hand, he would die, for the vitality of the man was weak; and he despaired of everything, and returned to his land, and scratched the leg to cover it, and it healed; and I have told this story only for this reason: one does otherwise if it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 Aposteme sometimes comes in charnut and remains so long that it causes a large swelling of the bowel; and then it runs and pierces, and the bowel jumps, and the place stays open, like a wound of a vassal; and the skin that is above is as delicate as unbleached linen, and does not penetrate to the bone or to the nerve, and such disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistule"; but if it is long enough to reach the bone entirely, it is called "fistule"; and the skin should be cut all around, just as unbleached linen; and it does not heal due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if the skin hardens and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, cure it with a clisterium in this way: observe if the breasts are large, and the nipples within them smell foul; then apply an Egyptian clisterium made thus: take asafetida, oil, litargire, equally, and cook these in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then take as needed and make it into water and honey, and apply the clisterium to the breast, and squeeze out the pus; leave the medicine for two hours, then remove it by straining; do this frequently until the breasts are healed and the pus is gone; and at no time is the clisterium made with vinegar water, when this medicine is not present, but you take vinegar of vine ash, pour it on, then strain and apply the clisterium, until you know that the breasts are well healed; and if the patient cannot bear it, or the Egyptian medicine or the vinegar water, then use a clisterium made of water and honey with a little pulverized litargire; or apply a clisterium made of honey and sweet wine, as long as the honey has the property to purify and cleanse, and the wine makes the blood thicker; and when you have done this, and are certain that the breasts are well purified, then apply to those that cause discharge any medication that stops the flow, and make it with rose oil and in wine; or apply some medicines and ointments, of which I have told the properties or the treatment of ointments; and if the holes of the breast are small, and the opening of the clisterium cannot enter, then widen it slightly with a knife, and put on an Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, until it is wide enough; and if the wound is too large, let it heal naturally as long as the level or the clisterium can enter, and if the nipples emit pus, apply vinegar or more below the level where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the bowel is full, do not allow it to be strained with a cord; and if you cannot cover the opening of the anus in this way, arrange it so that the bowel moves towards its lowest point because when the bowel is full, do not allow it to be strained with a cord and if you cannot cover the opening of the anus in this way, arrange it in such a manner: that the bowel moves easily downwards, and do not let anything remain from the stool; take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and lay linen cloth over the entire wound; then press strongly towards the injured area near the opening, which is larger than the first, and place ointment on it according to the size of the injury, and put it on the injured area of the wound to align the bowel, and do not remove the large cloth except after several days once; and he who is on the injured area of the anus removes it frequently to extract the bowel, and learn what comes out from the bowel, whether it is venom or pus or bile or undigested food; and beware if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is abscess or not, and when your medicine has been spread in this manner and you see the nature that rises on the injured area of the wound, then know that the intestines have already turned inside out, and bring the healthy parts closer; and then uncover it in the morning or third day, and when you uncover the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast falls inward improperly after many days, know that the breast does not heal itself.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle poisonous worms come after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 For those whose flesh in wounds turns black and for those who do the opposite; and if the breasts swell indigestibly after many days, know that they will not improve; and if the breasts delay in drying up, and are swollen, apply medicines that dry up moisture in substance and are dry in effect, such as oil of roses, for there is much part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine; use oil of roses with rose oil, and equal old wine in substance; then boil it and use it; and do the same with mastic and aloe and incense, and grind them into powder and sprinkle on the honey when it is over the fire; and then apply a plaster to it, and place it on the breast, and at times administer long aristolochia root, and celestial root, which is like flour and cumin; and use simple or compound remedies: grind them, make into powder, and sprinkle on the honey I mentioned before, and use; and if the cure does not improve and is not cured by this remedy, know that corruption has spread throughout, and causes pressure in the bone, or hard members, or ligaments; treat it with the remedy for fistulas, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess on the nail bed.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 Pancreatic abscess is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or occasionally in other places; and when it is neglected, if one does not pay attention to it, the abscess grows, spreads and boils as it moves towards the root of the nail, and possibly affects the entire nail; and the corrosion reaches the bone, causing the joint to become wide, and the color becomes discolored.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the previous section and the treatment does not work, then you should amputate the entire excess that remains of the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The cauteries are very helpful if the bone is healthy and the nail is whole; and when the nail starts to grow into the flesh, and it begins to prick and bleed, you must put the lard under the nail so that it stops the flesh from growing, and push it upwards, and strike the flesh gently and lightly; then apply hot and corrosive medicines on top of it to remove everything; afterwards heal it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if the corrosion is in the bone, strike it and pull it out, for as much as the bone becomes corrupt, it cannot heal; and if you see it becoming corrupt, strike it with the iron as previously stated, afterwards heal it until it is healed; and if it is wounded and feels great pain, you must first make it clean; then cut the nail with a sharp spatula from above, but ensure that the cutting does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, place something over it to relieve the pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain in the deaf hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 One must straighten the finger that is born in some people by chance, and by chance it has flesh, or it has bone, and sometimes it has a nail, and none of these grow from the root of the joint, or they are born in some knuckles.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 The one that is born in any nail of the finger does not grow, and the one that is born at the joint of the finger, by chance grows; the size of the fleshy one is light, thus it should be cut off with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	If it is born in the root of the joint, it is difficult to cure; hold it covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the one who is born or should be in the last nail, you must first cut off the rounded flesh to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate size wire, and then heal it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swelling that comes at the joints happens at the same time by birth, or by injury of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 If you need to suture that wound, it should be repaired according to its natural shapes; then put between two tents or dampened cloths oiled, so they do not stick; or you put between two thin planks until the edges are sutured, as necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If one of its sides comes with the palm, then strike that joint as required.
des vils	 of villagers
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 Those are veins that are large, swollen and full of melancholic superfluities, which come in many members of the body; and it happens more often in legs of those who walk much and work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must administer purge of gall, and then the healthy from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The iron treatment is done in two ways: one is that you cut it and drain the black blood; and the other way is that you tie up the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The thigh is to be cut as follows: first, raise the leg with very hot water, making the flesh soft; then hold the patient's leg from above the calf to the part below the knee; then cut the vein at one of the spots, either I, II or III, in a wide manner; then separate and draw out black blood up to your hand, from one end to the other, as much flesh as the sickness can bear; then tie it and command the patient to eat meat that is darkening quickly; and repeat the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, which benefits the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The blistering is to be done as follows: reflux the patient's leg, if it has much hair, then put it in water and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you do not have water, heat it with fire, and then press towards the vein near the long side of the thigh or in the part below the calf; then cut the skin at the edge, and strip the vein from each side, as much as it appears when felt; and it will appear red and black, and where the vein enters the skin seems like a white cord; then push the root down, until it is swollen with the skin, and then lightly peel it off, then press in another place further III steps; then strip the skin above the vein as much as it appears, then draw it out to the root, as you have done, and then peel it again, as you did before; then make another cut, or more if necessary; then drain, and make another cut, as you did before; then make another incision, or more if needed, then drain, and then press at the end of the wound to the second cut; then remove the blood and pus layer by layer until it is all removed, then press; and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, insert a thick strong double threaded needle into it and tie and draw it, and insert it under the root, and turn your hand from one side to another until it comes out; and be careful not to press, for if it presses, it cannot be drawn out or lifted, which is harmful to the patient; and when you have treated it all, put on the wound linen soaked in vinegar and oil.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And if the face is contracted and twisted and swollen together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it forcefully, but do not cover it; draw it out as we have previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The shape of the iron with which one strikes the face is curved and does not cut; it pierces the vein instead, and it is large because if it were thin, it would pierce the vein, but be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
de la voinne civile	 of the common vein (civile means 'common' in this context)
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein (civile) is found in the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow and in dry land without moisture; however, it may also occur elsewhere, and this happens due to the corruption that comes from under the skin, as it rises within the body like a serpent and goes to the legs, piercing between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a very great inflammation comes in the leg and then the swelling changes, and the vein begins to bulge out like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the shoulder is open, you must wind around a piece of cloth from 7 to 10 inches long and sew it, and leave the cloth on the arm, and whenever it swells towards the opening, you should wind around the cloth again and sew; if it becomes too long, cut off a part and wind around the remaining, but do not seal it at its root as it is released; for if you seal it, it will return to the flesh and cause abscess, corruption, and disease, which must be treated carefully until it reaches the neck, and nothing remains in the body; this vein can sometimes extend up to 5 or 10 fingers long, and once I had a patient whose vein was 10 fingers long. When you seal it, press on it with a flat iron or lead, puncture it to the bottom, so that everything comes out; empty the material inside, and apply external medicine for corruption every day, then treat as abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And sometimes at this opening [vein], the hand is plunged in, and especially when it opens in a joint, be it arm or leg, and there comes much damage, and from which it may pull away; then heal as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 of worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This disease is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often happens to cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body spreading and contracting, and it is felt along the limbs until it reaches the skin or moves away, and jumps out; it is caused by corruption of certain humors, as serpents and lizards and roundworms or tapeworms in the stomach; and there is doubt about its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it to cure and draw, one can force it out only when it moves: therefore, you must tie the limb above and below with a strong cord tightly, then strike upward and pull it through, and if its end is buried deep in the flesh, and you cannot extract it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrodes oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming out or near the oil, hold a bellows underneath it, then strike upward and pull it through; and you must use the patient with purification of body medicines soluble for bad humors, and avoid rich food putrefactive.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This disease is called in our land "wind-ache," and it is a pain that comes in some members, and moves from member to member; and I have seen this myself.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to a sick woman, and saw her arm swollen, and noticed a small swelling in the armpit of the arm; then afterwards, it began to rise like a worm at the shoulder, faster than anything, as quick as living silver when it is cut from one piece; the pain separated from that place, and pierced into the shoulder, and soon after ran through all the body, until it came in the other arm; then she told me that it returned again around the body, as I saw myself.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered greatly how it moved thus from limb to limb, for I have never seen this sickness in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 I would have preferred that many move pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that this was because the woman had dry body and open veins, and due to this the constrained ventosity appeared; and it does not seem according to this reason for those who are delicate and have moist bodies and veins closed.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if she opens as we have said, lay her above and below hastily, then press on top so that the constrained ventosity goes to the place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it at your eyes, cure it with those who drive away the ventosity, such as fetid pills, pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	 arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are varied according to their appearance and the parts of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 The differences among them are that some have large points, small, smooth, and sutured; some have two angles, and those with tongues, and those where they are split; and one that strikes in any member does so according to these manners: either it strikes at the principal member, like the head, heart, liver, stomach, spleen, intestines, kidneys, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it strikes in any place of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you afterwards, make you aware: if you must remove this arrow, for the death comes after in many ways; and when this ill sign is not clear to you, and the arrow is not entirely out, pull it and take care of the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the sign of the brain when an arrow strikes and pierces it, and a swelling appears on top of the skull, is also accompanied by scotomia (partial blindness), softening and swelling, and turning yellowish in color, inflammation and yellowing of tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile; and perhaps without pus discharge from the nose or ears; and perhaps loss of speech and voice; and a white, moist discharge from the wound resembling pus, and it bursts as if with pressure; and if this sign appears, refrain from treatment, and remove the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The sign of an arrow striking or lodging in the liver is that it presses on the left side of the breast and feels as if it is embedded in something hard, not empty; perhaps the liver becomes swollen like a pouch and turns black inside, and there comes cold fever, sweat, and fainting: know then without doubt that death is near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of an arrowhead that has pierced the flesh is when there is no bubbling of pus from the wound, and the throat inflates, and the patient turns pale and sighs deeply and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	If the arrowhead falls into the bedclothes of the patient, it has passed through the ribs; and it causes great pain and sighing, and moves all the limbs of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	If the arrowhead falls into the stomach, it may cause something undigested to escape from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow strikes or pierces the belly, and it does not jump out through the intestine hole, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	If the arrow strikes into the bladder and the urine jumps out and runs away, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, such as the hand and arm, neck, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, wrist, hip, legs, and similar parts, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, do this instead.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to the man that an arrow or splinter pierced the root of his nose: I tried to pull it out from another side beneath the ear fat, but it felt sensation without movement.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And pulled out a splinter that had pierced the fat of the oil beneath the paper, and the splinter was curved, and could not be reached except for the tip towards the body, and the splinter was large like a Turkish arrow, all the iron felt in the ears; the person was well and no bad incident happened.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears; I sharpened the beaks, and made it thin until I pulled it out, and the Christian was well.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And when an arrow is embedded in a person, whether it be in the head or abdomen, and I thought he would die; and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I made an incision over the arrowhead, and applied force, and drew it out without any adverse event.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And when the arrow pierces a man's head or back, and the wound is healed over; and the arrow remains inside him, not changing its natural position, nor causing any harm in its natural function.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And when another man is pierced by an arrow in his face and the wound is healed, yet endures much pain for a long time; and many other similar occurrences.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And I was called to treat an arrow that had pierced the body of a nobleman, the king's son, who had fallen in the snow, and it was slightly deviated towards the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 I found the wound narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 I pierced it with a very thin needle and felt nothing; but he felt prickling and pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was the point of the arrow. I placed a plaster with soothing and digestive ingredients on the spot where there was no swelling, and the arrowhead appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I left the plaster for many days, healed the wound directly, and kept him in this state for a long time until he felt the arrow within his belly; and he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 I place the wound with corrosive medicine on it by hand for several days until it opens up, and then probe it, and feel the head of the arrow which adheres to the place; afterwards, I cauterize in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow appears clearly visible; and after a period of more than four months, the wound heals so much that I bind it with pliers on both sides and cannot move it anymore; then I stop refining and contriving means of instruments, until I make the pliers well-formed according to what its shape will be at the end of this chapter, while I am treating it and returning the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the men say that the nose cartilage cannot be restored; I then restore it, and the wound is healed, and the patient is completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 I have told you the quality of extracting certain arrows, but do not put all your trust in it because the books cannot fully comprehend it; however, wise masters are able to find solutions for small things and those that are present and failing, and they often discover nine new works and nine instruments below the surface of foreign things happening within this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows do not leave the body where they have been inserted except in two ways: either through the place where they enter or from another side; and one that bursts out from where it enters is an arrow entering flesh and sometimes bursts out again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And if it doesn't jump now, leave it until the flesh is spread around and the joints are aligned; also, if it is embedded in the bone and cannot be pushed out, leave it for a few days and move it daily; then it will pop out, and if it still does not, perforate with a sharp instrument everywhere around until the opening is enlarged, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If the arrow is embedded in the skull bone and goes towards one of the ventricles of the brain, or any of the accidents I mentioned earlier: do not pull it out, but let it be for a few days until it is aligned again; for if the arrow comes to the ventricle, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow is not fixed beyond the bone only and does not reach fully, and the patient suffers for some days with bad condition, then you must try to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very deeply inserted and cannot come out by itself, then you administer emolients around it, as I told you; afterwards, heal the wound when it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And if the arrow is lodged in the body and cannot be seen, seek it with all your might; if you feel it, draw it out with any implement possible; if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound or the depth of the arrow and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, widen the wound as much as possible; then pull out the arrow and if it has ears like it is stuck, remove the flesh that is embedded in it from both ends that you can, and then break or bend the arrow's ears until you can draw it; be careful not to break the arrow, but rather to draw it more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, press down the flesh around it, then draw it, as extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And if the flow of blood opposes it (the cautery), bring what we have said about treatment in its chapter; and be careful with incising the nerve and vein, and use device as you can safely draw out the arrow, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape they were in when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest help that can be, and if you cannot do so, put them according to what the sign indicates.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 The arrow that comes from another place, or anything related to it opens up somewhere, or the skin is swollen in the area that we can see or feel; cut then over it as far as the pliers can take hold, and then pull it out; if it leaps away now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round and round until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And if it cannot come out, leave it alone for now, and then continue the extraction until it comes forth; and if there is an arrowhead in it, push it to the end; and if it has fallen off, you should administer glue, so that the point of the arrowhead enters the glue; and then push more, and when the arrowhead is covered with glue, push in the instrument at the pointed end for easier extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 If the arrowhead is touched, you must cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if the arrowhead falls in the chest or the abdomen or the bladder or the side, and it is near and you can cover it, do so; and be careful not to cut the vein and nerve, then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if necessary; and care for it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tweezers used for arrow extraction resembles an owl's beak, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in many shapes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape of the growing hair is similar to a bird's feather, to guide the arrowhead, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of pliers for pushing and pulling is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	handles with common bodies (i.e., pincers)
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The number of veins to be cauterized is thirty-one, of which the first sixteen are as follows: two bandages that are after the ears, which are called "dous herbech"; and two arteries that are in the temples; and two veins that are in the corners of the eyes, which are called "aspirres"; and one vein that is on the forehead; and one vein that is at the base of the nose; and two tendons that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the lips; and those veins are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins that are commonly healed in each arm: one is called the cephalic, and it is located on the left side of the chest, and the lay people call it "arm vein"; the median is called "fistula", and is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and the lay people call it "vein of the heart"; the basilic is either on the right side of the chest, and the lay people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the elbow, and this is the one that heals, which opens manifestly above the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 The cubital vein is the one that is between the ulnar and the little finger, and it has two branches; and in the leg there are three veins: one under the wrist on the left side of the chest, and the second saphenous which is at the right ankle; and the vein called "nassy" that is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins beneath these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The patient should aid the veins behind the ears with the ancient cathartes and purge them; and the quality of the purging, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and scrub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then hold the neck of the patient with a screw until the two veins appear behind the ears in the two dependant places of the head; afterwards, press down on them with your thumb where you feel the pulse beneath your thumb; then take the lancet and thrust it through the vein to the bone, then pull your hand all along the vein, and strike and the skin and the vein well two times through; and make the blood come out until you see; then hold and tie it until it is healed; and I have already said about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The first artery of the two in the temples is useful for draining old, soft, and common otologies (ear diseases), and also for tears caused by the eyes; and the qualities of the drainer are as follows: the patient tilts his neck until both veins appear prominently; and you feel a pulsation under your thumb, then apply pressure on it; next lift the curved vessel to the top of your thumb and insert the lancet into it; lift the vein further and prick it, as you have done with other veins, and draw blood according to your need; afterwards release the patient, put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then tie it up and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of its dressing and its removal, or the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The incision of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the incision of the skull in the diseases of the old face, and it has migrated and reddened; and the qualities are that the patient stretches his neck by twisting it, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 And place the point upon the vein, and support from your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healthy, and not working again with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Moreover, the flames should not be too sharp, and the vein should be cut obliquely because the bone is near, and by chance the flames may break when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The incision of the two veins that are in the eyes helps with swelling, redness, and inflammation in the eye, and diseases of the face; and the qualities of their incision are that the patient stretches his neck by twisting from some chain, as before; then let it heal, and the incision should be a small piece of flame, a little long but wide because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then correct the blood flow, as much as you need, and then cover it with linen, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The vein of the nose in the nostril is useful for ague, scrofula, and diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that comes in the face, especially when it is old; and the qualities of the vein are that the patient holds his neck, then presses his nose to your left hand, and takes subtle flame long, and thrusts it between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well otherwise, and the blood will start to flow immediately; do not go too deep, and make the bleeding stop according to necessity, then let it rest for a night, as it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The first guinea pig's small intestine helps in the straightening of the anus, and at the beginning of the process of healing, as well as many diseases, impetigo, corruption, herpes, and stomach ailments; and the quality of the small intestine is that the patient lowers their head under one and the other, as we have said; and the master being on top of the patient, and the patient lies on the chair, then open the vein gently along its length, then draw out the blood moderately, or as much as necessary; then repeat the process in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and hold all the veins moderately so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	 Of the liver purge
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The sinews of veins in the mouth above help in swallowing and contribute to gum corruption, lip fissures, and teeth and surrounding issues.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 And the qualities of the purge are to make the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the liver, and observe both veins, one is on the right side of the liver and the other on the left, and they can be recognized by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are smaller black veins: so hit one and the other, and if you do not know which ones they are, and you are in doubt, hit the largest of each side, and likewise do with the two veins above and below, because it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 Of the liver beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The opening of the veins that are below the tongue assist after the head vein surgery, and it is at the narrowing of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth; and the qualities of the surgeon are that the patient swallows saliva between your hands before the sun, and wets the tongue, and looks under each side for a black vein: therefore, one and the other are healthy, but do not go too deep, as there are arteries below.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The incisions made in veins for common surgeries are done in two ways: either by piercing with a hot iron or a fine, olive-oil like tool, such as a scalpel, which is called "anesil"; and they can be wide and narrow depending on the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirrin is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And it is necessary to open the large veins with thick blood visible and containing thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive oil flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is pointed more finely, and it is for thinning out the subtle veins that have a yellowish thin blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The basilica vein (one of the large veins), which aids the diseases that are below the throat, neck, breast, and abdomen; and it is necessary for the patient to bleed profusely, and to drain from the artery that is underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 If the artery is cut, and bleeding occurs, it must be stopped, as I have said; but the flame should not be touched, but rather extinguished like an ember.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 If the basilica vein does not open up clearly, then you must insert another one or find another way to bleed it, or make an incision in the vein near the arm; it will open up clearly; and cut off the flame as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you wish to know the location of the wound, you must then strain the arm, touch the spot where you recognize the pulse; then mark that place, bind the arm, and cauterize the vein with fire carefully; be careful not to hit the artery when you see it swelling, for it is the artery: avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it swells up high like a child's urine and the limb is red and thin, know that it is not an artery: hasten then, place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if it stops bleeding, for many times this happens; bind the arm, leave it as it is, do not let the patient move it; be afraid, and do not let him move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not stopped and it bleeds, and no medication is present for you, strike the artery if it is open, because the head will retreat; stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And take a bark of willow, and cut it and take one of the halves and bind it well until the next day; if it does not stop bleeding, that is good; if not, cure it as we have said, with powders that stop blood; and the stopping of the bleeding should not be overly reliant on many positions due to the small size of the wound, and the power of the thread from the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The vein milk in the middle helps to treat blood from the head above and from the chest below, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic, as we have said; and the lord must be careful when he cuts for the nerve that is beneath, and if it bleeds too much, and he finds the nerve, and inflates and heals it should be cautious, and by chance may not heal; and this nerve opens up many times, and if it does not open in any man due to his subtlety, then you must heal it with an instrument anesthetic; and avoid the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The first aid for the skull fracture is that it attracts blood from the head and helps the eyes; it must be drained with olive oil or myrtle fire, because it is the safest of all veins, as there is no nerve or artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Further, one should seek the lighter vein and not strain anything the first time it is needed, and then try again; and sometimes the veins swell in some men, when the first attempt is made, but do not strain anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the urine is according to your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you should know about draining is that draining is not done except to maintain health and to prevent future diseases; it must be done in one of the three veins: namely, cephalique, faste, and basilique; and it should be done at the beginning of the summer, in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear; and it should be done on the first or third day, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The administration of medical aid is not limited by any fixed hour, but rather when it is required day or night, in every hour and at all times; and it should not be administered to children until they are 14 years old, nor to women during pregnancy for the fourth month up until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the elderly who have passed 60 years be salved.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 If anyone wishes to be treated, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that the intestines are cleansed with a gentle enema, if they have retained much wind, so that veins are not filled with superfluous waste which can harm the main organs; nor should one treat those who are excessively salty from foods, drunk, or intoxicated in any way, until they recover; and after colic affliction, vomiting, disturbance of the stomach, frequent urination, excessive sexual activity, heavy work, staying awake and fasting, and those whose vitality is weakened, either by something related to their weapon or body parts; then purify the humors if they are thick, by foods and drinks and medications, if you have that power; then immerse in water, unless anything forbids it, to purify the blood, and treat the vein with the third artery as we have said; and on that day, avoid work, pain, lust, and similar things; and be bound and joyful, and let the healer stand higher than the one being treated, and rub his arm two or three times, then gently pull the ligament above the affected area, for when it is too tight or thin, it cannot heal without that; then rub the affected area with your hands until the veins swell, and feel them; then moisten the healer's hand with a little old oil, then place his thumb of his left hand under the affected vein slightly below where one wishes to treat, so that the vein does not burst or tear when pierced.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 For there are veins that run like cords in the body, and among these there are some that become filled with windiness, so that when fire is applied, it does not open the vein, and thus is one of these; and if the vein is opened, the wound is too narrow, for which reason the cauterizers should be aware of this.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if it opens the vein again for a second time, that is good; but if not, then start anew under that place or cut more quickly if the wound is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 If the wound is swollen and the patient is afraid, let him wait a day or two and not tie up the arm: possibly abscesses will come out; do not enter into the bath, then repeat the cauterization if it pleases him; and if the puncture is small or shallow and you doubt that much blood will come out, apply all the fire directly to the puncture itself; and open it a little hastily, so that the wound swells; for this happens often when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the joint swollen, do not start draining it immediately, but put a little bit of olive oil on it, because it alleviates the body from blood and is coagulated in this place by the oil; and administer the olive oil in every drainage of veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same can be done with triacle and bowe when applied to the joint; if it becomes too thick, it should be made more subtle.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 If there comes a large abscess, which happens many times, especially when the opening of the vein is small, hurry up and put on the joint a sponge moistened in vinegar and warm oil for an hour; you must do this after the blood flow from the vein, and if it remains at the joint for some days without turning black or green, it will not harm; and if you see it, apply anything of aloes or myrrh refreshed in calament, poultice, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And there are often abscesses and appearances at the sanctuary (hospital): put your hand on it then, and if you find it soft to the pressure of your hand, that is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, you should not put anything on any of the things we have mentioned, for by chance without the artery; but he should be given one dry plaster to harden it, then cured with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw blood from each according to the quantity of its virtue, and from the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it drain until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it drain until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And for the one who is full and swollen, and requires extraction of blood, make a larger wound, and let the veins be wide; and for the weak one, do the opposite, and he must be bled little by little, and it should be done by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of bleeding is safe from displacement of blood and compression of nerve, and it is better than bleeding long instead of deep.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 For the one whose body needs to be bled, it is necessary to give soft bread soaked in grape juice beneath; if he is heated, bleed him 3 or 4 times. And for the one of cold complexion, fast before bleeding with soft bread soaked in sweet syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and let it be a fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if the palm (of the hand) is open to the wound, after the flow of much blood, it is necessary that he drink broth made from charcoal, and subtle-smelling syrup, and use the other things mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If you want to burst open an arm, or draw blood another time, if it has been weakened by excessive bleeding, let it bleed drop by drop according to the amount of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to burst open the arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong constitution, should let it bleed for 6 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to draw blood from another part, should draw it on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 For there is much blood within the body that is already heated up and causes fever; therefore, it is necessary to draw a large amount of blood, open the wound wide until it closes over again (palm); then you reward all the conditions of the wound, and place your hand on top of the thumb when it heals, so that death does not come in its place, which happens many times when the healer is negligent; and it should not be that you separate the arm and let blood out a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly; nor if it is curved, that you straighten the arm hastily, but rather leave it until it closes again a second time; or you prick it with the tip of the flame until the coagulated blood from the vein comes out, and place a piece of fresh linen on top, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, do not bind it at all until the abscess has been calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood again, do so in the same vein, or another one, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is similar to the vein in the head because they are composed of the same thing.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the manner of bleeding is that the patient pushes his hand into hot water until the flesh becomes red; then it should be bound somewhat, so that the vein appears well, then bleed carefully through the cross (of the hand), neither wide nor long; and let the wounds be large, and let the blood be bled near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be removed, put the hand back into hot water, and let the blood flow out in the water, as much as you have; and if it is in the summer, do not hit the hand with hot water again because one puts more in winter than in summer; and the bleeding of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The hot iron of the salvation of the right hand is beneficial for all liver diseases, and this is how it is done: hold the hand, and apply hot sharp, until the vein flees if you can see it; and if the blood flow is sideways, and if you cover it completely with everything, it will cause no harm; do not go too deep because the nerves are entirely naked under the skin, and then replace the hand in hot water, but make sure that the wound is not frozen and the blood does not come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as needed, put oil and silk on the wound to heal it quickly, and do this for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The salve of the left hand is good for the disease of the mice, and do it just as I told you on the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The hot iron is beneficial for all diseases that are beneath the body, such as the hernia, retention of fluids, kidney diseases, thigh and leg ailments, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 And the quality of his health is such that the patient puts his foot in hot water and rubs it against the vein until it perishes, and binds it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot, it goes very deep; therefore, bind it where it is wider or at the ankle, which is more effective.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you have a wound on the foot, be careful of the veins that are below it, and keep it clean in the same way as you would when wrapping; let the flames not touch it.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the wound cannot be removed, immerse the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 If the treatment of his health is necessary for the first time, begin it slightly higher up, because the area is salted; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do likewise with the soothing of the other foot in the same way.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The saline for the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the foot, and its application alleviates the pain of the haunch when it is used for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And the quality of his health is such that the patient immerses himself or bathes and compresses above the ankle four fingers twisted, because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, heal in all ways that you can, and by crossing; and it is more effective to cut it, because the area is raw, and it is much inclined towards human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 And if you don't cure it, no remedy will open or close the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and make as much correction of the blood as you see, then undo the bandage, and put cotton on it and press; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 of the boils' discharge
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Blisters of the bladder (or boil) are made of horns, or hairs, or glass; and blistering is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 This ventosation, which is felt as if it needs to be injured, is according to two methods: it can be for all fire, or with fire; and the ventosation made by injury and bloodletting is performed in 14 leagues of the body, from which one is entirely in the head; and others are in the neck; and others in the two chests of the neck; and the boils under the chin; and the boils of the two shoulders; and the boils on the heels; and the boils of the two arms; and the boils of the two legs; and the boils of the two ankles; and the ventosation does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it should not be administered at all, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if due to necessity of illness it is necessary to use an enema, or for customs, we will administer one every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end; because there are some who, when they need to use an enema, have a heavy head; and some who experience fullness and reddening in their body, and in their head, and at the neck, and darken their eyes; and some who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and withdraw their tongue, and bleed; and there are some who dream, and see blood and navrez and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially during the month, we order to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The muzzle syringe helps with headache ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be used after the evacuation of the entire body; and this enema is instead of the cephalic syringe, and it should not be used by those of cold constitution or who have diarrhea, as it causes them great harm; and for this reason, they should not use it, nor those with cold head diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal themselves become indolent, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of indolence.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The ventosation in the neck is located in the sinus of the head and the basilica, and therefore it is effective in the compression of the throat, and for splitting the channel of the jawbone, and completely, and filling; it should be pressed slightly, because if it holds too firmly, it can cause obstruction or inflammation of the throat or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 The ventosation on the costal bones of the neck is effective against headaches, otalgia and migraines, strangulation, pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is located in the sinus of the basilica; you should instruct the patient to press gently, so as not to press on the artery and avoid bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilations under the chin are good for mouth diseases and tooth decay, as well as similar diseases in the mouth; and they are located near the safety of the lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilations under the shoulders are good for diseases that come from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The ventosations of the ribs are as valuable as three veins in the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the lord not to pierce too deep, for the flesh is naked there, and knows nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventouse located on the rump is as much as for the emorroid from its foundation and diseases underneath, and the ventouse should be large and made of lead, as it needs to drain well; and in case it is fine, it would burst, causing great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The swellings of the legs open widely because they draw blood from all over the body, and are like the old pains of the kidneys, and bladder, and vagina, and diminish the flowers; and are in the position of the two shins, and the two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after a long time, and bring pus in various dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to put the swelling is that you empty it first, suck it promptly, apply pressure immediately and move it evenly, and do not stop doing so until you see the place become red and swollen, and the color of blood appears; then stop, and put the swellings, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are some who have loose skin and clear pores: it is necessary to cut only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deeper; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, it is necessary to cut twice: the first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the bone is very thick, it must be struck three times; and when we wish to draw blood drop by drop, we should prick only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 If we wish to draw much blood, we often reward ourselves; if the flesh is thick, pierce not too deep, and let it be such that the veins are pricked suddenly, and it belongs to him who has thick skin and hard, who have narrow pores, to anoint the places of the ventosations with sharp and penetrating oil: if it is in summer, with spicy, penetrating oil, or sweet almond oil, or seed oil of cucumber; and if it is in winter, with watercress oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balm of Gilead oil, anise oil, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if the patient whose wound you are treating has thick and wide pores, no oil should be applied, but it should be washed after the lancing with rose water, or cold water, or water of morel, or water of cucumber, or porcelain water, or another similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture should rise from asafetida or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 Those with excessive fluid rise from old wine or sour milk, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or others similar; and it should not be lanced before the bath or in the bath, but an hour or two after the bath; and he should not sleep after the lancing, and it is necessary that he walk when he is to be lanced and when he has been lanced.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And be aware that the one who is healing should take cool things, such as green apples and endive and lettuce leaves, and similar things; eat little, and pork fat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And for the one with a cold complexion, take honey syrup and fragrant wine that is neither old nor new, eat little bread and little pork, small birds and sparrows; on the day he farts, he should drink more than eat; it is also necessary to give some men to some men a triple or muscat before or after farting, for strengthening the main members; but let them be subtle, but those who are hot should not drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The following harnesses placed to wound are those that are placed on the liver, spleen, gout, stomach and flank, for these members cannot bear to be wounded elsewhere, and they are only used to draw blood from one member to another as we do with nipples when a woman is nursing; to remove viscosity from the member, as we do with the ventouse on the stomach and flank to reduce it; and to alleviate pain when there is obstruction or stone, as it does by chance attracting the obstruction, or removing the stone from its place; and it works in the same way when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these ventouses are administered empty for sucusing only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, as in cases of pleurisy, and in this manner the ventouse is filled with hot liquid or with a solution of cooked herbs appropriate to the condition.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the blister administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And it should be two fingers and a half of width and depth, and have a hole through the middle small but not too deep, as if to push an awl, and made of bone or wood in front so as not to prick the patient when placed on the member; and there should be a rod of the thickness of a wand or iron, passing through the middle, for placing a splint, and they should be large or small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them; because the blisters of children are different from the old, and thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And this blister should be placed on the member in such a way: take the splint of wax or linen, place it inside the hole of the rod that is inside the blister, so that the light penetrates into the blister and does not burn the patient; then place the splint on the member, over the hole mentioned earlier, so that when you look at it, if the vapor escapes, you remove the blister; and take the linen again as before, and repeat it often, if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the bladder which is administered in disease of pleurisy, it has no rod nor piercing, and it is not administered except when it is full of water, and it is placed on the body only; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Suction is not administered except in bodies where bladder stones cannot be placed, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare skin areas, such as the ear or nose, and others; and the quality of the user is that when you find bladders that are in sweet clear water without purulence, take them; place one nut in sweet water until they become familiar and have nothing inside; then sanitize the area with vein and bladder, then rub the body as much as it becomes red, and put the bladders on it; and when they are full and warm, if it is a place where a bladder can be placed, put it there, because this works well.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If not, lift the shoulder blade slightly, then deeply, carefully, and then press it back into place; if the shoulder is injured too close to the chest, moisten a linen cloth with cold water, put it on, until the pain subsides; if the pain persists or multiplies, put on vinegar powder, or other similar things, until it subsides; or you may apply half-peeled beans to the shoulder, and leave them there until they harden on the shoulder, which will stop the pain now; and if necessary, take more painkillers.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the pain does not want to take medicines, rub the shoulder with fresh blood or poke an needle into it until the pain subsides and then apply them, and as soon as they feel the blood, let them harden; and when you see that they stop bleeding, sprinkle some powder of aloes and horehound, or ash, which will stop them now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is frequently necessary in the art of medicine, and it is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Know, dear child, that the foolish man casts himself from this chapter, who has never seen any old books nor read letters in them; and because of this, science is alienated in our land, for I have never found a good one; and I do not know anything else, except through the knowledge of the old books, where I have studied the science and treated it, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought about, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary that we say the prologue of this book and the subjects where wise men put their understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 When injury or dislocation or twisting or swelling comes to anyone, it is necessary that you first heal the patient on both sides, unless something prevents you, such as weakness of body, old age, or illness; or if the time is very hot or cold; and eat cool foods, namely raw fish and mutton and eggs and drink no wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not fill too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about pus formation or spreading of matter to the member; then the patient will recover in the first stage as he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with meats that make thick nourishment or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water and rice, meat pie, beef, mutton, fish eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For prolonged nursing leads more often to fractures.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that the broken bones of the old and weak cannot be well restored or joined according to their nature due to the slackness of the limbs; neither can those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but do not despair, set the broken bone above it with a large piece that straightens and joins the limb together, as it was before; and never apply any traction, and for this reason feed it with rich foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the neck is different from the break of the leg or foot; and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There are breaks that heal by themselves, and others that grow worse if not treated, like the tip of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break with a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And each one should have its tool and instrument suitable for the restoration, according to what memory comes to mind; and it is known that bone fractures occur when the limb is twisted, and opens wide by dislocation, and presses against the hand; and when there is no twisting or touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no break; but there may be twisting, fissure, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	Do not move the hand but put medicines that come after this on it, and then hold it gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the fractures that go in the arm, and are the two parts disjointed, they must now be put evenly back together, so that the abscesses come to life; and if the abscesses grow close, you should leave it for a day until the abscesses subside; then bring it even with the muscles that you can easily and skillfully move, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration where there are pieces; then press, as necessary hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 If the bone is broken into pieces and divided into two parts, whether it be a hand or foot, or a finger, or two tendons, or one tendon and your hand; then put the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are disjointed, you gather all additions in their places to the muscles that you can, and ensure by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and join well the two bones of the os according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And it feels well to the touch if it seems not quite right to you: straighten it properly, and do not strain it too much, nor force it as those who bring it by their work, abscess hot and contraction to the member, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is set in place, ensure that you punish the patient so he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and carefully watch to make sure the limb remains as firm as possible, without feeling any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 When there is no pain, it is not properly set, and it must be put in such a position that there is no pain; and watch to make sure it is straightened, so twisting does not come when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken limbs can be various in smallness and size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 When there are small members such as fingers, wrists and similar: you must wrap them with soft and thin linen cloths; for those that are large such as thighs and legs: you must wrap it with a wide and hard bandage, because the wider bandages hold the whole large member firmly and equally on all sides, without any gap. Then tie three or four turns around lightly, depending on the member, and pull your hand slightly on the entire bandage, then go to the broken part and pull less than the break, and move away from the break a bit; and soften the bandage little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy tissue, then take another bandage, and turn it around directly over the broken limb. Then return to the under side of the break, and tighten slightly, not too much or too loosely, as we have said in the first section above; then put linen or cloth between the bandages until they are all even, then tie them all together, and finally place well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 And if there is an abscess or boil, place a warm poultice over it, and remove the abscess; leave it as such for several days; then apply sharpened steel on top of your steels (levers), and let them be about half the thickness of a large cane, or a fust used for splitting logs, or splinters from a palm tree, and they should be shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 But the lever that one places over the fracture should be a little larger and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as is required for the member whether small or large; then apply pressure with the levers as you did in the first instance, then tie a thread above it as in the first instance on the fracture; the thread should be tighter at the beginning, then gradually looser; it must be of moderate thickness, not too thick nor too thin, and made of flax yarn. For if the thread is thick, like what I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their rope from twisted flax yarn, it is a great mistake, because the splint cannot be even if it is too fine, and it must not have less space between each lever than two fingers.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the heads of the ribs after the resetting in healthy places, place linseed poultices or cotton wool over them to prevent bleeding.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with fracture and the bones are broken, I shall tell the remedy afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	Know that it is not necessary to reset all the fractured limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put hot irons on them before five or seven days, or more, according to your certainty of the abscess erupting; and here follows the method of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour which is kept at the walls of the mill, and mix it with a lot of egg, and put this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, on and this is the common method of the plaster restoring the fracture in various positions, and especially for women and small children, for it is not too hot or cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Here is another method for plasters that heal fractures, dislocations, and twists: take barley meal, salt, vinegar, asafetida, and Arabic gum, in amounts of ten; myrrh and aloes, in amounts of five; alchil, eight; grind these ingredients into powder and mix with plenty of egg. If the patient's complexion is hot, use this plaster, because it has a good composition and quickly heals broken bones for many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another method of plaster for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, soak in ten; myrrh and aloeswood, soak in nine; acacia six; Armenian bolex ten, grind well, and mix with vinegar or a lot of egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another method of dislocation and bone setting at joints, and alleviate the pain that occurs, and cut the bone with this tool, and break it: take new linen, moist it in oil and boiling water, and place it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This plaster does not restore [the bone], but it is good for alleviating abscess pain and treating actual pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster to restore broken bones: take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method of plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to hasten the healing of abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take root of mallow, camomile, violet flowers, powder of beeswax, each in equal parts; grind them and mix with wine; if the limb is scalded, mix it with coriander juice or water instead, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of emplastrum (a healing ointment or plaster) stronger than the first, when an abscess hard comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take roots of comfrey, flaxseed, balm of Gilead (balsam poplar), alfalfa, and sage, and flowers of violets and camomile, all in equal parts; grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates wrote in his book that nothing should be placed on a broken member for restoration except a plaster made of wax and oil, and no other thing more, and he said it should be between soft and hard but not too much of either.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It seems Galen said that for restoring a broken member, dry and slightly warm things should be placed on it, such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have stated.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plaster that is good for injuries and pain: take mugath (possibly a kind of flour) and crushed bones from men or feathers of birds, also mallow, and mix it equally; grind them into a paste and apply the mixture.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then loosen the wound a little afterwards, and make sure the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not loosen it by hand for many days. If pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, you hasten, and loosen, and remove the plaster immediately; and take a light cloth, sea sponge moistened, dip in water, and lift the wound, until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour, then place dry linen, damp with water or rose oil, and tie on a nut, as long as you are sure of the abscess being hot; and let the inflammation of the member subside, and the pain be removed, then continue the binding gently, and a little plaster, and not to strain too much as before; and bind softly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has healed and turned red, swollen, and pain has disappeared, and you need plaster and linen, then resume tying it as you did before equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 And if no swelling comes to the limb as we have said, do not dislocate it unless after 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7; and at no time should you leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals, and the joint approaches the flesh above; then hold it more firmly than before, and make the flesh thicker as I have said earlier; and if you see that the joint dries out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot enter there; therefore warm with hot moist heat, every time you dislocate it, and stretch the joint a little; by this work, cut off the nourishment from the limb, and heal promptly what the foolish surgeon leaves twisted: this is harmful, and such work is fearful, and I see no other remedy but to rest and work properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 Many kinds of breaks are, and they have various shapes, and their causes are determined; for there are breaks made by sword impact, and the bones fractured all along the bone up to its tip which is beneath the bone, as done by a haunch or fist; and this manner of break is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	For the sword strikes the bone from above causing it to be broken completely, and such a breakage is called "complete break"; and these are the wounds caused by either great or small complete breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a thrust-through injury, a fracture or falling on stone, or other similar injuries.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent fracture, which reaches up to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if there is a wound that penetrates the bone as thinly as hair, and it has a small crack, and for this reason it is called this kind of break "capillary"; and if a wound is made by striking with stone or falling, or in some way, and forces the bone piece inside, and the ends of the bone are shaved like a blacksmith does on top of pots; if the stone enters within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And this happens more often in those who have moist bones, such as a child's head; and it happens in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are dislocated, like teeth; and I shall speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	We know all ways of fracture by the distraction on them, and the examination with probing, and by the rotten flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of hair-like appearance is known by those who, when the bone is discovered and scraped over it, an opening appears black at the fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, beware of the sick person's condition, and if you see any harmful symptoms such as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, numbness, fever, pallor, and other signs in various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any doubtful symptoms and expect a healing, then start the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound first comes to you, and it is in winter, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day if possible.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if this is the case, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue underneath the bone is not corrupted, and the incidents mentioned will occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 If the fracture of the bone reaches up to the layer that covers the brain, then you must cut open the broken part as follows: and it is that you take hold of the child's head of the patient, and expose the bone in all possible ways, and on the shape of the wound more gently than possible, and if bleeding comes out when exposing the bone or pus, help yourself with whatever is needed, and it is that you fill the place with damp cloths soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the pus has subsided, and be sure of the stoppage of blood; then begin to remove the bone around it, and this is done according to two ways of work: the first way is that you cut crossways in front, and this is its shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have various incisions, some narrow and others wide, pointed and made with an iron blade; and work lightly, so as not to cut the tendons.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is out of place and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around it, in such a way as you administer incisions with trephines, but not so much that they cut through the bone to the other side, and there must be a margin or circle above the point to prevent the tip from passing beyond the bone; and you must have more than one, so that each comes into its place along the width of the bone, so that you have trephines for all sides; and this is the form of the four kinds of trephines.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you put one trephine on the bone, and turn it with your hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the trephine a little farther away, and do this all around, then cut the space of the bone between the perforations as subtly and gently as possible, following what has been said, until you draw out the bone or any of the tools you have such as pliers or tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you reset the tightness that remains of the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other incisors; and if anything from small bones or scales remains, remove them gently with the instruments; then treat the wound with cauterization and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is that which Galen describes, who was very skilled; and he holds it in high esteem, and this is his saying.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you should expose a part of the bone where the break is open, so that when you have exposed that part, place the lenticular anvil on top of it as shown by its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 Do not cut from one side, and let the part be hollow in two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you cut lightly around the bone carefully, paying attention to the cloth below; if it is torn against the bone, remove it gently, as it is cut badly without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone breaks through to the cloth, and the bone is chipped only from above, and there are small fragments, then it is necessary to smooth over the roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp scraper of different sizes, in order to bring the most suitable one for each place, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	The patient should shave himself with great razors, then with more subtle ones afterwards, and should not cease until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each other kind of hair cut and subtle breakage, it is necessary that you bring the cause according to his guidance; this is not a matter for anyone who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 If the wound is open, you must take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, then place it on the wound; next, take another linen cloth doubled over once or twice, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; do this as gently as possible, so as not to burden the wound, then administer more linen bandage over the top, but do not tighten it more than necessary to cover only the wound; leave it like that for a day or two until the abscess has subsided, then remove it and administer medicines such as root of lilies, flour of wheat, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; from these things make a powder and place it on the wound, and immediately administer reliable medicines without bitterness; and keep the wound clean, do not leave any ointment or bandage, as when pus gathers on the cloth of the brain, it will rot and may cause great harm to the patient, for when something bitter is placed on the wound, it will burn through from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care that no bad accident happens to the patient as we have said, for it is doubtful with a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if blackness does not come violently except for the medicine that has been placed upon it, its virtue being such, you must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue the cloth, and place it on the sore; then treat it according to the methods of treatment as necessary, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or just one of them because they are two bones; and the one below is cartilage, and does not break but only bows or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 If one of the two parts is broken, you must bite your little finger or thumbnail and place the breakage within your index finger hole, and at the back, until the nail grows again according to its natural figure; do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the breakage is in the upper part of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, then you must insert a small splint into the nostril.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If the breakage is in two parts, do as before and hasten to restore the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess has calmed down, then place linen bandages on the root of the nail where the breakage is.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you apply another to the other side, if the break is there; and let the dressings be as thick as they fill the openings of the needle.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And they said any restorer that one should soften the tents with butter, and to stir each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It does not seem good to me, but they should be softened in an egg yolk concoction, and flour powder; then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilages are hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes feathers of goose are inserted in place of tendons, and if one side is wrapped with a thin cloth, and the breakage is held, breath is blown through it; do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	If abscesses come up while you are working, put either wax or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a little bit of quicklsilver.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If abscesses do not open themselves, then apply a plaster outside, made of flour from the earth, and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then place light bandages on it, but do not tie them too tight; and if the break in the nail is small, and it is broken into small pieces, take it out with suitable tools, then sew the wound, and treat with things that heal quickly, such as plasters and ointments appropriate for this; and if there is no wound within the nail, then treat the tent, and put cotton in it until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the lower jaw is dislocated and there is no wound outside, and the break is only outside but not broken through, if one knows it easily, it means there is a curvature within.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side, you must insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; if the break is in the left lower jaw, insert your index finger of the right hand, and gently push it inside, then adjust it from outside using the other hand, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break in the lower jaw is dislocated by .2 (two fingers), you must administer an extension of .2 parts to make it equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth or fracture, hold them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then place a broken bit gag on the mandible and put one double cloth on top; put a large, well-made splint or equal piece of leather on top, long and wide according to the mandible, and attach it where you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see the figure changing, dislocate it after a day, then reset it to its original position; put a plaster on top, with flour from the mill mixed with egg or oatmeal after removing the gag; put a light linen bandage on top, and if the plaster sets, and the dislocation does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it is healed in four weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess appears, apply what we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, make sure no piece of the bone has been removed; if necessary, remove the splinter with suitable tools.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrowed, stretch it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all the pieces and none remain, if necessary, close the wound if it is wide and apply one dressing suitable for that purpose to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps (instrument)
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps break multiple times towards the shoulder, and the fracture is in four ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two parts, split into pieces, and is the easiest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is when the fracture has a wound, you should have two assistants, one of whom holds the shoulder that feels the forceps broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected area; then align the fracture in your hands so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or deformation.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to stretch more, put a round cushion of cloth or linen on the patient's shoulder, and make it as large as necessary; then extend and raise the forceps, and press the cushion with your hand so that the fracture is aligned as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out by force because it comes in fully, then the patient must lie on his affected side, and place one pillow under the shoulder, and push the ministers to move the shoulder downwards until the bone of the socket is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you see debris, then it is necessary that you cut across; and separate the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, hit it in one of the incisions you have made; but place this instrument under the socket to prevent dislocation.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And it seems like a spoon, and is not closed, and should be as large as required, according to the size of the bone and the nature of the work; and let it have two holes, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as the opening of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure about the abscess depth, if the wound is deep, then cut the wound, and if the wound is small, or you doubt about the abscess depth, then use linen and cotton, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot irons come for it, moisten a cloth with rose oil, asafetida, and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The setting of the bone, when it has wounds and is cut, is that you place a plaster of flour mill and egg yolk on the bone, and put light wicks on top, and put a splint under the affected area if needed; then take a very wide bandage about one palm in width, then put two layers of linen over the wicks, and the plaster; then take a thin strip of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage so that the ends of the bandage are hanging; and place the strip on the fracture, and turn the bandage towards the neck, and under the affected side and the patient's healthy side; and tighten each part, and when you see that the fracture aligns correctly, and you clearly see that the strip does not move above the broken bone, then check it every day, and when the ligaments loosen, hold it in place; and position the patient on his back, and place a small pillow under the affected side to lift the shoulder up; this will help the shoulder heal by aligning the fracture of the shoulder blade through the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident occurs, for up to twenty days; then repeat the plaster, if necessary, and tighten and leave it in place until it is healed; and it will be healed in no more than twenty-eight days, and less in some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	on the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 It happens that the shoulder breaks or is displaced from its joint, and one can feel it only by touching; then you should align it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form in all ways possible; then sprinkle powder from the mill with an abundance of egg and light feathers on it, and cover it with a double cloth; then place a large and thin awl slightly larger than the shoulder on it, and if there are any hollows in the shoulder beneath the awl, fill them with feathers of linen so that the awl is equal in all places; and then tie it firmly in a great bond so that the awl does not move from its place, and watch the ligament each day; and whenever it softens, tighten it again, and equalize the awl if it is displaced from its place, and have the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored in twenty or twenty-five days. And when this number is accomplished, release it, and be careful, for it is not bone that easily becomes displaced.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment protrudes in front and not beneath the skin, lift it up, remove it, and follow what was said earlier to heal an abscess with hot cautery.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture with fish
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The limb is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the edge.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 When it is broken obliquely, it slips downwards, and the patient feels great pain, lack of nourishment, fainting, and may vomit blood, and the fracture opening widens in the broken bone, and the limb becomes numb.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back with one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of both sides to your hands, and subtly puts it all in equal alignment in every way possible until the bone figure is as required; then put a plaster and bandages over the broken bone, or a lighter splint, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it on the bone so that it does not move; then turn the limb round and round, and tighten it gradually, and check each hour whether it heals, and if it swells, tighten it; and if it needs to be dislocated due to corrosion or pruritus at the joint, or pain or abscess, hurry up and dislocate it, remove the plaster, and direct the one who has come there in ways of treatment; then reset the plaster, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the broken ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of ribs does not occur except in large ones behind the back and near the neck, and they do not break unless they are slippery; and it hurts greatly upon examination at the joints.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the reduction is when you set the break as required.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then put a splint and bind with a stick, if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	If the fracture of the rib is slanted within, the patient feels great pain and swelling, as if from pleurisy, for the bone points to the skin; and the fingers become hardened, and immediately vomits a large amount of blood, which is a grave illness, and the ancients have made great effort to treat it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if among those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the abdomen, to push the fracture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not bring hot irons unless they have come (to be used).
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have come, then let them be heated.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that one puts vents on the side to suck out pus, which seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the vents do not attract the superfluidities to the side due to weakness in position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that one should cover the side with damp linen dipped in hot oil and place bands between the ribs to make the wound equal on all sides, then it should be cured with the cure of pleurosy (inflammation of the pleura), meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure due to the broken bone not bearing pressure, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision above the level of the fractured rib, and place a tool beneath it to prevent it from sinking; then the fracture must be cut, gently pulled apart, and the edges of the wound sewn together if it is large, and the wound treated with splints until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess comes, place moistened wool soaked in rose oil on top of it; and treat the area as necessary for abscess, and let the patient lie still on the side where it is, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never does a break occur in the bones of the collarbone, and it never bends; and similarly in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens to anyone and you want to know if it will heal or not, if you see his hands becoming soft, swollen, and dead, and he cannot move or extend them, and when you prick with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that it is deadly in many positions, and if they do not speak or feel when you pull or prick them, know that the bone joint is saved, and the patient will be healed if treatment is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And if a similar thing happens in the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it is diseased or not, take care if the limbs are weak, and if there are accidents that are in hands; and when it moves with a sudden ventosity and evacuation without will, when it has been lifted on the stomach, it also moves with ventosity and evacuation without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it is placed on the back and wishes to lie down, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Know that it is mortal: do not labor in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this event does not occur to them, then the situation is easier.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you soothe if there is an abscess that burns hot, put on top of it rose oil or egg yolk oil until it calms down; then put on top one of the soothing and drying plasters, and tie it with a string, and command the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If any bone dislocates, it is necessary to cover it with a cloth; then remove the bone, next join the two edges of the wound together with stitches if it is large, and heal it with soothing ointment for as long as it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken (which is called "the head of the cow"), push your left hand's pocket into it and hold it equal to your right hand strength, then put on an plaster and a dressing, if you have them; then tie it, and if there is bone dislocating, make it go back, and remove it, and heal the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break of the shinbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, there is only a slight reduction in mobility at the hip; it becomes long, bends toward the outside, and causes pain at the site where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above [the break], until you are above the broken area; and recognize which [bones] are broken and their shape; and if the break is only at the hip, set the break straight, until it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or bends inward, place the patient on his back, so that the restoration of the break can be seen.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it straight, place the plaster on top, then put a stick or a splint on top, and hold the fracture in place so that it does not move; apply the [medical] solution under the ribs until the fracture is healed.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess appears, do not touch it until the abscess has calmed down, and apply what we have previously mentioned; then return to the treatment, and hold it as necessary, if there is no bad incident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder breakage
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is between the neck and the chest of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a large splint made of wood or bone, in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two shoulders with two ropes, and place them high up, and make the patient lie on one seat; then lower the broken arm onto the splint, so it comes to rest, and have a slight curve of the splint in the middle; then place a heavy object or the assistant holds it down below; then have the assistant hold the breakage equal with his hands until the breakage returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you lay the patient on his back and tie his hand to his neck, then command two assistants that one holds above the breakage with both hands, and the other holds below with all the ropes, extending each rope to its side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you wish that the extraction is stronger, hold the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the helpers to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, you must place the sling beneath the armpit, and the other side towards the fracture; and similarly if the fracture is towards the chest, you must gently place the sling without exertion, until the fracture is level on the bone, and on the chest; then make it even, as necessary, and hold it in place, unless an abscess comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If an abscess does come, do not hold it for more than seven days, and place a soft cloth in oil on top of the abscess to soothe it; then you can hold it, and the method of holding is that you put the clamp on the fracture, then bring the arm towards the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; place the bandage, and hold towards the shoulder and towards the arm, such that the arm remains in a straight position, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints and place a larger and stronger splint than the others on the fracture, and let there be one inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the break two inches from each side; then hold on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, stronger and less in alignment.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 If you see the swelling and tightening, as we have said, during the operation to restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to heal for seven days, as we have said; then observe every three days the sling, that pus does not swell or come to the bone, or that the nerves do not come to the member because it is too narrow.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If the direction, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And if no such accident happens, he should not be dislocated before three days or more, and the patient should sleep on his back with his hands on his stomach; and place a cotton sock of equal size under the shoulder, and observe every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move or become softened tendons; if it moves through the power of medicine, and give him the meat we have previously mentioned in such a way that the meat is at first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is custom that the shoulder and leg should be reset within 40 days of all; and then he must be dislocated again, administering a bath and ointments to set it right.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the narrowing is deformed and swollen, it remains to loosen for days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the break in the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made of two bones, which are called the "two shinbones". One is small and it forms the elbow joint; and the other one is large, and it is located below, near the little finger. Sometimes, only the large shinbone breaks, or sometimes both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the small fractures are broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; but when the large ones are broken, the healing is poor, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it is only the small fracture that is broken, it should be stretched slightly and put in a splint.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it is the large fracture that is broken, it should be held more firmly; stretch it above the splint, and raise the hand cuff higher than the others, and the small bones lower than the others, and cross the patient over himself, and the splint in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers' arms to the part below his hand or his elbow, and another minister above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then make the limb equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, place each one back in its place, and if any of them cannot be held straight and you cannot restore it to its place, make a bone splint, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	If with the break into a wound (i.e., fractured open), I have spoken of it in the specific chapter; take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And if at the beginning of the reset there are abscesses that burst, apply a linen cloth soaked in a mixture made of rose oil and white beeswax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and place the cloth gently over the abscess until it is healed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 Then remove the linen cloth, and apply a plaster made of milled powder with egg, then place the splints, and ensure that the splint for the fracture is stronger and slightly wider than the others; and remember that it should have six splints or more in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and tighten more around the fracture than elsewhere, and always less when moving, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and ensure that the linen cloths over the fracture are soft and moist, not hard nor rough; and ensure that the thread used for tightening is of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And hold the member and the joint after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if any bad accident comes to the member, such as itch that comes to the member, then you should irrigate the member with hot water until the itches are calmed down; and let the member not be restricted from resting.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then resume the binding, and if the ligaments are destroyed and the bones are dislocated, and similar things, give advice accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	If the narrowing of the anus cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it for a little while, and leave it for some days until the narrowing passes, and then set it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things mentioned above come to the patient, do not unbind it until twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 In addition, he should place his hands at his neck and keep his neck even, and beware of movement and dislocation; and sleep on his back. Know that this break will heal in thirty or forty days or maybe twenty, according to the compositions and complexions of the properties.
de la brisure de la main	Of the break of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	The back of the hand and fingers rarely suffer breaks, but it often bends multiple times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, the patient should lie down crosswise, straight in front of him equally; then place his hand on a cloth spread out, and extend the broken bones, and align them with mirrors, until they are well joined; and apply a poultice and lint, if an abscess does not develop, then apply a splint according to the size of the limb; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture occurs at the front near the abdomen of the foot, make a bandage from rags, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken foot; then bind it with a long strip of cloth, and ensure the wound is covered as well as the hand's palm, and bind it as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is at the back, it is necessary that you place a bandage on top and another under the foot to keep the hand straight, then bind it all around the hand, and tighten the lace between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture comes in any of the fingers (such as the thumb), make it straight as needed and bind with the palm; if you see that a splint is needed to lift the fracture and keep it from moving, place a small straight splint there; if the fracture is in other fingers, such as the index or another finger, make it straight and bind with the healthy finger that is next to it; or bind them all together in one place, as you would for a thumb; take care in restoring its position and proper healing of the abscess, and watch for any signs of infection, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken leg
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the leg are often broken, and one can see it when it twists in front and behind; and the restoration is such that one tie is placed above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each minister evenly to their respective positions; and this is when the break has been set in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the break is near the root of the thigh, it is one of the ligaments towards the knee, and the other ligaments on the opposite side of the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And if it is near the knee, then the ligaments are below the knee, and the extension is distal; then place the hands on the bone equally to its two sides, so that it conforms to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster and splint, until the abscess does not appear.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess boiling, let it calm down before returning to your work and care; the treatment is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 It is necessary to wrap above the break and bind tightly in two or three layers, and remove any excess, then rotate the leg so that the heels come to the root of the thigh, and place the long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread to the top; then rotate the leg and wrap above the break and above the thigh, then put straps on the break and a splint on the bone of the leg; then apply soft fabric for eight inches between the leg and thigh to equal the strain, then begin to bind three or four turns above the break; and as you proceed higher on the break, loosen the strain; then take the two threads that you placed between the leg and thigh, and tie three straps that are above, then return to below the end of the thread, so that you come alongside the foot; and tighten, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like that, until no abscess or swelling or similar thing appears.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is a fracture, dislocate it and treat the part that is injured, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone protruding, they must be cut off, if possible; and if not, the limb must be broken and marrow extracted; and cure it as we have said until it heals.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thighbone is broken in such a way that pegs are inserted, as in the shoulder or arm; however, in restoration of this kind, the patient does not experience any pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the thighbone is restored in one or two days, depending on the different complexions [of patients].
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groin [area]
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the knee joint, there is little damage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 If it breaks, it is not really a fracture, but rather a crack or puncture, causing all sorts of pain and wound, and this feels very painful.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one puts equal traction on what is round at its ends, as long as it can be assembled; then place the splint, and put a round bandage, if necessary, and tighten it as required, then check all the dispositions as we have said in other fractures, such as abscess or other similar things; place whatever is needed for each accident until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "ham" and the other "shin"; and it breaks like the arm does, and for this reason the restoration is similar to that of the arm, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone is broken, it bends forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 If the large bone is broken, there is great pain and it can be seen clearly, and it turns underneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then you should apply extension and make it equal, and tie the joints equally; but if the break is misshapen or there are many parts, the extension should be less and lighter; align accordingly to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have completed your task, take two fists full of straw that will bind the leg from one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee down to its end; then wrap it in two layers, one above and one below, and tie it in the middle so that the leg cannot decline to either the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one should bind one arrow-length of the leg, and it should be made of straw, and put the leg for protection from movement, and properly apply it at the fracture where there is a wound; move the leg every day, to see if there is an abscess or any other accident; cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the bone fractures of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there comes no break, but the bones of the foot sometimes suffer a break and also the toes; no fire is needed except in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If the bones of the foot suffer a break and you see them overlapping each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wants to walk, and now place your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press it until they align again; then put a splint and padding on, and put a small table under the foot with two flat cushions, then tighten the splint towards the affected foot, then when you have wrapped cloth around it, and other things that you may need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, loosen the splint, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two [bones] is broken, restore them as we have said for the bones of the hand; then place a splint on the broken bone according to its length, and let it be slightly larger, then put a small board underneath the injured one that I mentioned, and tighten it accordingly; and if there are 2 or 3 [broken bones], or more, break each bone separately, place a splint on top of each bone wrapped in one linen cloth, and tighten the board beneath the foot; and let the protrusion be facing the abdomen of the foot so it covers it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	Also do not neglect the other things I said about other fractures, after what we have said; and treat each accident according to its needs.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the bone of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of the womb is broken, you should make it enlarged, then incline it to the back part and hold it from behind; then fill the cavity with the patient's cotton and also stuff it as thick as possible; then turn the woman, and lift her buttocks little by little, and then pull the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the cavity, and the bone comes out with the cotton; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or more: the break will heal, and if you see, take a bladder of goat, tie one end to the buttocks, and push the whole bladder into the cavity; then blow strongly into the tube until the bladder is inflated inside: the cavity will return the break; then fill it with cotton, and leave it for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bone of the thumb of man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the elbow bone; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who applies his study and skill, and read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 The break signifies in various ways the right path of restoration; therefore, pay attention.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the shaft (long bone), when it is broken, put a goose's gullet around it; then wrap cloths around it and leave for 3 or 4 days, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of breakage with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	To the one who has a breakage with wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the shin or shoulder or similar, it must be set immediately, so that the settings we have mentioned take place.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, clean it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then continue to restore the breakage in that same hour or day, unless an abscess comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If an abscess comes, leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it for three days or four, because you would bring a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks through, it must be set lightly by your hands, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	If the extension is not provided for setting equal to your hands, it should be made with this tool that is made of iron, which has 7 or 8 inches long, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and therefore, the mirror must grasp 3 or 4 depending on what is needed in each cure of breaking; and be round and slightly large, so that it does not bend during the compression on the member during your work, and be sharp before, and thick from the middle forward, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "elbow," so the curved shoulders should be placed on top of the visible bone; and push it once, until it returns to its place, and make them even one against another.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the break is subtle and the instrument cannot take hold of the bone, then you must cut the top of the bone so that the instrument has power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then strike it with an appropriate instrument, either chisel or saw, to your power; then remove that which is stuck in the bone with sharpness and small shavings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 Keep it in its place, then moisten the cloth in black bitter vinegar and apply it properly if it is hot; do not put any ointment or other substance on the wound that might cause corruption; then provide bandages when you have restored the bone, leave the wound exposed, and cover it with a layer of linen according to the size of the wound, be careful not to constrain the wound with the fracture; and many times this has been done by foolish surgeons, causing harm or death to the patient or sometimes rotting; and the bindings should be softer and more pliable than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is bad or large and you doubt that a bad incident may come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, do not put sticks on it; but wrap around, in place of sticks, hard cloths and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And after a day or two, if you see swelling in the wound, remove what you have put on it and apply healing ointments for wounds, such as healing ointment made from four ingredients and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must release the member twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	The limbs should be set in such a manner that the bone moves downward lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If it passes for several days without healing but the bone continues to break, knowing that there are small bone fragments; therefore, you must treat the wound with care and remove all those dislocated bone fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula comes to the place or any other form of corruption, you must treat it according to what he said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not drain it because many times death comes to it, but let it remain as long as possible; perhaps later a piece will come out through it after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The arriving bruises upon the sore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see it following the breaking of health, particularly near the joint, and it is displeasing to see the appearance of the limb's figure; and unfortunately, the limbs cannot perform their natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, be cautious: if it is fresh, administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and gum arabic, and similar things, so that you take one of these substances or all together, and mix them with a strong wine or with egg white or oil, and put them in poultices, and keep them on for a long time without removing them; and then loosen it, and start another, until the nodulation is removed; or you hold above a well-made piece of wood because the properties of wood are to remove all swellings from the limbs; and if the nodulation has already hardened like stone, it must be removed by cutting off the top, making the excess appear; or you shave it with any razor until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The weak member after being treated or healed
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is restored and remains weak and subtle afterwards, this occurs for many reasons: one of them being that it was tied too tightly, but not properly bound as required; or because there were too many bandages, preventing blood supply to the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to excessive movements, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, make the body lean, until the blood multiplies in him; administer baths, and give joy and peace to him; then apply wax over the limb so that the wax attracts strong blood supply to the limb; frequently drain off the pus with warm water, until the blood flow returns to the member; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	twisted limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When a limb is twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is deformed, yet it does not lose its natural function; do not believe in the foolish who say that one must break a limb anew, and many foolish men have done this in our land; this practice is condemned, and great harm comes from it, and perhaps death; however, if the swelling and torment are fresh, you should apply hot water or softening herbs such as mallow leaves, root, medicinal trefoil, and similar things; and make a soothing emplaster, like dittany well made, and take the myrrh of mallow, mix it with ginger oil or sesame oil, and make an emplaster; or use figs greased, grind them with wheat bran, and similar medicines that alleviate pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes, the dislocation is removed by continuously and persistently rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 Bring movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is growing hard like stone, it needs to be cut with iron, it must be covered up to the bone, with a subtle and gentle incision; and put dressing and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs to anyone, it must now be reset carefully.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 For if one delays, the limb swells, and in case it is reset at that point; this should not be moved until it has subsided: many times it brings spasm and other pains; nevertheless, when such a thing occurs, make the patient bleed, then let him rest, until all abscesses have been pacified; then heat the limb with hot water and oil, then gently move it, and cure each limb according to where the injury is located.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have organized the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to feet.
des mandibules	jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It often happens that the jaws are dislocated in two ways: either they are somewhat disjointed from their places and softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the lower part, and saliva flows out of the mouth which it cannot hold, nor can close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with the speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a small dislocation returns, it often does so in multiple ways.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 If it is whole and complete, then you must quickly reset it, and not delay; and in such a way that the servant holds the head of the patient, and pushes one of his fingers from one hand into the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on two parts; and the other hand should be spread apart to equalize it; and instruct the patient to soften their jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the thumb is placed evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to set it, just as if it were two jaws together, warm them with hot water and oil, until they are easy to move back into place; do not force it to return, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they are reset equally, the patient's mouth should be closed well with soft cloth made of rose oil and wax, then gently tied with several bands; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders between two cushions so that he does not move either right or left, nor exerts himself at all, but takes light food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are held together; and then eat lightly whatever he wants, and do not strain himself to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaws are well healed and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be set right within an hour and are not returned to their places, fevers and usual sickness follow, and perhaps abdominal distention, and perhaps vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, know that it is destruction; and many times the person who experiences it dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the noose (traditional English translation: neck)
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceful cannot dislocate from the inside along with the ribs and it is dislocated once at the back, and this is felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 Then the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back and extends his arms; then presses firmly at the shoulder joint with your palm, and it will return to its place; then put on the splint and bind it, and hold the shoulder from dislocating; the shoulder which is towards the spine cannot dislocate again, unless it does so once, and if it does, reset it to its place as we have said; then put on the splint and bind it, and hold the shoulder, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and in this way, the shoulders of the back are also reset when they are dislocated from their place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	When the shoulder is dislocated, it must be reduced first.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one is when it dislocates at the socket part below; the second is at the hip part; and occasionally at the top part, but this happens rarely; it never dislocates behind the shoulder nor inside the nerves; and it often dislocates below towards the socket, especially for those with little flesh, as it can come back quickly; for those with enough flesh, it comes back slowly and goes back slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some men that they get struck or broken, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you should verify it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And it is known that the dislocations are downward towards the socket, and you will find a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find on the chief of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the shoulder at the toucher the chief of the shoulder, as if there were an eye; and the sick cannot return his hand to its place nor move in any way; similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, as you can see clearly at the toucher; and this type of dislocation is not always easy to return, unless the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The method is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places their thumbs under the dislocated joint and pulls it upwards forcefully to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, extending it upward, then places it back in; it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said in a few days, the patient must be bathed in hot water; and prepare a soothing, softening and calming mixture such as decotion of elderflower, fennel and melilot in hot water, and give it to him; then lay the patient on his back, place a piece of linen equal in size but not too soft or too hard under his shoulder, then put the heel of another person on the linen, and carefully lift the head of the shoulder; pull the hand of the patient with the other hand; have another attendant hold the head of the patient so it does not move forward; that shoulder immediately returns to its place, and if you see that it dislocates in this way: make a man who is larger than the patient stand near; have him be straight towards his side, and push his shoulder beneath the patient's shoulder, lift the patient's shoulder upwards so that he hangs in the air; and another attendant pulls the patient's hand downwards towards his stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too lightweight, he cannot bear anything heavy, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And it is also done in another way: one pushes a long needle into the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is as round as a pea and not too large or too small; then it should be placed under the patient, but with soft linen beneath, and the patient should be lying along the pole; then stretch out your hand towards the other side and join the jointure back into its place immediately; if it does not return due to all these things we have said, this is the treatment: take a needle from both hands, four inches long and wide, which has a rounded tip to enter easily through the flesh, in the shape shown below:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then put the head of the rod wrapped in cloth on top, so that it does not hurt the patient, then place it inside the anus of the patient; extend one arm above the rod, and hold the instrument above the rod, and the forearm at the end of the hand, then place the forearm on a small stone of large width, and let the hands hang down below, and let the body hang down from another side: the joint will return in the meantime.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is inside, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that you put a spherical piece of linen equal to the size of the instrument, then apply the plaster made of milled powder, with incense and egg white, all over the shoulder and around, then tighten it below the anus appropriately, turn the string around the instrument, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain in this position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must be fed little by little, until the limb is comforted, for it will heal faster; and then feed more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it becomes firm and is not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has come or for some other reason, you must administer three fire cauterizations as mentioned in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you do all this and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is severed or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation which is towards the hip, and limbs, whether front or back, is made by force, and extension of hands, and some other means are administered; and it is treated until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after healing comes stiffness in the limb, and late movement, the patient should use hot baths many times, until the stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation cost
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the thumb is dislocated at the knuckle, and it comes back at the knuckle; and if it has been dislocated from all sides, both front and back, and the dislocation is not corrected, for it can be clearly seen and felt; and it dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the broken bone with the healthy one, you should see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is dislocated, and the arm cannot bend nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it in such a way that the abscess does not come back, for if an abscess comes back, it would be difficult to reset; and it may not be possible to reset it entirely, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be returned to its state, you extend your hand towards his two hands; and his arms should be extended, and his hands facing each other according to the cut around, above and below, and push the joint at his fleshy parts together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	If the dislocation is in front, it returns when you fold your hand over your hand, and press the root of the palm that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 If it does not return to its place, you must administer strong traction; and two people should stretch the arm, and two more should hold it still while stretched; then you should wrap a double-length and wide cloth around it; when the healer joins the dislocated joint with his hand, he should apply some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint back into place as far as it will go; and when it is in place, you should put dry plaster with egg on it, hold it firmly, and keep the patient's arm at the neck for several days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is closed in its place, release the bindings and leave it; if you see that the joint is not binding well, renew the plaster and bindings, and leave it like this for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 And if there is pain after the joint has been reset and it becomes motionless, bathe and rub it gently and press until it is soothed; or you may place a woolen pad of sheep fat on the joint, leave it for a day and night, then remove it, let him enter water bath; and when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, replace the pad, then enter water again; and do this two or three times until it is healed; and if you see, place warm moist sheep's wool with butter on it and press it there; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the wrist occurs easily and more so than other joints; therefore, it must be returned to its place promptly, immediately when it is dislocated, before the muscles become swollen or an abscess forms in the wound.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 And the resetting of the hand, place the sick hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the assistant, align the mirror so that he places his palm on the appearance of the jointure, and press until it returns completely. It is important that you look to see if it is in its proper position; then have the patient rest the back of their hand on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's palm of their hand on the table, and have them place their other hand above that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, it is well; if not, apply warm plasters to abscesses and let him rest until sensation begins again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 And if he cannot bear it and you cannot put it back after some days, the dislocated joint remains twisted; this does not harm the patient as long as the hand is disabled and cannot exert any force: thus know that nerves are cut or arteries; there is no other remedy but to strain by cautery in this case, and possibly nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at the joint, place it in the plaster that we have mentioned, then tighten and leave for 5 days, then untie and leave so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot move well and there is no inflammation, moisten with warm water and rub until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	About the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or the belly; then push the dislocation towards your pockets until it returns, then hold the finger's head, and turn it towards the part where it is disjointed; and leave it for two days, and on the third day make it equal; and bind it as we have said, and unbind it from the fourth day, make it move, and rebind it; and do this often, until it becomes straight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do the same as you have done above, until it heals; and do the same, when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	the dislocation of the vertebrae in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the vertebrae of the back or neck are dislocated, where there is none to cure, death quickly follows the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 And the signs are that the exits leap without voluntary control, cannot be held, and many limbs are softened, where it is either both knees or the two arms or neck; many times the vertebrae become silent in four parts; that which becomes silent at the back is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you examine whether the gilbositez has come from childhood: if not, there should be no cure or healing.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And that which falls or due to blows or similar things, the ancient methods of cure used to speak in large words, but there is no great benefit in them all; but I have shortened it according to my intention, and I have made instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that in the swelling which comes before, there is no remedy nor health; and similarly, that which comes straight between two sides, and cannot be cured except by the one properly coming from behind, as I have said; and it is that the patient should lie with their face equal in one place, and have a support beneath them so they do not bruise; then insert the needle into the head in earth firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage over the affected area of the patient, and another at the thighs, and knees, and ankles; and two assistants know the bands, one at the head and others at the feet, among the two needles; and they should be well fastened, the needles as we have said, and the assistant places their palms on the spine firmly until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if the dislocation does not return by this cure, take a board three arms long and rounded at one end, place the patient on his side, push the head of the board under the armpit, then put the middle of the board on the spine; place the hands on the other end of the board and press firmly until it returns to its place; if you see it not turning, do it on the tether that turns with the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And you should stick two thick thorns into the patient's head, one arm apart, and between each thorn have a handspan of length; and have in each thorn a pin or a tether, and let the pins be firmly rooted so they do not move; and between the two pins have a turning pin, like how the cord turns, and have in the turning two small pins of a handspan long, to turn the tether; then tie the cord that is among the shoulders to the tether on the head, and the other cord to the tether on the feet, and let each assistant turn his tether along the entire cord, and the master should adjust the spine equally as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 And when it is equalized, place a drying plaster with plenty of egg on top, then compress, and then press it with a wooden rod three feet long, which pierces the joint and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a cord, as we have said, and let the patient rest until he is well; and if something comes at the end of healing, administer softening and calming medicines, along with the rod we have mentioned above; and sometimes a piece of wood is administered, and sometimes the appearance is in the back spondile of the spine, and it is believed to be dislocation; and this is the bone that opens, which should not be presumed. In case of accidental death.
des dislocations de la hainche	the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder come dislocated only by dislocation, not otherwise like other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated in four parts: within and without, front and back; and more within than out, and less dislocated in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the recognition of its dislocation inside is that when you join the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer and more open at the knee than the healthy one; and the sick person cannot bend their knee in fire; and it is the joint which is dislocated swollen with abscess that burns hot, because the head of the calf comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of the one who it comes to discharge, is that this incident is contrary to those beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of the one whose it comes beforehand, is that his leg is well positioned according to completion; however, do not double bend the knee due to pain, and if you wish to make it walk, it cannot move forward, and retains its urine, and when it goes, it passes above the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one whose it happens behind, is that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip of the calf is in place beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The re-alignments of this type of dislocation are as follows: you examine whether the dislocations are old and remain according to their position without any treatment; and it is not necessary that there should be any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the one whose dislocation is recent, and it is of the four types of dislocation, you hasten to return the joint, pushing it inward and outward, moving it left and right; by chance if it returns, there is no need for further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this manner, you must summon a strong minister and hold the leg firmly between his hands or tied above the knee; another minister extends his hand over it in such a way that he puts his hands under the calf, then tightens a strong cord around the thigh; another holds the head of the cord; all extend upwards and downwards at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at one time, and hangs suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If it is not [the case], then one must apply a cure to its appearance. When the dislocation is at the front, you should remember to lift the patient on his healthy side, then tie a rope around the root of the thigh, and the place that is below the ankle, then pull the rope up towards the ankle and towards the knee; then take another attendant with his arms, grasp the large part of the diseased thigh, and stretch it out backwards in this manner: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together tightly with a strong rope above the heels and above the knees, and let the diseased leg be extended two fists more than the others; then let him be hung from a post by his head, and be suspended above ground by his arms; then command the attendant to grasp the thigh's head, and another attendant hanging with the patient, who grasps the thigh in this manner, because the joint will return quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And when the dislocation is out of place, the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of gout; and stretches the ligament above the affected leg properly, and above the foot as well; then insert two needles, one at the head and one at the toes; then thrust the needle between the knees toward the patient, in the correct position; and place wet rags around it to prevent the patient from bleeding; then extend each minister towards him, and the mirror places his hand equal to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns (to its place), that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, put him on a table and press it as we have said in the case of gout, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when there is a dislocation in front (of the body), it is necessary to stretch the affected leg immediately, and as I have said; and the surgeon should be on top of the injured angle, then press with the other hand, and pull downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And if the dislocation is to the side, it should not extend the patient below, nor lift above the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated to the side, as we have said in the reclining position on two hips; and be facing downward, and the leg extended as we have said before, and should press upon the joint at the table; and will be proper when the patient extends his legs and they are even; then adjust the thighs, and place the pillows, and bind with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and rest for three or four days, then release, and place the pillows again; and if you see that they are even, bind as before, and leave for three days; then release, and let him walk well until the limbs are comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	On the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee can be dislocated in four ways: inside, outside, and backward; but not forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all such is that you make the patient sit straight, extend his leg if he can, place your back on his thigh, and place his foot on your feet; then take his shin in your hands, pull it apart between your hands, then bend the two sides of the shin; another servant extends his foot until the shin returns to its place, and the signs are that it bends lightly to the knee; put the plaster on, bind the leg to the thigh, and let them heal together strongly for three or four days, then release it; do not let the patient walk, until the limbs are comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not straight, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of clubfoot, until it becomes healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both within and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 The signs show that the ankle is swollen, and it tends towards the part where it is dislocated; the readjustment should be gentle, and it should be extended gently to the hands when it has been reduced only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it has been fully dislocated, you must make the patient sit straight, and hold the leg with the hands above the ankle; then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, and then to the left hand twice, then extend the foot upwards, and push the foot upwards strongly; and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, you must continue the work because it can return again; and if it cannot return in this way, lay the patient on his back on the ground, drive the spike firmly into the ground between his legs, and tie rags around to prevent bleeding of the patient; then hold the leg with one hand, and another person holds the ankle or ligament up above the knee, so that it is held near the foot joint; then each person extends equally, and the spike should be placed firmly between the patient's legs to keep him in place while he is extended; then the mirrors equalize the dislocation with their hands, and another person holds the leg straight below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And when it is at the joint, put the plaster and wool on top, press firmly, tie the foot to the leg, watch the nerves that are above the heel behind, so the bandage is not too tight; then leave it for 2 or 3 days, and if the bandage softens, tighten it; then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and let the patient walk for four days; and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess has come to a head, then you must open it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of the hands
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, they should be carefully stretched out without strain, and it is an easy thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the dislocation is in any knot of the back of the foot, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a bed straight up, and put your foot on the opening of these jointures, then press firmly on the foot until it aligns; and when it is even and there is no gap, put a two-toed table under the sole of the foot, then tighten it, and leave it for 3 days, then untie it; and let him rest as long as he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound occurs with dislocation and it is to be restored, often the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful, merciful, and slow, nor hasty; first use warm poultices to abate the abscess, and let the patient in the hand of God, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, as soon as the abscess subsides; and when the limb is in place, administer warm poultices to the abscess, treat the wound, as necessary, using dry onions; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are displaced, set them, and do what we have said for simple diseases; and take care not to enter into fear, according to what I have said, for it depends on your Creator, and for the sake of the wisdom of your weapon and body.
Amen	 Amen (In English: Amen)
