O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	I have completed this book, my very dear son, which is the end of the knowledge of medicine together with its content, and I have ended it by its explanations and its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in a vision that I shall complete this book with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is considered foreign in every way, science and knowledge are perishing and being lost, and nothing remains beyond small descriptions in books written by the ancients that have been changed by hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes error and vanity; intentions are closed off and knowledge is removed.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I shall bring it to life in accordance with the arrangement of this treatise by means of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; and together with the forms of the cautery instruments, and other tools of the work along with the accompanying declarations and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands have been found in our time, the art of medicine has become distant.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who undertakes it should be versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to such an extent that he knows the judgment of limbs, their forms and joints and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of bones, and the movement and rest of veins and arteries, and the location of their outlets.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And Hippocrates said that the hand without a finger is not much, and with work it is nothing; and the same applies to the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the beginning of this book that he who is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned matters, let him beware of making mistakes and cutting men; thus I have often seen more than those who undertake this science and abandon their learning and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a madman who lanced one abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck and lanced the arteries therein; thus so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her own hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another madman who drew out a stone from an old man's body, and the stone was large; thus he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within four days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had been called before to treat him, and saw the state of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And another man who took care of one of our land's dukes, who had his leg broken and with the break had a wound; and the ignorant men closed the break above the wound using strong ligatures, and did not leave any space for pus to drain, leaving it thus in one piece; and he commanded that it should not be loosened; and it remained like this until the leg swelled up completely and the toes perished.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to loosen the leg; and when I undid it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the corruption had already settled or spread to the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to advance through the member until the entire member was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And another mirror which collapses and thickens an abscess, and then burns it with the wickedness of its power.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when an abscess is pure of melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in a place where one can remove all that has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: one where there is danger in many ways; and I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 Because it is necessary for you to guard yourself so that the foolish do not speak ill of you, if you take up arms in defense, and treat your patients gently and firmly, and use the best method with God's grace, may you come to salvation and be praised; and abandon hopeful diseases of great suffering; and discard your arms from that which causes doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can depart from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Galen warned in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of evil disease lest you be called foolish.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and removal of medicinal cauteries for ague, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and iron tools for cautery, and of everything necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, lancing and wounds, extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is ordered for the head to the feet, and the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Furthermore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of the aid, and the harm, are the longest and most subtle words and secret responses; and many wise men have spoken of this, and they agreed on it; but their words were not enough for me, because I reduce the lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the cautery helps universally in all complexions, whether they are hot or cold; this refers to two complexions: namely, the hot and moist complexion, and the dry and hot complexion.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the hot and dry complexion with matter, some said that the cautery is of great help; others said the opposite: that the cautery is not beneficial for illnesses arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to cure hot diseases with heat or dryness; but he who said the opposite said that the cautery provides great help for hot and dry illnesses arising in the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you perceive the body of the man and his constitution is with heat, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this saying.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, do not interfere except for those who have tested it and who know by long experience the chapter of cauterization, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their occurrences and the time span; we are not afraid of other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the observers assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know, my son, that cautery combined with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and more powerful than cautery from burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple and does not affect any other member unless named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Hot medicines coming from one body member to another in alignment, bring illnesses of great pain to the diseased member; and by chance, fire may kill the patient due to its high temperature and the goodness of its substance, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experiment and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is true in matters; therefore I excuse myself for the length of the speech, since I do not like to deprive you of the secret that is hidden concerning fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, that they agreed on when cauteries should be performed, and chose companions.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is useful in all times, because the harm happening is kept under control by the help of cautery; and similarly, if the cauterization is necessary for pain that cannot wait for a time when greater malice does not come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think about it, dear child, as the foolish do; for the illness that is cured by cautery will have no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cauterization is not just a medicine that changes the complexion, but dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more effective than medicine in speed of action, and due to the power of its work and its dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the illness comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the disease and its virulence; and the superfluidities are collected in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, except if cauterization is administered in that place or there is little superfluity and moisture, as in the case of dense cauteries for pain, and similar things; but this rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the rear of medicine, but this is true; however, they do not believe that cautery is useful after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it does.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the rear of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are more effective than iron, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance; and they said that the lead of a cautery does not cause necrosis, but this is not true, as I have experienced, and found it to be true in some men; and golden cauteries are more effective than iron ones, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And always when you heat it strongly with gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it soon cools down; and if it is overheated, it burns; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use the fire cautery that we have found suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I order you this chapter on the head down to the feet, so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Hot oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is beneficial for coldness and moisture on the brain, and it is used in the case of a disease called "soda," and for various humors that descend from the eyes and ears, and for many dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and indeed for all diseases caused by coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine clearing the head, for three or four days according to the strength and age of the humors and the accustomed condition of the patient. After that, you should perform the incision on the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on a low surface; after that, place the base of your palm over the base of its neck between its two eyes; where your thumbs will meet, if it bleeds there, heat the cautery called "olivare", which is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place it on the neck, draw your hand down and pull in a twisting motion; then quickly remove your hand, and look at the jawbone if you see a small bone; and if you do not see it, continue heating the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; after that take a piece of linen, wrap it around soft cotton, place it on the neck, and leave it for three days; afterwards put damp wool over it; leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that when a wound remains open for a longer time, it purges more; and therefore aid in healing.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said to one of these that the fire cautery should be allowed to rest so much that a part of the bone is burnt, and then reset the burnt bone part and heal it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they said the other that the fire cautery should be allowed to rest above, and push so hard that it reduces a hole as large as a vinegar barrel because women put in their fuses for this reason since the humors come out; and the wound should be kept open for a long time afterwards; then it should be healed and closed.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two types of cauterization do not seem good to me altogether, except in some men where there is fear; and it seems to me that I should let them go; for the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other members; and even when the head of the sick person is naturally weak, the first appearance of cauterization seems more healing and beneficial to me, and I use this method in such cases.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	For the chronic and long-lasting pain of the head, the patient should use wormwood and pillwort which are called "cochie", and purgative for the head, oils, and plasters; and if they do the cautery as we have said before, it is not worthwhile.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's pain is of strong nature, and not too cold; then cauterize under it a small amount as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery that is called "vaselz"; and there is one vessel in which air is put; hold your hand so you do not see the bone: the patient feels more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle part of the head, and this is their form:
dou cautere dou chief	Fire cautery for the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When pain suddenly comes in any part of the head and the disease extends to the oil, and the head is purged by diverse medicines, and the other treatments mentioned in the division of diseases are performed but it does not help: then you make cauterizations according to two ways, that is to say with hot medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with hot medicine is that you take a piece of alum and remove the bark, and then you cover two pieces of it with wax at the temples or where the pain is, so that you can place the alum under the skin; and when it has been placed in this manner, you hold it there for twelve hours. Then you remove it and rub the alum gently and leave the wound for two days or three. Then put on cotton soaked in butter as much as it will absorb.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment until it becomes healthy; and if you see that he uses any of the burning medicines that I have written or treat with ten medicines burning.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 Instruct the patient as follows regarding the iron cautery.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cautery in the shape as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is shaped like a clo or has .1 inch of curvature and has a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and slightly move the iron a little while half the thickness of the iron is burnt; and remove your hand so the artery does not burn, which is away from it, and let out an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting cotton on the wound and leaving it for 3 days; then put dampened cotton in butter, and later treat the wound with ointment until it heals; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the tool called "cultellare" at the tip, be careful not to hit the artery in this migraine that is not old.
de emigraine	of the migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When curing migraine as we have said in the divisions of diseases and it does not benefit, and you see that the cauteries mentioned before do not help; then it is necessary that you heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and place your hand on the side of the wound for half a finger's length, and press once, making sure not to hit the artery and ensuring you do not go as far as the bone; beware of the jawbone which moves when one eats, and let the nerves have no sight but the moved jaw and let spasm not come upon the patient, and beware of a decrease in blood flow from the artery when it is hit, or excessive fear and especially for those who do not know it, and who are not students and experienced; leave the operation in progress; however, I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is hit, and I will show you where it should be done in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not help the illness and the patient is suffering, cauterize near the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter of artery extraction, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the cold pain in the ears from frostbite
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear is painful from frostbite and it has been treated with dissolving medicines and other cures as we have said in the division, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", which is shaped like this:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After marking all around the sick ear, or around the two where pain is present in both, move away slightly from the root of the ear since you have signed the place; and place 10 points around each ear; after curing the place until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that is to be cured with a cautery is not for those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not perform a cautery on similar conditions that come from dryness and spasm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of torture which is caused by a flow of bile and purges of the head and gargarism, and it is not effective, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, another a little distance from the temple, and the third in the angle between the two lips; place the cautery in the open healthy part, and make the cautery burn towards the top of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a fist; leave the cautery there until half of the coal is burned; this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The type of surgery I have described earlier is somewhat more subtle and the blade should be slightly thicker; after curing the wound as I mentioned previously, let it heal completely.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve and the patient does not have a fever, then administer four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one through the top of the head, and one in the region called "waist" as we mentioned earlier, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; heal it as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large years and round pills made from cerebrum; then wash the head of the sick person thoroughly, and put above the occiput the plaster of mustard (sinapi) which is written or treated as plasters; and this is the method of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy in this way, it is good; and if it is not, they do four cauteries of oil on the head from the nape to the neck, with a distance between each cautery of one fingerbreadth; and treat as usual, and if you see it heal, and the patient is enduring, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two horns (of the skull), and continue treating until it is healthy; and let the cautery called "olivare" be as I have previously said.
de la froidor dou chief	Of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head should be cleansed for years and as previously stated; after that, anoint the patient's head, then apply the fire cautery to the head and on each horn, and one behind and four on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, apply four cauteries on the spine of the back; let it burn until the most painful spot is burned, then wash your hand; after that, cure until it is healed, and remove the cautery called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilentics should not use the cautery forcefully except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to modify the skull with other treatments as we have said in the division when the patient is grown and endures to take medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, give him gargling and frequent mastication to modify the skull with good foods; afterwards, rub the head well, and perform one cautery as we have said before, and one cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is out of place and endures, perform cauteries as I said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterized place be oiled according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, perform one subtle cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy are the superfluidities or corrupt and swollen fluids, then the cautery of such cauteries should be performed on him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluidities are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink to purify the brain, as it was before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the king [physician], make one linen tourniquet well made, just like a circle, and put it around the patient's head; cross the patient, hold him tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment, which is good for burns of old age; heat it gently so that he can tolerate it; after emptying the circle inside the head, let it cool; do this to the patient once a week with good governance until he is cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 If you wish to perform cauterization, make multiple pricks throughout the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This method of cauterization greatly agitates the brain; then put cotton soaked in butter and linseed oil on it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes come first with the signs that I have said in the division, then you begin and give the patient something purifying the head, keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterward, the patient is instructed to bend their head backwards, and fire cautery is applied to the back of the head, and two cauterizations are made on the two temples in the same location or one on each temple if the injury is on one side; and strike all the cauterization with a force against all the veins and arteries that are under the skull, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and be careful not to discharge blood, and if you see too much blood flowing out, stop it by your power as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in cutting the cauterization how to stretch it; and sometimes fire-cautery or hot iron is applied under the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	tears of the heart
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the eyes' tears are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or if they flow from the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees it is cold, fleumatic superfluities, then do the cauterization I mentioned at the beginning of this treatise: that is, a cauterization on the head, two cauterizations on the temples, two cauterizations where the eyebrows are under the bones; and if necessary, cauterize wisely above the eyelid with small cauterizations.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	When the tears of the body are within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient four night hawks to drink; afterwards, cut the head of the corpse and make olive oil cauterization or apply a small cautery of olive oil; also, do two cauteries called "clavilis" on the temples, a little under the hair; beware of the artery that you do not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then perform cauterization using this cautery that is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	 Here is its shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to apply two cauteries on the two serpents that are as long as the sorbents themselves; do not leave the hand until the third part of the paper is burned, as I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair which points the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes, the hairs of the eyes are converted into eyelashes and prick the eye, and then a cautery is performed according to two methods: either with fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and become even, then put the patient in a healthy state; afterwards draw a figure on parchment of the eyes similar to the shape of a thistle flower, and mark the beginning of the hairs; then place damp cotton soaked with egg glair and musk oil on the eye, then heat the cautery as shown in this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the figure that you have marked multiple times, let the scabs be burned at that spot; and the signs of the healing process are when you see the papyrus retracted, and the hairs raised at the end of the oil; then lift your hand and leave it for 3 days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed; after that, apply ointment until it heals completely.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs grow again and the papyrus is softened, then start cauterizing on the same spot as before; and if the hairs are curling, cauterize until the papyrus returns to its natural level, and becomes smooth and does not prick the oil with the hairs.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medical cautery is to instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the mirte leaf; then take French soap and quicklime, one of each, and grind them together well; and quickly heat it up, so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the parchment as you did with the mirte leaf, and place the patient's hairs on top of it; and if the patient has pain in only one oil, you should work on just one, and if both oils are affected; and put cotton soaked in egg white under the oil, and hold the patient's head over the medicine and press for a short time whenever the patient feels burning from the medicine, because it burns like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done so for a long time, give the medicine at your shoulder.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the mortification is passed, lift up the wound surface, and if you see the paper lifted as it was lifted by the constraining of fire or incision, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is not like this, then put more medicine on the wound or the medicine has not worked yet, as long as your efforts are equal and your eyes focused; then put cotton soaked in butter until the wounds burn closed, afterward cure the wound with ointment called "diaphinis" and another one until it heals.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if it is necessary for you to be careful about your work, keep far away from the eyes with great care so that no medicine reaches them.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 If the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs prick in the oil, repeat the medicine on that place which has been properly moistened by the paper, as you have done before; afterwards cure it until it is healed; this is the method of the combs made from wormwood:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eye of man is diverse in size and smallness, and according to this your constraints should be applied; and do not deviate from the correct path for the one who practices this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On treating a fistula with cautery.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in a secure position; and hold the patient's head between your hands so it does not move or turn; after that, put soft cotton in an eggshell or under parchment on the oil; afterwards, heat the cautery which is ready; and direct it towards the head as if it were the beak of a falcon, with the cautery also directed; if you see, it should be pointed from one head to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent; but regardless, the one that is directed serves for your purpose.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is opened, drain the pus and dry it; and if it is closed, open it, and pull out the bowel; afterwards put hot cautery on it in form, and hold your hand on the cautery to the part under the oil, so as not to make a mistake; and place the cautery in the fat of the oil and corrode it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you come at the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If that is not the case, repeat the cautery again, and if necessary, leave it for three days; afterwards put damp cotton in butter over it, and cure it with the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days have passed and it is not healed, apply corrosive medicine as long as the bone is exposed; and the king will do according to what comes up in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a way of making a fire cautery which no ancient person spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 For the fistula, cut it open; then put in the camahan substance that is in this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make the amount of one camelot; hold your hand firmly on it and do not move it, so that the molten lead does not run to its side; it is necessary that you place cotton soaked in oil on the patient's wound: the camelot will heat the fistula's opening, and the wound heals miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the fire cautery as we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, then administer oil of roses or bring the fistula to the body heat as is appropriate in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cavities in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there are cavities in lips called "hairs" and also in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat the cavities as we have described in previous sections and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery scalpel of this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it urgently into those cavities until it reaches the font (spring or source); afterwards, treat the area with tar until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess occurs in the root of the throat or the eye, or palate, or the roots of the teeth, after it becomes pus-filled and swells and becomes a fistula; you treat it as we have said in the divisions, but it does not help: then you should have one cautery according to the size of the fistula; after draining or piercing the fistula, hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the font (spring or source) of the fistula, and close the opening with your finger; and do this once or twice, after treating it as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed in this way, it is good; but if not, you must explore the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it is of no use, then put the head of the patient in a warm place; afterwards heat the cautery so that its shape will come as follows: put a cane on the tooth; and put the heated cautery inside quickly, and hold your hand long enough for the patient to feel the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after letting go of your hand, restart the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and hold it there for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the moving tooth is made stationary, the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupting moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	From the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the teeth comes from coldness, or there is cold or fever, and medicines do not work, then there is need for cauterization according to two methods: cauterization by lard (burterapi) and cauterization by fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	The cauterization by lard is performed in this way: take lard from a pig, and the end in an iron or bronze spoon; after that, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a cloth, moisten it with boiled lard, and put it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it cools down; and do this often until its power reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the cotton and cotton moistened in cold lard, put it on the tooth again and put hot iron on it until the fire comes to the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The cautery with fire is such that you take a cane of iron or brass, and it should be thick enough that the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient; then heat the cane, after which the appropriate shape will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cane cools down; do this often, as the pain will be relieved that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And the patient should fill his mouth with good butter in haste for this cautery, and then release it; and this is the shape of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	3. And make the cautery for any part you wish, and according to what you are able; and this is the shape of the rod:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When scrofula is due to cold fluids and is not obedient to medicines, then heat the cautery as follows: have two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side; place the heated cautery on the abscess where it is required, until it reaches the base of the abscess. If the abscess is small, adjust the size of the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days. Put moist cotton soaked in butter over the wound until the pus is gone. Then heal the area with ointments and salves until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The form of the shoulder blade:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 The shape of the shoulder blade: When moisture overcomes the channel of the collarbone and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should be purged first with soluble medicines; afterwards, make a cauterization at the root of the throat, but do not go up to the throat, and only apply a little bit of heat.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterwards, make another cauterization at the junction of the neck with the spine head and let it be the "clavicle" caution as we have the form mentioned earlier; and heal the place until it is healthy.
de la toust	tooth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and illness of the pormon are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or heat, and the disease is ancient, make two cauterizations on the forearm; and one other cautery between the breasts; and let the cauterization that is called "clavile" according to the form mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see, make cauterization by pricking all over the cautery that is called "poins" in the ear disease as the form is described earlier; and let the cauteries be up to 30 or a bit more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After treating the limb as previously stated, let the cautery be at three intervals according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because the cauterization is lighter, because you make them in pairs of two.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Then the patient should be placed on their back and side; then warm the coal that is within the hollow of your left hand; and if the jointure is dislocated inside, heat the iron with these two nerves that are in this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And cauterize the skin until it perforates to the costal cartilage, and the figure of the cautery will appear together with four cauteries; and this is made using the cautery that has three nerves, because the figures of cauterization are called "cauteries"; and these nerves are according to the subtlety of a tendon, and it is the shape of the cautery that has three nerves.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	Sometimes it is sewn up on this one nerve, which is why there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting the cautery on, break it up with silk; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 If it is dislocated above [the joint], which happens little, then do cautery on the thick part of the cautery rod, or many cauteries while pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is reset, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When in the stomach there are coldness and much moisture that increase its complexion, and the catarrh multiplies in him, and in the usual methods of treatment he does not benefit; therefore, the patient should be supine on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 Afterward, the third type of fire cautery is performed under the armpit by a thickness of one finger, throughout the entire cautery, and the second type of cautery outside the two costal areas so that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and there should be enough space between one and the other so they do not touch each other when they turn into pus; and let the cauterization be such that it pricks both parts of the skin, and let the figure of the cauteries be in this form without alignment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form, and he who fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and holding above the stomach at the point according to the quantity that you see there; then cauterize all the cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the healing of the wound is complete, when it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When the liver feels pain from coldness, moisture, and large winds, which are expelled from its natural composition due to superfluidities; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, it does not help him. The patient must be made to lie on his left side; and signs of three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity should be placed on the liver, near the hypochondriac region, where the loins of man come; and there should be a space between each cautery equal to the size of a finger. And the cauterization should be long in length, not too much pressure on all the cautery; and only half the coal should be burned, and the patient should be upright on his feet; and if he cannot, then he should lie down, and stretch out his legs, and lift his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And if your wish is to cauterize these cauteries with the scalpel, and you are subtle and wise in the art, beware that you do not burn entirely the body, for it will scorch all over; and let it not come up to boiling, for the heat is very subtle there, and the wise can see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 If there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know whether it is in the liver's flesh or the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, then it feels madness-like pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this treatment is to be carried out on the patient, it is necessary that the patient lie down on his head; and then press firmly where the abscess is located, and then warm up the cautery which resembles a needle, as shown in its form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And apply the fire cautery until the core is burnt, and come to syphac, as far as it can be pierced; afterwards, cure according to the cure for abscesses until it is healed; and it should not be used this cautery by anyone other than one who has long studied in the art of medicine, and because many times these diseases have been caused by its improper use.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Afterwards it can be boldly operated, and yet I think it is better to wait.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The pleurisy cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones say that for pleurisy, one should perform the cautery with the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, as large and as long as your thumb; moisten it with oil, and heat it up, then cauterize one cautery between the ribcage and neck, and two small cauteries a little below in the area under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth and sixth costal cartilages, sloping downwards a little; and one cautery on the side, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two at the sides of the stomach far from the cautery which is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand too hard, instead do it gently as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And an old man said that no one uses the fire cautery like a plowshare and heats it up and places it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and the pain subsides, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, there is fear or death of the patient now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	For the mouse cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not help, then they suggested four methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 There are several ways to perform the cautery, either three or four, by arranging them according to the length of the mouse, as I described in the treatment of the liver; and do not rush your hand over the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on his back; there is another way to perform the cautery that involves heating the cauter that has two nerves, as we showed in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the tissue that is near the mouse, or the side where the patient's pain comes from, and elevate the swellings you lift the tissue according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After putting the two nerves inflamed in such a way that the other part is pierced, pull the fire cautery out, and thus there will be four openings; if you see, cauterize the entire cautery on three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the treatment when pus has come out for a long time, it is necessary to use the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	And from the dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cautery does not work on dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When the cure is done according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and the treatment does not help at all, then it is necessary to make four cauteries around the abdomen, one above the stomach, one above the liver, one above the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the place of pain; and let the cauterizations be close to the thickness of the skin.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open for a long time to drain pus, do not cease treating the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions (presumably referring to life and health) will be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the fire cautery for the belly is like the cleaver that we have shown before; and for the back, it should be olive-shaped, as has been described earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the feet are swollen in a patient who is edematous (dropical), and filled with yellow fluid, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and dip your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter too deeply, so as not to burn the yellow fluid excessively; and let the cautery be in this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards do two cauteries on both legs at the tip of the scalpel; and let the cauteries be long, one beneath the knee in front and the other outside the leg; and keep the cauterized areas open for a long time to heal, as is necessary; then treat the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	In the treatment of the dislocated shoulder:
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the swelling of the belly comes from coldness and moisture, as the digestive and retentive properties which are in the stomach and intestines are disturbed and cannot be cured by methods of healing; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong symptoms, then do one large cautery on the stomach according to what was said before or fire cauterization of the stomach, around the belly four subtle cauteries, and one small subtle cautery near the navel and two subtle cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each joint, and two small cauterizations on the stomach beneath it, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When hemorrhoids are based or one or more, and are old and filled with thick cold and moist corrupted fluids, and have been treated as we have said in the divisions, it is of no use to do cauteries: III on the spine of the back, that which is completely deflected under the loinbone and triangular, and the cautery below the buttock; and if you think that his stomach is chilled and meat not cooked, and the face swells, then the face receives a large cautery on the stomach as previously said, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with the entire cautery nail; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After healing the shoulder when it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carnivorous disease called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat althelul, if the cautery appears to be similar to a razor, then heat it and apply it all around the althelul wound; leave your hand there so that the cautery comes to the opening of the vein, thus cutting off the blood flow. Do this once or twice, and if there is much althelul, cauterize each spot as we have said; after applying ointments, allow it to heal until it is healed; if you cauterize a large cautery on the skin, it will provide more aid.
de plaie mal curee	From badly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear incision or opening, we will speak about it in its place; this disease can only be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 If a fistula comes, and it is swollen and filled with pus and decayed matter, you should test the whole tent in every way, and be sure that you know the entire tent how much it heals.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After heating the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the size of the tent that has entered, and repeat the cauterization as much as the body requires to burn and decay; once, or II or III, depending on the amount of pus needed; and beware not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and intestine, beware of these places, and do not perform this action outside of a charnu (a surgical instrument), and believe that it is not dangerous; after healing the shoulder when it is healed, if the shoulder is sutured and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the shoulder is healed completely; and if the matter is not removed, know that the bone is broken, and corrupt the bone in its place; and thus as one of those whom we will say in his place.
de la maladie des reins	Of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the loins comes from cold and bloating, and it does not take on female form, then you must apply fire cautery to the kidneys from both sides with the small-headed iron we have mentioned earlier; and if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have 4 cauteries in a line, and they will be more effective.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weakened by cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then apply fire cautery on the part of the bladder located behind it, where the pubic hair begins, one on each side, and each cautery should be as long as your thumb; also make a cautery at the back, if needed; and use the small-headed iron in the shape described earlier.
de la marris	of the marriage
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marriage is cold and moist and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their term is delayed; and when they come, it causes great pain: then it is necessary to apply four cauterizations around the womb, as we have said regarding the bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterization be incision-like, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the itch
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the humors viscous descend towards the pit of the itch, and for this reason it moves away from its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the place of the departure is found if it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the pit of the itch with one cautery resembling a circle, and sign in front of the place around the pit as it turns, so that the pit is within the circle; and let the cauterization be such as when the stomach has been cauterized.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this fire cautery is not present, make four large olive oil cauterizations instead, and let them be as deep as all the others; and let it heal when it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain from the hernia
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the area of the hernia and it is caused by coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured as we have said in the division, but the cure is not effective, and the disease is old; then you must purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills or other good-seeming pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 After that, do fire cautery; and the method of fire cautery is according to two ways: namely, with burning substances, and cauterization by fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Fire cauterization can be done in several ways, one of which is to cauterize on the belly of the hernia in three triangular cauteries according to this form, making a good and deep incision and leaving space between each cautery the size of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped. Sometimes a cauterization is made in the middle on the head of the hernia, for which there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, cauterize at the circular cautery that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the hernia; but do it in such a way that the circles enclose the entire hernia, and all the edges should be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the method for treating sciatica when the pain remains in the loin and does not reach as far as the thigh nor the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 If the pain reaches as far as the thigh and the leg, you should perform cautery where the patient indicates that the pain is located, and the cautery shall be made four fingers above the ankle on the left side, a little bit; it can be a surgical cautery, but the thickness of the coal used must be thin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two fingers or near there, you should cauterize where they feel the pain with three fingers or four on the cautery which is called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a fire cautery with a knife or circular cautery, but be careful in all your cauteries not to let the cautery burn the nerves and large arteries, and not to cause greater damage and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I myself have seen many who made fire cautery on the heel of the foot, and they let it grow so much that the leg was swollen all over, and the toes as well, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a belly solution where he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two places at once, do cautery on one and the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the wise men said in the cautery of the ankle, as follows: make the iron like a small nail or slightly less, and it should be between the ankles or one between the ankles to a distance equal to the size of a nut; and the anvils should be above each part, and they should be shaped like nuts, and have a well-made anvil; this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it turns completely red and boils, then place it on top of the sick person's wound and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with a firebrand. Let it rest for four days, then apply a plaster made of butter, keep the wound open for a long time; after treating with ointment until it heals.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albuhasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly due to the fear of its appearance and those who rarely use it; however, it is one of the good cauterizations, which can be endured, and there where it cauterizes.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The fire cautery of medicine is such that you make the instrument inside hinges in this way, cutting along the edge of the door, and it should be made of iron or steel with a long handle, and on top it should have two prongs, and between each prong the thickness of a finger; and they should be open and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing the hinge-board on the sick person lying on his side, put your hand almost above the hinge-board; after that, throw in between the two circles of hot iron that has been heated by the fire pot for an hour, and let the patient endure the heat and burning from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it burns like biting into flesh, and when the bites have passed, take your hand with the instrument and gently lift the wound edge, and leave it thus for three days, and cover it with butter until the blackish scab is removed; and leave it for three days so that pus can drain out; and this would be the last help after the ointment treatment until it heals.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 If the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, do as you have done in the wound edge: that is how hot water is used, and I have written or explained its method of treatment for medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take alkali and hot live coal, equal amounts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 Have a small hole covered so that the tip of a razor can enter; and pour this pot onto another well-sealed pot, then put alkali and coal and water on top, until there are two layers of powder that you have well stirred with your hand; and leave it like that until the water and steam and smoke or pot evaporate, then take all of that ash, and pour it over the coal and the alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And when it is hot, it is administered for various medical tasks and other cauteries of different members because it does the same work as fire, and if with other medicines that are used to cauterize a wound such as thistle and honey, coal with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galen tells us of a cure in which a nobleman was healed from the pain of the hernia and sciatica, and he praised it much, and said that no other treatment was used, and that he became healthy once when this cure was performed, and he bathed himself as he instructs hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he says to take green litharge in powdered and dry form, grind it well with a little fat, place it on the hernia and the thigh and leg where the pain is felt, and press it; and leave it for 3 hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed, and make him lie down, and the pain will leave completely and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medications unless after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's fat, it helps much; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take linen and beat it with old oil, and place it over the furrow which is between the big toe of the foot and the other one which is called the "fossicle".
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 Afterwards take dried goat's fat and heat it until it becomes charcoal, place it on the linen and leave it until it has been absorbed; then repeat this process again, and do not stop repeating until you believe with your senses that it reaches the bone, and that the pain stops; and this method of cautery is called "cautery of goat's fat".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either by falling or from impact or excessive evacuation, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these cases are worth cauterization, unless it is due to the influx of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary afterwards that the patient be bled with pills or other similar things on the back where the pain is, three marked lines deep, and in each line 5 or more cauteries according to their power and quantity that the patient can bear; and the cautery should be made as the one called "poins"; and if you see, make 4 cauteries or 2 at a medium-sized cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tightened throat when they are lying down, and fear; you will find it in the lower spine at the back and in the appearance that comes upon other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this thing and intend to cure it, cauterize it with the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 The fire cautery increases every part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see, cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointing to two or three lines, and let the tips be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the joint until it is healed as we have said, make sure you do not administer the cautery in the hollow of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in joints is due to moisture that affects every member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which are called "gout" properly, and when it is caused by coldness and medicines cannot cure it, it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the patient sit with their leg bent at the joint, and the cautery should be olive-shaped according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary to prick on the pelvis, make the cauterization with the whole cautery, as they claim "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which happens often, make cauterization on each knee with three or four cauteries on each side, using an olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand too far away that the thickness of the coal is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to the knees and the back, administer the fire cautery as we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains are at the hands, make incisions around the wrists for two lines; and if there is no pain in the fingers, make incisions on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and be mindful of the patient and think about remedies.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you take good care of him and cleanse him with purgation, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	From the cutting of the siphac
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture comes in hernias, and the testicles descend into the inguinal canal and this is new, if you wish to treat it, it must not be masturbated on that day; and it should use things which loosen the belly, so that the hernia descends from the belly; afterwards, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his flank until the testicles are repositioned, and you pull them towards you, and sign of the healing under the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and at every sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in the shape described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it becomes white and exudes blood.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then pull the muscles back to their place; and let the attendant hold his hand so it does not return; and work well on the thighs of the patient, put the cussin and the serjeant on the thighs, and the other on the affected area which holds the hands; then place the cautery on the sign all over your hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not touch the bone the first time, try again until you reach the bone; be careful that the muscles do not jump when you perform the cautery, so as not to burn them; and so that the patient does not die or suffer harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that if you do not reach the bone during the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And the cauteries for children should be subtle according to their size, and the same for adults according to theirs; after three days, cure the wound from the cautery with butter until the burn is removed; after that, use other remedies until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days while the wound is healing well; and it is necessary that his exudations (discharge) be left unattended so that boils do not appear when he gets up to go to rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 After forty days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a good poultice and put it on for another forty days; keep him in bed with good rest, but do not let him work too much or drink and eat too much, nor let him cough too much; if he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I shall say after the treatment of amputation in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen (lit: of the bursting of the belly)
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When roundworms come in other wombs and are recognized, and you see that they no longer grow, you should perform the amputation cautery according to its size, and it should be burned one-third of the thickness; afterwards, you should heal according to what has been said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first mark the location and make a line above the roundworm, and another below, and then place your hand on the entire sharp-pointed cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any member, either from falling or being injured, and that pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not heal it, then you should cauterize with the cautery called "poins," and the cauterizing should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, its virtue, its location for twisting, and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, start another cautery on top of the first one because it is customary for the cautery to move towards the limb that is closest, so you should perform the cauterizing as long as the patient remains unhealed.
de meselerie	When the humors are out of balance due to moisture and heat, and one feels pain or discomfort, it must be purged through purgation. This involves taking a mixture of wormwood, myrtle leaves, and bread soaked in vinegar, which will help to cleanse and cool the body. After this, you should drink a cold water concoction made from crushed ivy, plantain seeds, or other suitable herbs, which will further aid in balancing the humors and alleviating the discomfort.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The cautery is sometimes helpful to a great extent, and equally so the patient who comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 Can you see the patient to perform a fire cautery, ensure that the patient is not in the beginning stages and has been treated as we have described in the division, and does not bleed nor remain; if you fear that corruption will affect the entire patient, then perform V cauterizations on the head: take hold of the head with one hand, and the other toward the front to the end of the hair; and over both temples, and behind the occipital bone; leave your hand in place until the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scorch marks come out from it so that the vapors of the gross humors can escape; then cauterize on the swelling according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease is scattered everywhere, it clearly spreads; therefore, you must cauterize with the cauteries we have mentioned at each point: one cautery in the navel, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the hip and one smaller one, and two on each shoulder; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; beware of nerves that are near the last calcaneum, do not burn them; and sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the wrist, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more you do with fire cautery, the more help it provides and benefits them; and know that the sick do not feel pain from cautery as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it should be great and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find in the ways of iron smithing.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the shoulder with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When a swelling appears in any limb and is cured by medicines, oils, plasters, but it is not healed, then do cautery on the limb according to its size and smallness; and let the cautery be slightly entering into the thick part of the skin; then cure with oil until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And sometimes they make a fire cautery on the hand, foot, and back, at the exit of the nerve that makes the limb motionless, and thus if it is excised the vein; nevertheless no one should interfere with it unless he is knowledgeable about the members and the exits of moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	Of ulcers or sores
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is developed, and the medicine engine has no effect on it, then cauterize with a cautery of about half an inch deep according to the thickness of the skin, until the blister is removed and its color changes; then cure with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from a horse and crane, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	Cure syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a boil begins and you wish to stop it, if you cauterize, do so with the circular fire cautery all around the circumference of the boil.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 Nevertheless the wise say that one should cauterize also in the middle of the boil; but it does not seem good to me because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen once before; a more appropriate thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the fire cautery which is called "circular", as we have said in the discussion on fire cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling which cannot grow
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati", which is slow to heal or because of the excess it causes, or because of the patient's age when he becomes decrepit (meaning very old) and has little blood, or because of the time; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize it with many small cauteries, pricking around it; after that, leave it as it is.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 Then it will hasten to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see that the wound is pierced completely with all the cautery, heat the cautery in this manner:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced through, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels no pain from them in this manner so that the course of the pustule is clear.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the patient has recovered completely.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another kind of disease called "corroding", and it is nothing but an eating away of a limb because it consumes them as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease in a place that can be burned with cautery along with fire, then gently heat the cauteries, both small and large, according to where the disease is; after burning all parts until you reach all the corruption and there remains nothing of it, everything corrupted should be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days and put on the affected areas softened cauteries made with oil until the burns caused by fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the cure of ointments generating heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if you see after three days that healthy char does not come out, it is good; and if not, repeat the fire cautery on the corrupt part of the body.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this purging is sometimes cured with medicinal bleeding instead of fire cautery; but nevertheless fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already said the treatment of medicinal bleeding in its division: take it when needed.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The growing hairs should be allowed to remain long and equal on the feet;
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often happens that in the foot through an opening comes a disease called "close" according to our intention, and it is a large thing swollen which breaks the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cauteries of this disease are according to two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 This is to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 To know fire cautery, heat the iron to a point like a pen of hot coal, made from good iron that can pierce through all sides, and have fine edges; then place it on the nail and rotate your hand around the nail until it reaches the head of the nail; leave it there for three days until it begins to pus; then make a plaster with coarsely ground herbs and oil, and leave the plaster on top of everything all night, and the nails will shrink and be removed from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the wound with healing salve until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 And if it [the shoulder] has been dislocated by going out through the body, and this happens frequently in hands and feet, you should bring forth hot cautery; and it is to be done in this manner: take a cane made of iron or bone, or a pen from a plowshare, and place it on the nail and the tendon [or ligament], which means to burn warts; and place the cane so that it surrounds all around, then put a little hot tar there and hold your hand well, and press your hand as you turn so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot tar penetrating deep down to the root; and let the patient endure for an hour a little bit of the burning of the hot tar; then leave it like this, and it will all fall out with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 As another does afterwards, while you cauterize all those on the body, then treat with ointments that soothe pain.
li cure dou trembler	The cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	For someone who is trembling due to cold or quarter fever or something else, you should perform four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one in the buttock, and one on the stomach with an olive-oil cautery; this will stop the trembling and hasten recovery from the illness.
des pustules puans	pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes, from the body's outside appear baths of pus or boils that come from large, corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 Firstly, when they appear, it is necessary to make a fire-cauterization on each head of the boil: a subtle cautery of mirte stick or one made from the long root of aristoloche, or the cauterizer made from lentil seeds.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear in this way and they cannot grow further, but the excess is broken down from which they come, and they heal; however, it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when an artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often, there is great bleeding from the cut artery that comes out at the wound or incision of an abscess, or during cauterization of a member, and similar things; it is a very serious matter to bleed excessively.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens to anyone, quickly place your thumb on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the blood is calmed beneath your thumb, and no more gout exits; then take olive oil cauteries, both small and large until they are all red; then take .i., either large or small depending on the wound and the location where the arteries flow, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your thumb, and hold the cautery in that position until the blood is coagulated.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps fiercely when you hold your thumb on the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take hastily another one of the cauteries that are by the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is coagulated; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is exposed, and let no other harm come to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be coagulated well if the artery is large, unless this is done by one of the four methods that we have mentioned: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated otherwise, or by tightly binding with thread, or by medicines placed on it which can coagulate blood; and let it be tied and constricted accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers constriction tightly with fabrics or placing hot things on it, or similar things, does not benefit from it unless otherwise.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have medicine present, they should place their finger on the wound as we have said, and stretch it tightly until it is constricted above the wound and the vein; and it should not move but it should be moistened with cold water often so that it becomes very cold, frozen, swollen and constricted; and make inquiries in advance about those who need cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases where fire cautery or burning medicine is required, and we have discussed their causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will proceed with this chapter by the same way because it is easier to understand what follows.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	Furthermore, as I begin this, it is necessary for you, dear child, to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many ways of people come in treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 Those who are so self-confident with their disease that they die easily due to the foolishness that comes from their illness and its great severity should be feared.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And among these there are those who will offer you advice, saying "wait, I am cured," but the illness is insidious.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not act rashly but wisely from that which you are certain of, and from that which you have learned; and use diagnosis and indication in treatments of your patients so that health may be achieved; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, our Lord grants you good understanding and righteousness; if you wish to inspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, come.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have divided this chapter for your convenience, speaking one topic at a time, as the cauteries were previously described from head to feet because you will find it easier to understand what you need in this manner.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of water.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes in children during childbirth and when the head of the child is forced too hard; sometimes it occurs for reasons unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in adults, except for children; and all those that I have seen hastened towards death; and because of this, it seems to me that it would be worth lessening the work in some treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have seen one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew larger every day until it could no longer support it; and the moisture gathered under the skull bone between the brain and the skull; and if this moisture is under the skull and the abscesses are small, you should make a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture can flow out; and here is the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see the joints at the head of each part open up when you press it from within with your hand, and this does not respond: then you must make four incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after incision, remove all moisture from it.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 And after the incision, draw out linens and powders, and put vinegar and oil on it, leave it so until the fifth day; then undo it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, keep the swelling reduced, and let the patient eat dry meat of parched moisture as long as the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look where the abscess is larger, and gather the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes to the right, and sometimes to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut there where the abscess is open, and drain the pus; do as you can, and watch that you do not cut an artery; and let a vein bleed, so that the patient dies a natural death and from the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of scrofula (a chronic disease affecting the lymph nodes, often in the neck)
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "cataract" occurs in the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old, and the medicine's cure does not help at all, then the last cure is the cautery with which they will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Therefore, when you wish to cover it, let the patient bend back his head; afterwards rub the area with a dry cloth harshly until the arteries appear, then grasp the patient's neck with the entire cloth; then look where the veins are biting, and the ears of both sides are behind them, and they are brought together; then mark the places to be cut, then take a sharp spatula of two parts, and cut each one until the incision reaches the bone, and this should be wide at the base.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it (the artery), push the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting through as two fingers apart.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it jumps up continuously without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And if the artery does not open by itself, it is necessary that you measure the space of three fingers, then carefully make an incision up to the bone; and the amount of blood that needs to be removed is approximately 6 cubic centimeters, and possibly a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then examine the wound: if it remains above the bone pointlessly, if the cauterized abscess does not come, then hold the wound closed and tied, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the old migraine comes and the acute catarrh, because of moisture from tears and heat in temples and aged senility, accompanied by similar things, and it is treated with methods of medicine, but none of it helps him; then we must open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient bares his temples hair, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, as it opens well by its beating, and can be easily located except for some very cold men; and if it is located, the patient holds his neck with some cloths, then rubs the place with a harsh cloth, and anoints the place with warm water until the artery appears manifestly; then takes the spatula that has this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then, lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then pull it up to the pulleys, and carefully remove all the tissue that is underneath from each side; and if the artery is thin, turn it to the point of the scissors, then cut off that part according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not cut, it will not heal completely in all places.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from the 7th vein, up to the 4th; and if the artery is large, it must be tied with a double thick silk thread so that pus does not come before the suturing of the wound, and bleeding comes; then cut away the excess that is between the two ligaments in the same hour, and if you see, cauterize the wound with the cautery tool up to the bone until the hairs are cut off; this is the moving operation, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauteries are aid to finish moisters (a term for boils or abscesses): therefore it is a greater help to those with moisters.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Therefore, for the extraction of arteries it is necessary that one fill the place with old cotton and put on a well-made dressing; and when you pull them out, cure them with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and bandages, until they are healed; and if the artery breaks as much as you work, hurry to cover it with cauterization, or use vitriol and strain your hand so that the blood is coagulated; and if you don't have this available, put your finger on the place for a while until it becomes numb, then rub the place with cold water and keep straining as necessary; and those that are moving (referring to the broken arteries) and easier to extract should be cauterized with this sharp cautery of 2 parts, but they should be thick enough to hold their heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the straw is too thin, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives one thickness of a finger, and when you have pressed down on them for three inches, and you heat the iron hot enough so that it reaches the bone, and strike the vein in three inches; and they should be separated by two fingers because it is not always welded to this cautery altogether; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the eyes are flowing down from veins that are above the testicle of the head and no medicine cure helps it, and you see the patient wrinkle his face, and his forehead trembles like with chills; and if they are tender and moist so that the hair of the scrotum falls out, and the scrotum is inflamed, and burned by the flow of tears, this requires this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And it was called by the ancients "contused cure", and you must do this to the patient who has this disease on his forehead; then make three cuts equally along the length of his forehead; and one of the cuts should be like if you were to move the forehead downwards, from top to bottom until the eyebrows, and the other two should be on the cheeks above the eyebrows, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the jaws, and each wound should be the size of three fingers joined together; and prepare a piece of sponge and a lot of cloth for wiping the blood, then insert the sharp lancet two parts of its length as shown here:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	The incision is from the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the cartilage that is between the two cuts right up to the bone, then continue from the middle incision to the other second, and then pull out this spur.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert into the first cut the instrument called "culter," which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other, and its shape is:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And make the cutting blade pointed towards the chest cavity, and the cut should be soft towards the bone, and push it until it comes to the midline incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And take all the vessels that descend from the head towards the eyes until the incision is continuous up to where it opens the chest cavity, and then continue in the midline incision until reaching the other side; and then equalize the blood, and press the leash for the blood drawn; then put a piece of old cotton in each incision, and put moist dressings on it made with wine, oil, and alum, and make sure that no pus comes; on the third day, untie the ligature, and apply a large amount of cold linen, then apply ointment with basilicon and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it heals.
dou reume des eulz	The root of the hairs
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Whenever an acute catarrh comes, it usually affects the thin and small hairs, impairing vision, burning paper, hair falling out, and headaches with pain at the root; and the patients cough; therefore, recognize these signs that those materials and this catarrh do not come from anywhere else but many veins, and the medication used to cure it should be this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And you must tell the patient to recline their head, then make a large incision behind the head and another wide one at the back of the neck.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 And start from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go up to the bone; and distance your hand from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge; then press between the two edges of the incision and put old cotton, and thread; then lay damp linen on top, and guard against hot abscess; when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until char begins to grow, then treat with things drying out char.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flower and 4 parts of colophony, and make a plaster with them; administer it to these wounds as an ointment to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Make a tube of silver or lead, narrow at one small opening and with a lid for distillation; use an instrument of lead well made for this purpose; if you wish to apply it, wrap a small rafer around the tip with cotton; pour your oil or juice, and any medicine of yours into the tube; place the tube in the ear; push the rafer into the cotton completely; press gently until the oil distills or overflows from the ear; heat the distillation with fire as one would distill it in the ear; ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be good.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, animals, stones or similar things like iron; seeds, beans, peas; or something flowing like water and ashes and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls into the ear bone (or any other way that does not align with the ear), does not fit in the ear, or does not grow within the ear, put the ear on a hot surface.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see the bone, apply a little purple oil or camphor oil, then perform extraction; and have it vomit of condishions, and stop up the nostrils when vomiting comes, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and hold it above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Often, there is farting with this treatment; and if it does not fart, perform extraction with subtle tweezers, which is as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it does not come pus with the tweezers, introduce extraction with a thin wire of double curvature; and if it does not come out by this method, make a cane of beeswax and thrust the head of the cane or the opening of the ear strongly, stop up that which is around the cane with soft wax so that the pus cannot enter with the cane; then draw it out forcefully, for often times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take bird's glue of whatever kind you find, and put on some instrument pointed for this purpose, and put a little cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and draw it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not come out with all the things we have mentioned, then quickly make an abscess incision in the ear where pus comes, and spasm. The manner of the incision is to first make the patient purge himself from the cephalic sinuses, and draw blood according to the measure of its potency, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or flesh depending; and make the incision like the moon, so that you come to the stone, then remove it as much as possible, and quickly suck out the pus into your mouth; and heal it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is an abscess that swells and inflames, administer extraction; and if it cannot be drained, administer a thin, soft spatula according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 And make an incision of that grain (of the bone).
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not do this when you think the grain is moist because of ear moisture, until you have made many cuts; then extract it with subtle tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In the ear, therefore, when water falls, it is necessary for the patient to use eardrops first and then stuff the ear with a large cotton ball.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let it lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it jumps out because of this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If it doesn't jump out, take many small and thin/light pebbles according to the size of your finger and heat them slightly in fire; then put the patient on one side of their ear and support the other with another pebble from the other side; then place a third pebble on the pebble that is in the ear; and do not stop striking pebble against pebble until the water completely comes out, and it will jump out entirely; and if you see, take a piece of thread, tie one end to one of the pebbles and hold the other end, then heat the other pebble with fire until the thread becomes hot; then repeat this process with more pieces of thread until all the water comes out, as we have said in the stone section.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of a small animal, such as fleas and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large and can be felt, bring the extraction tool with tweezers; and this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the removal of worms in the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and treating with distillations, and the cure does not help, then you must look at the ear in the sun: if any worms appear, take them out with fine tweezers; if none appear, take the thread of this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And push the thinner head of the cane into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient has, then forcefully follow the entire cane; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 If they do not come out, stop the cane with cotton as I have said in the piercing; and if they do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven for expelling worms, and you will find them where to treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this equipment, it is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make a tube of silver or lead, narrow at one small opening and with a lid for distillation; and use an instrument of lead well made for this purpose, and if you wish to apply it, wrap a small rafer around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and any medicine of yours into the tube, and place the tube in the ear; then push the rafer into the cotton completely, and press gently until the oil distills or overflows from the ear; and the patient will smell it, and the distillation should be heated with fire just as one would distill it in the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Make a tube of silver or lead, narrow at one small opening and with a lid for distillation; use an instrument of lead well made for this purpose; if you wish to apply it, wrap a small rafer around the tip with cotton; pour your oil or juice, and any medicine of yours into the tube; place the tube in the ear; push the rafer into the cotton completely; press gently until the oil distills or overflows from the ear; heat the distillation with fire as one would distill it in the ear; ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be good.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens with adults due to ear infection or pus inside the ear, and this ear infection sometimes penetrates fully into the ear if it cannot be seen; and sometimes one side of the perforation heals, and this can be easily observed.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, if the illness comes on suddenly and cannot be seen, it is a grave issue in many ways, and in such cases you must put the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the inflammation clearly, then open it entirely with this spatula as shown in the figure.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be sharp and cutting in front and behind, so that it does not prick the ear; if the inflammation is of soft flesh or corns on the ear, then hold fine tweezers, and gently press until all the soft tissue is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the opilation (a foreign body) is completely in the ear, take a fine razor and heat it slightly with fire, then put it in the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If the patient experiences pain due to a foreign body in the ear, pierce it gently and ensure not to injure the nerve of the ear; then put a tube according to the size of the opening into the ear canal, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, take a linen cloth and soak it in rose oil, and powder over vitriol (which is broken); if you see the ear swelling, then pull out the first linen cloth and insert another linen cloth soaked in rosin oil and beeswax, until the swelling disappears; then heal it until it heals completely.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If there comes discharge of blood, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the blood discharge which are either distillations or cauterization.
de la char des papieres	of paper pulp
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This remedy is brought on paper for the eyes when they are moist and dry; it is necessary that you stretch them with tweezers and forceps, and strike the root of it with a spatula; then place vitriol powder on it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	If it is not removed by the remedy, then cauterize it with the subtle cautionery lenticulaire, and cauterize again after the incision heals; and many times they will heal again, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned away and do not return.
de la gresle	from the hailstone
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Often, in paper, there come things that seem like gravel in their form and hardness, and because of this, the disease is called 'grain', which is a gathering of large moisture in the paper above and below; the remedies are as follows: keep watch if the grain softens on both sides, and it is easy to know; then make an incision, followed by gently peeling off each side, then take them with tweezers and squeeze.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot cover it with a patch by pricking a bit of paper, let nothing worry the patient; and if the wound is large, bind it up with a stitch, and let it heal until it is healed; and if it is small, do not apply force because the salve will soon restore it and irritate the skin.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	If the hail is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper and take hold of the hail with pincers, squeeze and press it from both sides; if the paper moves away due to the incision, it does not harm; when the hail is squeezed, apply oil of salty water, and cure the affected area until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the hails
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 The ointment called Exina is anointed on the papers above, and it happens more often with children than adults, causing their eyes to water greatly and they are unable to look at the light of the sun due to tears hastening towards their eyes; therefore, they lie down on their faces immediately, sleep, and their wet papers cover their eyelids that have been covered with the ointment which opens in oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of work is that the patient places their head on the healthy side; then take one linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exinach contained in each part, then place it on top; and press with your fingers from one side and another, so that the exinach is collected within the circle; then make a small incision in the middle of the moisture using a pointed spatula and not larger than the wound made during vein opening; and cut through the skin until you see the exinach; and in various positions, exinach comes out from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white grease.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take hold of a piece of coarse cloth between your hands and turn your hand to the left and right until it is spread out; and ensure that you do not push in the incision, that you do not reach the oil, that you do not pierce it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exit opening does not open at the beginning of the cut, lift up the cut slightly; then stretch it as we have said, then wet cloths in water and oil, and place them on it, and hold them with straps.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And for such men who break whey and place it on top to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal him until he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the joint becomes an abscess that is hot, then heal it with poultices soothing until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper lice are born with hair unlike nature and grow, they harm the eyes and bring on various diseases such as persistent tears and softening of the paper lice, until it is a cause of their destruction; and the cure is in four ways: either by cautery with fire, or by medicine for ague as mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and this can be done by incision and stitching or by caustic, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your healthy side, then turn the paper louse from oil with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, push an awl through one filament of the paper louse from its margin where the hair grows or protrudes from those hairs, and pull one filament above the entire paper, then shave the area beneath the paper where the hair is located, from the large tear to the small one; then extract one filament, and place a small tent of cotton and wool underneath the paper where the figure of the hook will be, then mark on the paper a figure like a mirte thorn, but it must be according to the quantity that you see will raise the paper which is prescribed for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And for those who need a large amount of paper (softened), they should apply it entirely over the two lines you have drawn, starting from the large blister up to the small; and one of the incisions should be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the onion in one of the two angles of the key, then peel off all the skin; then bring together the two edges with a stitch using a needle and fine linen thread, squeeze out the blood, and add glue to the excess threads at both corners as necessary; if you wish to do this, but if not, leave the stitch and threads for three or four days; then heal the wound without stitches with drying and constricting agents, since the paper relieves the wound and holds it together, but the stitches are rotten (as they say), and this is labor without fear; and in another way: you should sign the paper with a shape like that of the holly leaf, as we have counted, with three incisions in the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then make it even on top of the small powers according to the following form:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the thing is not even, take a needle with thread, and push it through the figure; then put the other end of the thread out of the large hole, and the second end out of the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin as you have described, then sew together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments; and sometimes the hair of the paper becomes converted: then you must use what we have said for the incision; but sewing in one and the other is more skillful.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of canine wounds is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and place it within according to what I have said, and then make two sacks by hand, and two thin strings as long as the paper and the thickness of the spatula; and tie the four corners of the sacks with the strings; then assemble the two sacks gently on top of the oil-soaked paper, and tie the two sacks from the four corners to form a knot; leave it for some days, and the skin that is tied will die, rot, and turn black, until it falls off.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it takes a long time [to heal], if it is struck with force, then cure it until it is healthy; and when the wound heals over, and the paper is lifted, and the hairs will not grow; and this is the form of the second canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Take a fine needle and attach one thread of silk, then assemble the heads (of the dogs) carefully and put them together gently, and let the length of the threads be one palm; then attach another fine thread of silk briefly, and sew the heads; then place the patient's head in your healthy hand and expose the work to the sun so that it is clear, because this is a subtle and small work; then insert the needle all along the chase (stitch) in the root of the hair adjacent, and make it pierce through the paper as soon as possible until you pull it over the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the chase, and insert the hair into the chase if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out of the chase with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the stitch is treated and the hairs do not come out, then you will pull the stitch down to the thread that you have arranged, until the stitch comes out of the wound and you see it with the eye; then you will pull the stitch and the thread, and close the eye and let it rest for two or three days, until the hair adheres in its place and the flesh grows over; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long natural hair, and let it grow with that which you left, until it is elongated and then cut it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the corruption of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease which is called "alecraty" or the boils come in the oil, it comes in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or by cutting, or by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And the method of work in it is that you cut through that suture, separate the lips of it, put threads of linen inside and tie it until it heals; and it is not suitable to use drying and restricting substances in the treatment of it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 If you do this, the disease worsens more than before; but in cases of softening things, such as fenugreek; and the broth of water or broth and flax seed should be cooked, and immediately dissolve alkali in any oil, and wrap it in a cloth, and apply it to that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the essence of your treatment is that you must take care not to suture it in the same way as it was before; these operations that we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease and are not effective unless they change the form from what it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	the pus that comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cauterizations and similar things; and the way of work in this is that you take a needle, with which it has double thread, and pierce through the flesh, so that the threads come out on both sides of the flesh; then lift the flesh up to the full length of the needle, and strike with the spatula wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the paper figure returns as it should, that's good; if not, take the rasp and place it in the fissure, turn the paper, and make two fissures where the costal part of the paper is inside; and let the edges of the two fissures be the angles of the incision you made, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure will be like the figure of a letter with no "Greek"; then remove that cartilage, according to the thickness where its sides are angled under the paper; then adjust the two separated parts, and sew them together with linen thread; then apply the medicine for softening, and bandages, until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, then you must make a flat incision under the hairs of the paper, as described above; then separate between the two sides of a tent, as I have said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the disease, because it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare all kinds of instruments with every means possible to make the shape return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what work and tools are required in different positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	quickly of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture occurs in the hands of men in such a manner that the paper is sealed with white oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must push the tip of a razor blade beneath the paper, and lift it up; hold it with pliers until you reach the point where the spatula is subtle, which should not be too sharp or too rough, so that the patient does not suffer from the sharp spatula piercing the oil; and make your incision, from which you scrape the assembled tissue, gently, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and heal the entire assembled tissue, and sometimes wash it with vinegar and warm water, and let it dry; then place a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and place moistened wool on top of the oil abundantly in egg white; and after three days use warm water and healing substances until it heals.
de l’ungle de l’oil	the tip of a razor blade
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail has two types: one is nerve-like and resembles a hard callus, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles white frozen mucus, which when touched with iron and cooked in pliers, does not melt; and both types start near the large tear and grow gradually until they cover the entire eye and light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient places their head in your hand, then you pull out the hairs; dip the paper into water, then take the nail with small pliers and place it upwards; then take a needle, put a horse hair or ox hair or cow hair and a strong thread on it, double the point of the needle slightly and pierce through the nail, poke all the way through with the needle, tie the nail with a thread and place it upwards, and scrape off the rest of the skin around the nail's base, then chop the remaining part in the root of the armpit to all the subtle fatty tissue and small nerves, leaving the natural flesh or armpit as usual; and sometimes the nail is placed only at the onyx, and with thread, as we have said; then scrape off all the fatty tissue around it, which is shaped like this:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the fatty tissue does not touch the skin and break it, and that the artery is not pierced; and after the incision pour oil a little bit of boiled butter, and with lard make a poultice, and leave it until the next day; then heal it as necessary until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	If the nail is not nerveous and you cannot pierce it with the needle, and the onions cannot enter, this condition of the nail is often healed with medicines; and they grow as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, open the oil of the patient, and take a piece of the fatty tissue sharp according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And grind the nail gently above it, and if you see that it does not diminish at all and the reason follows, then distill from your mouth into the collyrium oil made of litarge and red collyrium powder and boiled, and instill the oil until the next day; then continue the other work according to this same procedure, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing contradicts in the oil, as in an abscess, then milk it, and first treat the abscess with heat until it is healthy, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid harms the oil greatly, suspend it to the onion stalk, and cut off a small part so that tears do not come out from it; then distill in the red collyrium oil made of litarge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows over the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 For some men, a red char (pustule) sometimes appears on the nail and covers the nail bed and adheres to the paper and turns to pus, and resembles a rose bud; and the procedure is such that the patient holds their head in place, then opens the nails, and all of that pustule corresponds to the surrounding areas, and hold it in place with force; then strike the first pustule, and continue striking it with the razor until the end, and be careful not to nick the oil at the procedure; and let the incision be made with a spatula as we have said in the incision of the nail bed and small instruments similar to those used for removing the pulp, as the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is completed and all the pustule is removed, use oil of calendula or break red colander oil or similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton with egg white on top of the oil to ensure that it stays clean; and if anything remains, and the wound becomes inflamed, and you doubt that it is clean, leave the oil and cure the wound with things soothing the inflammation; then return to your procedure until it is healed, and thus do for all pustules treated in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, it is necessary that you lighten the treatment of each weak place by nature's way; and for the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not push your hand into any of these works until you see that this member can endure that work.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Red veins that are covered by oil become visible and they make their work (the task/affliction) evident and weaken the oil every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Therefore, it is necessary that at the first sight of the oil (sebel), you notice if there is any other disease besides sebel; then treat the sebel in this manner: instruct the patient to lean their head on your side, then press those veins all along the length according to your wisdom, and make the incisions subtle and double as shown in this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And may there be two openings in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then may the openings be skillfully made subtle, and draw out the blood hour after another, until you see the veins move away from the oil; and ensure that you do not pierce the oil with the tips of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so as not to burn except the veins; and when you have done this, if distill into the oily colander green and red for correcting those that remain blocked.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, make a plaster on the oil with things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and is certain of an abscess healed, then resume according to this manner as long as it is healthy; and this is the form of force:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula from oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The sore named "fistula": when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not cured, there is a trick in it that you cut above the abscess where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, you should use the tool described here; it is called "sharp head," and it should be made of iron one inch thick, and pointed like a chisel as shown in the following form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it upon the bone that is corrupted, then turn it between your thumbs and press your hand slightly until you know that the corruption has been restored; do this once, then restore the joint with medicinal leeches.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the joint is sutured and there is no pus present, and the body of the wound remains in this state for 40 days without reopening or becoming abscessed, and no bad accident occurs (it is healthy); if not, then there is no other means but to return the fistula (the hole) to its original place according to this form: it is necessary that you make an incision in the bone for a second time with iron, and by hot medicines, and when it is exposed as shown here, take the firebrand according to this form; the head of the iron should be at three angles, and the shaft should be shortened up to the head as you can see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place it on the bone of the socket, and move your hand away from the oil hole, then turn the whole drill until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it if they hold their hand on their neck; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have instructed, and when the flesh hardens and the joint is strengthened, the matter goes to the neck; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the flow of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are completely open and there is no need to disturb the ship, neither reduction nor increase, you must hold the patient; then clean it, then apply poultices or ointments made of herbs without iron, then put oil (made from) acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strap it with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, fold each one four times, and then place one on top of another according to the amount that the eyes need; then strain it through a strong binding, and renew the poultices to heal without iron; then remove the poultices and leave the strained oil for a day and night, and if the liniment softens, you must tighten it strongly; then remove the linen after a day and night, and if you see the oil healing, that's good; if not; then renew the linctus and the cloths and the linen and the poultices until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The breaking of a rotten cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the ruptured eye, it opens, and paper-like substances, like grains of resin, come out and are frightening to see; then, if you cover it, the treatment is such that you push a needle into the root of the affected part from below up to above, then push another needle with double thread from the edge of the wound; and make it pierce, leaving the first needle as it is; then hold the eye of the double thread and bind a part of the eyeball around it tightly, then remove the needle and put soft woolen oil soaked in egg on it; and leave it until the threads stick with the eyeball, then cure the oil with comforting substances until the wound heals; and sometimes the wound is held closed by the eyeball itself, each part of a circular piece of fabric, until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear large, pierce them with a thin spatula that comes from the oil, correct the moisture and clean the eyes, and insert something immediately; then remove it when it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the oil bowl
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease called "alcunnati" is not far from a swelling in the oil that resembles an abscess, but it is not an abscess; and the manner of its appearance in the work is such that you make the patient sit on a chair arranged upright, then take hold of the head between both hands and turn it until you see the swelling come up towards your eyes; then it must be lanced, and do not drain the fluid and clear away the light, and let the patient see things as they are accustomed; and if it does not drain down, know that it is an abscess, and if the emptying of the swelling is not arranged as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the thin spatula and place it on the corneal toe membrane and the cornea, as long as the bladder protrudes; when it is issued, distill into the hot sharp oil mixed with honey, or hot oil boiled with fenugreek and honey. Then cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	waters of oil (literally: "of the oil")
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have the resemblance of eyes in the division, and what is required for piercing; if it works according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit crossed between your hands, away from light because of the sun, and hold the oil tight and very firmly; then put the paper with the oil in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if they are on the right; then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your left hand if they are on the right; then put the tip of the instrument under the cornea by the thickness of a nail in that part of the oil at the smaller tear duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" skillfully, and hold your hand firmly until it penetrates the oil, and feel that almagda enters the empty space; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda should be at the full length of the measurement of the distance from the eyelid to the end of the black part; and this is the cornea of the oil; then you will see the bone in the paper due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, and afterwards put the instrument up to the place where the water is, then press down along another path.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 The patient should now press down on it (the shoulder), so he sees the instrument before him in its oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After a short rest, press down again on it (the shoulder), and if the first way goes back in place, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not go back up, gently rotate your hand around it; then press down a little more on the gem-oil and draw out the oil from inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then put on it (the shoulder) a cloth or wool soaked in rose oil and egg oil, and bind it with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, and those of our time, place on top a mixture made with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	If the oil cannot enter due to its hardness, as there are some men who have too hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is shaped like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And therefore pierce the conjunction only, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then apply alum, as we have said; and when completing the work, arrange the patient on his back in a dark place; and he should be prevented from all movements, and take light foods, and neither move his head to the right or left, and he should be bound according to his disposition for three days; then release him in the same dark place, and test his vision, and let him see some things, and then rebind him for seven days; and you should not do this during the time of treatment or after cutting, but you should loosen it, because the pain increases quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If an abscess appears, let it be lanced before the seventh day, and direct the one who soothes the abscess; and when it is eased, let [the patient] lie down and place gold on his eye for covering any day, and remain in that dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 Then he should leave the house little by little, and return to his usual condition; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his land everyone eats almagda (a type of food), causing the water to come out, but I never saw anyone do it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the resemblances of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see them; and they are properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the head of oxen of this same subtlety shall have four corners pointing.
de la char sor le neis	On the flesh over the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 Sometimes, various types of cysts are born, which resemble scorpions in size; and if there are such cysts or the cyst is inflamed with a dark color, and if the cyst has a soft bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In that case of the soft and not hard cartilage, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils, and pour the onion juice into those cartilages, and draw it out; then take hold of what you can support with the sharp thin spatula on one side, until you know that the cartilage is completely dislocated.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains that cannot be covered, you should burn it all with subtle and light instruments, so nothing remains; and if an abscess or pus sacks appear, give aid as needed; and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the charred matter is removed, then pour in oil, vinegar or cold water.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If it does not open and moisture arrives up to the palace, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not perforate as needed, know that there is cartilage grown in the bone above, at which point the tool will not come; then you should put a piece of flax thread, fairly thick and wet with our hands, between each stitch and space that is necessary; and insert the sick person's cheeks through the flax thread as far as their power allows, and pull while smelling until it comes out through the nose; and children in school often do this, and it is easy for him who wants to do it; then hold the first head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other while we are the ones who are pulling the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do this as you know that their flesh has been corrupted, draw out the pus, cleanse the wound, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment, then put it back in place as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has rotted all that remains of the flesh; and then place a plank splint on it for any number of days until it is healed, and if drying medicines are needed, use them; this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, as one distills oils and medicines in the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or lead, resembling an open lantern, and you should lead it as such; if you see, make it closed, and let the instruments be filled for purging the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	On the flesh over the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the head of the neck and grows larger until it can be seen with the eye; and because of this, you must cut it at the beginning and remove all of it, then place the fire cautery or burning medicine on it; and if it is not treated immediately when it becomes large, if it is hard, red, poor in sensation: do not touch it with iron as it is an enlarged abscess, because whenever it is touched even once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch and not hard, you can cover it and treat it with fear. Cure the area around it with drying and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when swelling comes in one of these cartilage joints, it is of little use for most men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, if this occurs to anyone, look to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then align the two lips to a stitch, then cure it until it heals; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, you must cauterize all parts of them where they are raw until they heal, then align the two lips to a stitch, bind it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood powder and ground incense on it; and place some plaster of strong or another plaster over the powders and leave it until it dries, then cure it with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of stitching is that you align the swelling: either with needles, as we have said in the belly stitch; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	For men, it happens within the lips that an abscess occurs hard as grains of wheat, either smaller or larger; then you must turn the lips and cut open each side, take with tweezers and strike in each part; then apply the leeve of vitriol powder over the incision until the wound is cauterized; and then soothe the wound with dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	of the chin
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a swelling arises on the chin called "albulus"; you must hold it with tweezers and strike at its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow; then apply vitriol powder or other drying powders over the wound, and if the swelling returns after the incision, which often happens, strike it again and cauterize it; it does not return again after cauterization; these are the shapes of the instruments for covering.
des sordens	of sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes sores are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh scabs; and sometimes the teeth become black and yellowish and decay, as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; you must make the patient sit in your hands, his head on your lap, and clean the teeth or scabs that are visible, until nothing remains; and in this way do with the blackness and greenness, and yellowing and other spots, as long as they are cleansed; and if one removes what is at the root first, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and the third, as long as you have everything cleaned; and know that the teeth require different types of instruments to clean, according to the work that the barber demonstrates, because the razor with which one cleans between the teeth has other forms than that with which one cleans the root; and these forms and others should be provided for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you cure the tooth of its pain, it is necessary to delay drawing out as much as possible, for it should not be done at all; because this is a very high substance up until there is no excuse to shave.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Therefore, when the patient is forced to draw teeth, you must be certain about the pulling tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Many times the patient suffers and believes it is a toothache, and draws the good tooth; but the pain does not go away as long as the evil remains, for we have seen this happen with saints; and when you are sure of the dying tooth, then it is necessary that you gouge around the tooth completely. Use a strong forceps to protect the gum from all sides; then move it to your hand or fine pliers at the first grip and grip, until it is well loosened; then tighten the pliers; and hold the patient's head in your lap so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After straightening the tooth correctly to break it, if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and gently push it in from each side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if the tooth is pierced and eaten, it is necessary that you fill it with bandages where the perforations are; and if you compress it gently with pliers, so as not to break while compressing; and it is very important to work skillfully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And be careful not to break it, and leave a part behind, and the pain for the patient will return from the root even greater.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And be careful not to do as the ignorant lords often do, who in their haste and recklessness sometimes break a chariot, and do not bring about what we have described; but sometimes they cause this great disease due to the roots that remain or because the chariot is broken, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is removed, wash the area with wine or oil and lard; and if bleeding comes out, which often happens, use vitriol powder; and if it does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, with which you mute the teeth first, should be long points and large handles, so that they do not bend as you draw the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be large enough that they do not bend when drawing the tooth and made of good iron, and be pointed to hold the tooth in place.
de la racine des dens	of the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains drawn out, you must put soft cotton moistened with butter on it for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 until the limbs are smoothed, then insert the pliers called "algefri", by which the shoulder seems like a beak; and inside them make as if it were a file and this is its shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these tongs, you must peel back the skin entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as a palindrome, in its place.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	It should be thick and sturdy so as not to break, and if the root pops out with these tools, that is good; if it does not, help with all the instruments, as their forms are listed below.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses the instrument with two prongs, its form is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments that are in front of the teeth, for this tool appears to be large pincers. Here is its shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this tool should not break, and know that many tools are used for teeth; also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters discover by themselves their instrument according to what their craft and illness require, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach an instrument because of the variety of cases, and if it breaks a chariot or another bone that it can, if it seeks the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, here is its shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And should be large and firm to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can hold and remove; then restore the joint with appropriate medicines, and if there is pus in the bone and it is small, grind everything with this tool:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth do not appear according to natural form and are misshapen, especially in women who have not yet borne children, you should know that if the tooth is impacted after the dent (wisdom tooth) and is not properly aligned, it cannot be corrected: then remove it; and if it is near the dent, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, made of sharp iron at the end, and remove it.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the handle of the forceps should be used gently for many days due to the hardness of the tooth and because you do not move the others, and if it is possible, file it down with a small file in the shape as shown here:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is the same as the file used to make needles; and file the tooth gently for many days, so that it does not move too much when it grows; then plane it flat at the end with any rasp, and if the tooth is excessively sharp and bites the tongue, you must file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth fall out.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the teeth are loosened, either by percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot press on it so that he eats without chattering, and you have cured them with constricting medicines, but this is of no use; then they must be held back with a gold thread, for silver threads become green and rot, but gold does not change; and the thread should be medium-sized neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth aligned, take the thread and place it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the shoulder between the separated teeth, if there is one or more, until you see clearly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue covering until the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and skillfully, so that it does not move; and tie your knot at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then sew the head of the shoulder with thread using pincers, and assemble them and place it between the healthy teeth, making sure not to pierce the tongue; then keep it in this position as tight as it can remain without dislocating. If it dislocates or the stitches come undone, tighten with another thread; if it remains in place for a while and serves thus for its entire duration, this is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth and the two molars, as you can see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, place it back in its socket, freshly and as we have said; and do not interfere if one is not skilled and patient, and sometimes a tooth-shaped bone of an animal is used, and placed in the place where it is missing, and tie it as we have said, and let it stay for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 There are times when a ligament comes under the tongue or is born in this way, or by accident due to a sutured wound; and the operation is such that you open the mouth of the patient, hold his head still, and pull the tongue aside. Then sew the nerve ligament wide enough for the tongue to be dislocated from its place, if there is hardness or knot, which is due to a wound being sutured; in this case, break it with an unguis and sew it wide open; make sure that the incision is not too deep, because there is an artery below it; when you have finished, raise the leg from cold water and ash, then put a linen tent under the tongue; tighten it each night so the leg cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And if blood flow comes out, put vitriol powder on it; and if pus flows from it, cauterize it with the slow-burning cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat it with another cure until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see it of small color or black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a cancer; and if it is declining towards white and there is moisture, throw the onion, and cut it with a thin spatula from both sides; and if it turns black at your procedure, apply vitriol powder until it is burnt, then return to your procedure until you pull out all of it; then lift some lard oil and linen, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	Abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Sometimes a boil called "godath" comes into the throat, which are properly called two almonds. When you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also because of the discharge of blood; but let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will cut it open or it would burst by itself; and if it is of white color again, and the root is thin, prepare the instrument for covering, but first check if the abscess is cooled and calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his shoulders should be in alignment, and open his mouth and take hold of him by the sergeant between his hands, and press the tongue down with all the instrument as described; it is made of silver or fine iron like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	If you press the tongue with the entire instrument and see the abscess, take a hook and pierce it into the almond, and pull it out above as much as possible; and pull any cloth away from it, then cover it with the instrument, as described here, which resembles something forceful; and although the head may be curved and one end to another, they are sharp, and made of iron or copper:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, hold it with pliers of this shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And if you do not have this instrument present, use pliers with the following shape: and when you catch one of the nuts (peas), hold the other in the same way, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot, sharp, and warm water, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient again with hot water or cooked quince peels, or myrtle twigs, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then treat it until it heals; and sometimes other abscesses than the two nuts may appear in the throat, if so catch them equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I treat a woman of an abscess that was inside the throat, to be specific, an abscess of small size; and I had tightly closed the entire throat so that the woman could not exhale through the narrowed passage, nor eat or drink, and would have died if she lasted thus for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess had risen so much that it had burst through both openings of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 I therefore immediately, and thrust into one of the openings, then pulled it out violently, and removed a large piece of bone; afterwards I reset it in the other wound near the neck, and opened his mouth and pressed his tongue; after that, I thrust the opening into these abscesses, and took a part of it, and no more blood came out; and thus the intestines were expelled from the throat of the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting off this abscess for a long time; and the abscess closed again and filled up the cavity that I had seen, until it became quite large; then I tied it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it stopped growing; and I left those parts, and let God do with them as He would after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When the rectum protrudes towards the anus and is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called "anus".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 If the wound, as we have said in the division, is cured but does not improve, and you see that the abscesses are calmed and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and if it is round and not long and red, black or blood-colored, then you should avoid incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it, as I have said according to its bladder and length, you must make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned before; then insert the cannula into the anus, draw it out, and cut it with the two instruments I mentioned in the incision of the two anuses.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And it is necessary that you not cover anything beyond the natural term; for if you do, it causes harm to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use as we have said in the incision of the II amandres, and treat it until it heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient fears to be covered, then you should use an instrument for the cauterization of the senses to alleviate fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the method of cautery is sharp fire.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the patient must place their head in your hand, and then press their tongue against the instrument as we have said or in the chapter of cautery, and hold it with a sharp-hot iron, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, which has this shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And have some hair or oil where one applies the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument fully with all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine without reaching the throat and the nose; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the eye for the amount of half an hour, until you see that the eye turns white and the redness caused by the medicine is alleviated; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument with the cotton on top of the vein above, so that the cotton adheres to the eye; do this frequently until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for four or five days. If you have to start the cauterization again with the medicine, repeat it, and after the cauterization, irrigate around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, clean what is around the medicine; and moisten with cold water, and treat with gargarismes until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more effective by fumigation, not by cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take camomile, yarrow, origanum, rue, and chamomile, and assemble them all or some of them in one pot, and put them inside, and make it boil; and let the pot be well sealed with strong clay, and in the pot have one instrument comb-like according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And it should be of silver or tin, and one of the heads pushed into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is putrefied; afterwards, it repeatedly occurs until the eye dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of an abscess's hot phase, for many things occur; and do not do this if for the declination of an abscess's hot phase.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 If this instrument is not present, take a canal and put an eggshell crack within the head of the patient so that his mouth does not get too hot; for the eggshell crack does not allow the vapor to bother the mouth, and it is good treatment together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it is necessary to insert a bone or fish spine into the throat, or some other thing; therefore, you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue against the instrument until you see movement in the object; and whatever does not open and remains stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps this will expel the object through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of wool, or a radish root, or one morsel of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will adhere, and then you can draw it out; and if it does not come out as we have said, take an instrument made of wood in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and lift the head high; be careful not to touch the epiglottis, as nothing should move or push the bone in; rather, the patient should push the instrument, because they must move or the thing is loose; if it is pushed down, or pulled back, move it evenly along the instrument until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the throat vein
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Sometimes the medicine is bloodletting, as I mentioned in the division, through the use of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the patient's throat towards the sun, since you will press his tongue with the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see the blood, draw it out very slowly with a small lancet, or fine tweezers suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that does not work, take a thick cane and push it into the patient's throat, then push or pull on the end of the cane with hot iron and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And let the patient be treated with water throughout the day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take a full glass of cold water, open the patient's mouth, pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with your hand frequently; and as soon as the blood is felt by the water, let it fall out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 And if it does not fall as we have said, then the patient should be subfumigated with asafetida in the instrument I mentioned for the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, because it will persistently return.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The manner of fumigation is that you take the pot which has charcoal in it and cover it with a perforated cloth in the middle, and place the head of the instrument in it; then pour your fumigation on it, and have the patient put the head of the snake in his mouth and close his mouth so that no smoke escapes but comes directly to the anus; and the anus will soon become inflamed, and if it does not fall, then start the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, eat salty and acrid things and drink nothing; and then it will be necessary for him to evacuate by this means.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the instrument used to treat the nostril is as follows, when it can be seen, resembling curved tweezers for entering the throat; and similar to a syringe tip, and it should have a sharp edge so that what it grasps, it cannot let go; and here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 Many things appear like abscesses, according to what is recalled afterwards in this book from one and another, and they are diverse in perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways that one resembles the other, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is for the cavities that are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 For abscesses in the head are different from those in the cavities, and abscesses in hollow bones are different from those that come at joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if there are abscesses, one should not pierce them until the boil is ripe according to its completion; and if there are such as they must be pierced when they are hard, but do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that come at joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When an abscess comes near to a joint, and it is left until it bursts around it, in case the ligament and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 If the abscess is near the main member and you delay the perforation until it matures, it will harm the main member; or if it is near the base, piercing it before it has matured can cause the abscess to spread, resulting in an open wound, a fistula, and preventing healing within a long term. It is not advisable to pierce an abscess without digestion being completed, unless it is near the base, which cannot be perforated until it is full-grown, and straightened out within, and a fistula forms; and it cannot heal within a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the sign of the perforation of an abscess that is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, the disappearance of fever, the reduction of pain and redness, and the decrease in swelling and shrinking of the abscess's head, as well as other signs; and you should make the perforation sit lower or closer to the abscess, where it has started to move open; and let the perforation be long along the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places or areas without any pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that break, according to the same member. (direct translation)
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in the charnel (or putrid) place, it is beneficial to let the perforation remain until confirmation through complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce it beforehand, the body will be flooded with its venom, and it will be filled with much filth; and by chance, the lips may harden and it may infect you deeply.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And it is necessary to make small piercings for small abscesses, and large piercings for large abscesses, and numerous cuts according to the similarity of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where you need to cover them, they should be bandaged; when it has become as thin as cloth and is softened, it should be done as with babies: and if there are those that are cut into three angles, and those from which a round incision is made, and other incisions and similar cuts and bandages.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 He who has no head (like an abscess superficially), it is necessary that you pierce it fully; and when the abscess is large and has collected great pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part; stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing out incorrectly; do this many times gradually, until the pus is completely drawn out; similarly, if the patient is weak, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old people debilitated.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 The pus may sometimes spasm with the discharge of it, which may happen that the patient dies, and you need not worry.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, proceed with great caution in this chapter, and when you have pierced the abscess, drain the wound, and check if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a large wound, bring threads of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess and there is much pus, it is necessary that you place a thread in each one so they come against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or with linen rags without moisture, tie it until the third day; then lance it, and cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and apply it to the cloth, wetting it repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the bleeding persists, provide treatment and care, and apply the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, and the limb or abscess is very nervous, you should put hot tents and damp cloths on it; if it is summer, and the limb is fleshy, you should put damp cloths on hot oil or cold water, or on oil and cold water for up to three days, as we have said; then remove the abscess and drain it and cure it until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	This must be understood universally in the treatment of abscesses; now I have told you how to proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 For small abscesses coming from the head, there are ways that are in bandages, similar to the bag of a linen sack, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are some that have fat or moisture similar to pus; and there are some which are hard and stony in the cutting, and there is no doubt that the arteries do not oppose it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of cutting is that you explore with all instruments called "intermissor", from which the form comes afterwards, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 For if it contains moisture, they make a long incision.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is drained, they scrape without leaving any hair that contains that moisture, because it returns immediately when left alone; then put cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; otherwise in oil and lime, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who have been delayed will recover.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then repeat the wool, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know that it does not stay in place; then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 If the abscess is fatty, squeeze it according to this form, longwise; and pour out your onions and the bark from all parts, and apply all your cure to draw out the coat where it lies; and if the arteries oppose you, do as I told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And likewise treat the abscess if it is hard, and of cutting and caring for it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And cut above the hard abscess and moist it, it will be easier because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And for any of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and among those was the abscess I treated or head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had pierced it with anything, one would have made an equal wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses or heads coming from children's heads and the roots of ears, they should be opened wide every day depending on the situation, in order to let pus out; and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Often this abscess appears at the neck, beneath the chin, in armpits, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, they are swollen and connected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 Each scrofula is properly within its side, as the neck and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the resemblance of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 Some contain moisture, and there are some malicious ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In the one that you see with good disposition to be touched, and resembles the color of the body, and is silent from all sides and is not arterial nor venous, and is not hollow; it must be cut open on top, and peel off each part, and place the two lips of the curette at the anuses, if you have need of them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head; pull gently and gently, and be sure to not cover the nerve or vein, and do not let the spatula or lancet touch, so that the hand does not tremble, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you open the vein or artery and it does not let you work on it, put vitriol powder into the wound, or some powders that stop blood, and hold the wound closed; and leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound becomes soft and starts to pus.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the blood stops flowing, return to your work until you finish it; then check at your discretion if there remain small scrofulas, if so, cut and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 And if there is a large vein near the root of the scrofulas, it is not necessary to cut the scrofulas at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang down without harm; then treat the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 If you excise the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, for there will be no excess remaining due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 It is necessary that you understand to cover the root and pull out the pus, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those scrofulas that have excess, pierce there where it is swollen; and pierce it as the one mentioned above, in a dependent manner, then introduce poultices with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply an ointment to heal it until it is healed.
de squinance	The meaning seems to be about treating a scrofula (a chronic inflammatory condition), specifically when it becomes necrotic (rotten) and needs to be drained and sewn up. The term "de squinance" in the following sentence is not explicitly explained in this text, but it could potentially refer to the same condition or a related one based on the context. Here's the translation for this line:
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke and described the measure of the throat, but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and this is their written words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinancy, the slit in the throat called "epiglotte" should be opened; and aid should not be given by these, because all the veins and the passageways of the sickness are for those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two glands.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the channel of the passageway, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should do so below three circles or four small slits through the middle, between the two circles or by the amount of the split at the symphysis, not in the cartilage; and the veins that supply it are long enough for this section of the epiglottis, provided that there is no cartilage.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 If the master is fearful, then it must be stretched out to the full length of the throat, then cut the cartilage until it reaches the trachea; and sever the blood vessels if you see anything, and then cut the symphysis as we have said; and this has been demonstrated by the section of the windpipe which protrudes through the broken larynx and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hour has passed where there is doubt about strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound with care, and sew it completely through the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce heat, until it is sound.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Al-Zahrawi says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged dead, and the wings are cut off.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then apply the throat (cautery) for this reason: because the patient cannot cough, and they breathe through the wound, in this way they are kept from death. And for this reason, the ancients instructed to leave the wound open until the malignity of the disease has passed, which takes 3 or 4 days. Then they would command to sew up the wound and cure it; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 A young girl took the knife and thrust it into her throat, piercing parts of the windpipe; I was summoned to cure her but found her lifeless.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I found the wound and saw that blood was coming out of it, and I knew that it had neither opened nor conducted air except through the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hastily sewed up the wound and cured her until she was healed, and it never happened to the girl that her voice became hoarse, and she returned to her health; for this reason I say that in such a case of the windpipe there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	in the throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and is a large abscess in color like a goiter, and is very common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural, and accidental; where natural has no device.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 The accidental type is also of two kinds: one is similar to fatty tissues, and the other kind is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; there should be fear, and it should not be operated on unless in the case of a small one, and prove and search thoroughly at every entrance; if you find it as fatty tissues and does not spread, when you cut it, take out all its covering, if there is any; and carefully encircle it, and cure it until it becomes perfectly healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 Many ways of ours exist, which I will describe all their similarities; now it is necessary for me to say the entire difference between notch and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Dislocation is characterized by heat and fever lasting until the swelling has passed and the fracture has healed; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 The notch has no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains the pus, which is its own sac and is of the same color as the body, and begins like an abscess, and becomes large; and they have two similarities: either fatty or moist, and many colors are like what I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the newt, that you test and examine first everything in the instrument called "entromissoire", according to what its shape comes or the chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 The method for the incision of abscesses is that you take a place more moist than what you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little until you feel the abscess has been pierced, then according to the size of the abscess; then extract the pus, and be careful so it does not spout.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If moisture runs from the ulcer, make it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after opening, moisture does not come out, know that it is filled with fat; then make a cross-shaped incision, grab it with forceps, peel it gently on each side and pull the skin or coat that you can pull safely along with it; and if you cannot pull it safely, pull it apart in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If there remains anything, it comes back many times; and if a small amount remains and does not trouble you, apply some corrosive powder to the wound, hold it closed with bandages, place warm soothing things on the abscess, and heal it with other treatments until it is healthy; and if it is large, cut the edges of the wound in two, and heal the one that emits pus.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beats against you or otherwise is contrary to you, and you hurry and apply vitriol powder, let it lie for two or three days, until the wound heals, and allow the boil of blood to subside; then return to cover what remains unhealed with a new dressing.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Here are the forms of the probing instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three crosses which are called 'albaret', and one that is called 'breb', and there are also three kinds for encircling abscesses: large, medium, and small, to probe the fistulas; and they are similar to needles used for sewing, and they are made of citron wood, or iron, or silver, and yellow ones are more valuable, and they are more skilled at penetrating black plungers for encircling the swellings of the fistula; and they are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the wound.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The shapes of the tumors are very similar, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and some tumors have two humps in three ways; and some tumors have three humps, and they are also of three types; and some tumors have two humps, and tumors with a single hump, and they are also of three types; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The tips of these are sharp, and those who do not cut only from one side, so as to avoid striking the vein or nerve; and these instruments used for insertion are called almelles and they are placed in several positions, so that the patient does not feel pain at the opening of abscesses; and there are three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and it is not used elsewhere except for charnut (charred) areas such as legs, arms, breasts, and ulcers, and sometimes another similar instrument is made smaller, resembling fistula stitches, according to this shape, to stop bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed at the site that heals quickly, at the veins, and sometimes returns according to this large form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, until they seem like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and those who wish to cure them should do so according to this form of the line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then remove the fat and apply medicine to the wound, then bring together the two lips of the wound at stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if the breast tilts downward due to its size, as happens with women, then split it into two halves above, by two similar cuts; thus one should hold the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from line b to g; then remove the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and introduce what has been said for stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not wish to rest, or due to the discharge of blood, then fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it digests the remaining fat, then heal it when it is drained.
des apostemes des asselles	From abscesses of the saddle (a type of boil)
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the saddle are types of hard scrofulas with ridges, and if they contain moisture within them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b up to the line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the whole boil which is in the abscess is emptied, place old cotton on the wound, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply an ointment to it until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, make incisions in it as we have said for scrofula, and if pus forms in the wound, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the cutting of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is punctured and the skin is closed above it, there are often abscesses; and the same happens with the vein that has burst and formed an abscess; and when you recognize it by the artery, the abscess extends deeply; and when you feel it with your fingers, it feels tight; and when it is caused by the vein, it swells noticeably away from the surface; and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the shoulders and angles and near the neck and in many other places, and it is large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is required to cauter the iron cure, and the one who is at the head should also be cauterized; in the one who is swollen with an artery, make an incision through the skin lengthwise; then open the abdomen carefully, cut the artery from the tendons, until it is exposed; then insert a needle, and pierce it up to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then push the thumb between the two bands until the swelling subsides and is drained; then bind the wound with a bandage until it heals; if the swelling is due to the opening of a vein, then you should stain your hand with it as much as you can from the wound, then insert a needle under the place you hold in your hand, pierce it and have it carry a double thread, so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the wound, as I told you, or bind it with one of the two bands with a thread; if you doubt that the threads will stick, then insert another needle through all the thread under the wound at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places; then cut the swelling until it subsides, then cut the superfluous fat and leave what is tied; then put a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply treatments with tent and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	From abscesses of the flesh
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As in arteries and veins, abscesses come to the nerves when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And this often happens at the shoulders and fingers in all places where there are joints, and it is called abscesses, and its color resembles the body's color, and it is found in various positions with pain; and when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not completely within the body, but under the skin; and it should be treated carefully from all sides, and it does not go forward or backward, neither up nor down, and the one who is in joints must not be covered with iron: perhaps it would cause contraction; and those who are on the head or forehead, rub with spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is small, take tweezers and press it at its root; if it is large, open it with an incision, peel off the skin, then bone and close the wound with stitches, and let it heal until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	Heavy growths hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "funge" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots and large heads; some are small and some are very large; I have seen a man who had two bellies that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had narrow roots, and were cut open, and moisture flowed out of them immediately.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I cut and found one weighing 18 ounces in the other 6, and the work in the incision is such that if you look at it, the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a narrow root; if you cut with a large spatula, be present the cautery fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 For in the thigh, there often come too great displacements of blood, and if it persists, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient fearful and afraid of the iron incision, take a thread made well, tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; then pull it tight, and do not stop pulling the thread of pledget until it stops the flow, causing pain; and if the roots are thick, be careful to cauterize the same place again, lest it recur; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cauterize the one who is of dark color, poor sensation, and milky eyes.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess swollen, and I will come to the treatment for gonorrhea afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil bursts out
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of boil comes from a cautery of wound or split in the scrotum (as it happens in other routes), and it is above the abdomen and among some of the testicles, as it happens elsewhere, or due to blood flowing from veins or arteries, as described earlier, or due to swelling; and if it comes through the route of the scrotum and the exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and has an open wound with multiple exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse. When you press it with your fingers, it retracts and then comes back, and in some cases, it becomes hard, and greatly swells at the entrance of the wound, and due to much labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing and easily pressable without constraint; and if it is due to blood, the abscesses are large and hard, and are filled according to a certain amount; and if it is due to swelling, it is soft to touch, and the work is that you look to see if the appearance is due to the blood of an artery, or vein, or swelling.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 It is necessary that you let the treatment continue.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For it has doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter of abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 If the appearance is due to the intestine or the belly, you must instruct the patient to bend his back and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the swelling; then command him to lie down between your hands; then go around the side that you have signed with a spatula; then cut half of the abscess above with a large spoon; then tie it around with a strong thread or a strong cord firmly, and tighten the ligature; then open the half of the abscess stretched out over the ligament, and insert your finger; if you find it caught in the ligament, release it, and push the intestine out of the belly; and if you find the swelling, take it with the spoon and drain the excess; and if the arteries or veins oppose you, go around, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two thick threads, and insert the needles around what you have made in a cross that you pierce; then press the abscess over the needles for four leagues, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the side as it is, and let the dead flesh rot by itself; or cut when it becomes tender and can be pierced, then cure what is necessary, and close the abscess as we have said; drain the pus or moisture that you find, then cure the side of what is needed, and sew the side.
dou chancre	of the abscess
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the similarities of abscess, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how one should administer fire-cautery; and we will say the abscess is in joints, and great caution must be taken in its treatment, and the ancients said that when abscesses are on a place where they can be shaved like an abscess which is on the face, or on the thigh, and in similar places, and it should all be removed when it is at the beginning; but when it is large and old, it does not have to be approached, for I never knew anyone to heal it, nor has anyone healed one before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when they are in place and can be removed as we have said, it is that you purge the patient once of black bile; then make him urinate if he has manifest repletion, then prepare the patient. That is, shave the area to be operated on cleanly; then dip your fingers or a lancet in boiling water and cauterize the vein or artery you are going to operate on; then wait for all the blood to come out, and press the area well with your hand or something, and if the flow of blood opposes the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then heal him by other means until he is healed.
de ydropisie	And from the dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 We have said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs for each similarity, and the cure done with medicines, and that which is cured with iron: it is only eclipsed; one should not touch iron in these two similarities: namely tympanites and ypsarche, for it is a deadly thing. Therefore, when you treat this similarity of dropsy called "eclipsed" with medicines, if the cure does not help, observe whether the patient is weak or if he has another disease other than dropsy, such as swollen belly and similar things; do not touch iron in that case, for there is doubt. And if you see the patient of strong constitution, and he has no other disease except dropsy only, and he is neither too young nor too old, then proceed as follows: lift the patient upright on your hands, and the assistant presses the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the buttocks, then take the pointed spatula according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And let it be cut through in two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And let it be pierced without entering so much that it does not reach the intestine when thrust in, and cannot be bent; then check if the yolk sac is attached towards the intestines: if so, you must cut below the navel III fingers directly above the handle; and if the yolk sac is due to liver disease, it should be on the left side of the navel III fingers; and if it is due to mucus, it should be on the right, and the patient should not lie on the incision lest the superfluidities run to that weak place; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push, and place your hand at the entire spatula between the skin and the sac as when peeling an apple of the quantity of a nail or so; then pierce the sac until the spatula reaches the water level, and this is the bladder, then draw it out, and push this instrument from where it is shown here:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And it is similar to a thin silver needle, and is of linen or light thread, and in the lower part, there are three holes; on one side, two holes; and one on the other; and the head of the shoulder is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes carve a feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 In the upper part is the anus, so when the instrument comes to the water, push it now on the instrument; then empty either half or one third part, for if you empty more than necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he falls down, or approaches death; but empty according to its power, and according to what the dispositions of the power of the patient and his pulse indicate; then move the instrument and stop the water, and it is now held in check by the plug that seals the wound where you have pierced, as I spoke, that you pierce in this manner; then begin moving the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient suffering from water, and draw a small amount of water; do this every day, and take care not to let it linger but only a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And if you doubt about the patient and let him have much water, cure him with burial or hot sand, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and anoint him with wine; and cure him with drying medicines until he is dry, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the vein
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Sometimes children are born who do not have foreskins at the penis, or the foreskin is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it is necessary to pierce through all the spittle very thinly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 Then put the thin foreskin of wood on it, tie and hold it for three or four days or until it wants to urinate, if it is removed then, and let him urinate, and then replace it; and sometimes it may not be necessary, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 For the person whose ulcer is small, it is treated with a poultice of cloth, as we have said, and it will open up.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those who do not have the ulcer in its place are bled, because no one is born with an ulcer at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating before they raise their penis; and they cannot enjoy intercourse due to this, because the matter cannot reach the opening, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of the work is that the patient lies supine on their back, with the head of the penis and the tip likewise like the size of a feather, so that the testicles hang in the scrotum, as required; and take care to avoid leakage of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, stop the bleeding from the wound, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the genital sores
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often this ulcer appears on the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly genitals; and in it there are malignant and non-malignant ones; you should take them once a week with a subtly thin tool, and cut and clean all of them, then put damp cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on it; then cure it with diaphinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the ulcer is malignant, with pus-like color and swelling, then you should apply a fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have cut it and if the ulcer is below the penis, having part inside the skin and part outside, you must remove the ulcer that is inside first; and when it has healed, you should take care of the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you treat it (the shoulder), do not be sure that the joints of the rod will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come into the rod and the surrounding area; if so, everything that is black and corrupt must be cut away, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour, which should be made from the bark of pommegranate seeds and other similar things, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if there is discharge of blood, bring the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cauteries assist the two conditions together: namely, in the discharge of blood and corruption; and if the joints of the rod are corrupt and recede, you must bring or guide from the rod a plunging cane made of yew wood, and make the patient urinate; and when the hairs have risen to the head of the rod that is in those who have not been circumcised, or there is pain or abscess, it is necessary then to shave it with a razor, until the ligaments are loosened, and the joints of the rod are released from all sides; and if this is a painful thing to say to them, you must shave it at the spatula, any little bit from the head of the rod and the skin; then separate them well, and put a thin linen cloth dampened with cold vinegar between them so that they do not adhere again.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like other wounds in terms of healing; however, when we perform this work on our own accord and specifically for children, it is necessary that we do the best job possible and make it as light a wound as possible to heal quickly.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients would not circumcise their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have wanted the greater part of masters and nobles who performed circumcision around age one day, and for all newborns; however, it was feared because there were two layers, and by chance if the upper one was cut, the lower one remained.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now cover it with copper, and the pain is doubled; at the amputation which is close to the limb's point, the cutting edge of the iron may slip off, and ruin the work, and many times it grows in such a way that there is no need for amputation and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	I have found the advantage of using ligatures in amputations, because the force cuts equally well above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, you should cut it evenly all along; but make sure the thread is tightly wrapped around the skin; and the method for the first operation should be such that you make the child understand, if it can, that you tie the thread only around the rod, and then let it rest in every possible way you can; then let it remain between your hands straight, and restore its strength between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then push your hand onto the rod and blow or cut, and pull it up until the head of the rod is in; then clean it well of the filth that has accumulated there, then tie a double thread around the opening, then tie it over the one thread to the knuckle and the index finger, and bind between the two threads, then untie the thread quickly and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood flow freely and flow, for this is the purge; and sprinkle powder on it and sprinkle rose oil cooked egg white mixed with fresh rose oil and wrap the egg white around it until the next day, and treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces for cleaning is as follows: the two heads should be soft and pointed, and they should be as large as a finger equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the mundification is when the cores within are at incision; therefore, you must extend it to your nail, so that the lews become abscesses; and strike it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, grasp it with pliers, and then strike.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If they pass more than three days and that which is below the worm is swollen, let it be until the abscesses subside, and gently scrape it; if you can move it, strike it as you can, and keep away from the part of the worm, this will do no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the limb with submerged wounds using the powder we have said or treating powders, and if you strike too harshly, it will go up, but this will not harm; treat it as we have said until it heals.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is due to a stone, frozen blood, pus, frozen semen, or similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not relieved, and you see it is retained by a stone lodged in or at the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over his knees; his feet should be placed on the back, and he should extend his abdomen from the upper part above the lower back, and hold the patient as tightly as possible; then the neck of the bladder should be compressed to express the stone above it, so that the urine is released; if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, you must administer extraction with all the instruments called "syringe", of which this is the form: and it should be made of fine subtle silver tubing, like the feathers of a bird; and the tube should be one palm and a half long, and should be fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And the method of the issue of the urine is as follows: You take a double thread, tie one end to the head of a linen or cotton rag, and insert the other end into a syringe; and tie off the excess of the linen and insert it into the top of the syringe, then oil or butter the syringe and dip the penis and scrotum in oil moistened with olive oil and warm water; then gently introduce the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis; then bend the penis over towards the anus; then insert the syringe up to the bladder, and make the patient feel that urine is coming out into the empty container, and this is not done according to this order unless because the conduit through which it flows is twisted; then pull the thread completely through the linen, and urine will follow the linen, then extract it forcefully, and correct the urine; and continue the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorchures or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is collected there, and you see it distill liquids and medicines, do everything with the instrument called "clepsydre," and its form is:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed and if it has three openings: two from one side, and one from another, as you see; and the medicines should be such that they stop the worm without adding anything, if one can draw out the moisture, and push as necessary; and when you see your medicines expelled into the bladder, place the head of the syringe in the moisture, and draw with the drawing motion that is there; if you draw out the moisture with the syringe, then forcefully push back the drawing motion within; the moisture will enter, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; this is the form of the subtle enema with which one cleanses the bladder: this is as follows:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And it is made of silver or lead, and the head is higher; below it lies the chest or ribs; then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the masticator that you use to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between two breasts using strong thread; heat the masticator over the fire; then insert the head of the clistere into the wound, hold your hand on the bladder all around the masticator until the patient feels that the masticator has reached the wound; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle, puncture it roundly; then push the strong thread into these holes, assemble the circle like a shield, put inside it oil and masticator and water, seal it in the instrument; and do the same with the wound, pressing your hand until the masticator reaches the wound.
de la piere	from cutting into stones
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the ways of stone and extraction with medicines; and I have told the difference between a set stone in the rain, and all the signs, and in what kind of stone one should work with cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder, resembling water in its subtleness; it opens wounds, injures the patient's penis, pierces many times, then binds it; and at most these leaps cause foundation problems. And children recover easily until they are four years old, but it is very serious in adults, and it is mild to those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it sometimes blocks the stone (arrow or bullet).
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take hold of the patient by the feet and push and move them downwards, so that the stone descends into the bladder, and at times moves upwards; then have the patient sit with his hands hanging down between his legs, so that the bladder is completely declined towards the lower part; then grasp it and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry to cut on top of the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not fall at your touch, moisten your finger of the left hand if the patient is a child, or use oil if the patient is an adult, and press it onto its base, and grasp the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, bring it to the neck of the bladder; then press towards your finger, and push it out through the place where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch his right hand upward and remove the skin that is under the scrotum in the part where the cutting is done; then insert the spatula covering it, which is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And they make an incision between the coccyx and the base of the sacrum, not in the middle but along the left side of the coccyx; and it should be straight across the stone, and your hand should be either against the base or the coccyx, and the incision should be wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; by chance, the pressure on the hand that is against the base may cause it to jump out due to the effort; and know that there is a certain stone where there are angles and margins: it is necessary to extract it; and if there is one that is rounded, similar to a plum pit, and round, from which the issue is slight.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 Therefore, where there are angles and margins, make the incision larger; if it does not come out, you must pull up on pliers that are shaped like a chisel at the tip, to force the stone out so it does not escape; or push the instrument with a subtle curved tip into it; and if you cannot trick it in this way, widen the hole slightly, and if it is not rounded, squeeze it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, first pull out the largest one from the opening of the bladder, then pound on it, pull it out, and then the smaller ones if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, it must be made larger by making a bigger incision.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 There are two things that happen to the patient: either he dies or urine comes out quickly because the wound cannot heal; but still you must try to drain it, or break the nails with pliers as much as possible while draining it; and when you have completed your work, you should fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and hold it closed, and put on top a damp linen cloth in oil and vinegar, or in oil and cold rose water and cold water, to soothe the abscess heat; then lay the patient on his neck, and do not undo the bandage until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen [the bandage], moisten the wound well with oil and water, then apply the ointment defyndicon and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And if an abscess comes in the wound and the corrosion, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and the urine is retained due to this in such a way that without jumping with urine: then press your thumb into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and cause diarrhea; then lift the wound from pus and ease and oil, and help it in all ways you know, until it heals; and it is necessary that every hour that you care for it, you bind the two thighs, and place the medicines on the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If the wound is small, and it is conducted by the penis and pierced through, and urine cannot flow out; you should cure it in this way: cut it many times, or be excused from cutting due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already proven this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron fork according to this shape and sharpened at four angles on one thong:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take the thread and tie it around the penis under the stone, so that it does not return to the bladder; then push the awl lightly into the penis, until it reaches the stone; and turn the awl little by little in the stone, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what is left of the stone inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is broken and jumps out with the urine, the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie a thread around the stone below and another above, then direct the penis towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the woman's stone (meaning: uterine stones or ovarian cysts)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It often happens that a stone is inserted in women, and if it ever occurs, the treatment is grave, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that by chance the woman may be a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to examine herself, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And the third method is that by chance one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth method is that the stone of a woman is deeper than that of a man, because it requires a more profound incision and great fear ensues. If such a case arises, then you must seek out a midwife who knows, and if she can't be found, then take a subtle one; and present to her a wise bailiff in the affairs of women or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her that she does what you command regarding the investigation of the stone; and ensure that the woman is a virgin: Then you must press your finger or base into it and seek the stone; and if she finds it, then she should constrain it under her finger, and I command her to press her finger or hand on the patient, and urge her left hand upon the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If it is found [the dislocated shoulder], then you must gradually move it from the entrance of the bladder until under the hip bone, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike on the bone in the root of the thigh near the middle of the femur, where it is moved apart, and feel the bone in that area; do not move your hand above or below the bone, and keep it small [in size]; then press the thumb into the hip, if you feel the bone so close the wound as much as the bone can protrude, and know that there are many types of bones: namely, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 Recognize the symptoms to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 And if it (the wound) opens again, put vitriol powder on the spot and hold for an hour until it stops bleeding; then return to your work, as long as the stone is still there, and have tools that I told you about in the extraction of the stone from men to help you in your work; and if it opens again and it is the artery that was cut, put powder on the spot and bind it with straps and bandages, do not continue this, and leave the stone and do not draw it out, for the patient may die accidentally; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the heat of the blood is relieved and the wounds have healed, return to your work until the stone is expelled.
de hernie carnouse	Of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	In other words, aquose is not something else but an assembly of moisture or white pus that is under the sac of the kidneys, which contains the egg; and it is called "white pus", and sometimes it is properly within the egg's membrane itself, if one believes it to be another egg; and it is the skin of the kidney between the white pus we have mentioned, and it does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this aquose is due to weakness that comes from the kidneys, and this matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And sometimes there comes percussion on the eyes, and this moisture has many colors: either it declines to yellow, or without redness, black or whitish, and this happens more often; these are signs for recognizing this gathering, because if it is white as we have said, it is a good abscess, long like an egg, and do not open the eyes, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 And if there is moisture in the cloth itself, abscesses become reasonable with part of the egg, and for this reason it is believed to be another egg; and if the moisture is between the hide of the skin and the white flesh, it can be felt well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe thoroughly to find out its form, which is described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this which follows the intrusion, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When we treat it with iron (meaning cauterize), the patient should be anesthetized according to our ability and the fullness of his body; then lay him on his back on something slightly elevated, and cover him with many cloths; then lie him on his left side, and command the attendant to stand on the right, and stretch out the arm at one of the two armpits near the hide of the skin; then take the spatula, and cut the hide of the skin along its length up to the end of the finger, and make your incision straight in cutting the hide of the skin down to white flesh, and peel it off carefully according to your ability; then pierce the white flesh fully with water until it is hollowed out, and drain all the water, and then place your thumbnails, and push the white flesh up; and do not touch the hide of the skin, but only the white flesh; cut all around it carefully, making sure you cut it well, for if you do not, the water will return; and if the egg breaks during your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the white flesh; then bring together the two sides of the hide near the armpit into a stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it heals.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupt with other disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, suspecting the flow of blood; then strike the cone at the entire suspended area, and extract the egg, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And if an ulcer is assembled in two parts together, know that these are the branches; if you strike the other part as you did the first equally, then draw out the blood, and put damp linen in oil of roses into the wound; and put another damp linen in wine and oil on it, and put over the two cysts, and put over them doubled cloths, and tie it all with a string according to this shape:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take two cloths, and use them with damp linen in this shape and sewn together into a collar for the thigh, and one of the heads takes hold under the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the handle; and the other head on the two angles, and assemble all the rest in the knot of the garter; and sometimes this branch of cautery is used instead of iron cutting, and it is that you take the cautery cutter thinly, and strike the leather of the cysts, and heat them as we have said, so that the white pus from the ulcer is exposed; then take the cautery in this shape, and pierce that pus with a small hole, and peel off that thin cauter with hot iron:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And the cup in all ways that you can, while you are heating it; and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg (meaning "yolk"); and know that this work is more wholesome; and pay attention to the lack of bleeding, and perform the operations of cutting; and if anything prevents you from doing so, or an abscess bursts or a flow of blood or something else occurs, then treat what prevents you, according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 If the patient is afraid and does not want to endure this operation due to its horrible appearance, then perform perforation as I told you before, and know that when you are certain, by the signs we have described, that the abscess has been opened, then make the patient sit on a raised seat; next, pierce the abscess in the area below the whole spatula-like blade, and place the perforation along the length of the body; ensure that the wounds are wide so that all the pus can flow out; then put cotton over the area and hold it in place, allowing the remaining pus to drain, and treat until the wound is healed; if the white cloth does not let the pus come out through the opening of the wound, you must insert a reed or instrument for letting out pus from dropsy, as described before; enlarge the opening of the wound, know that the pus will return, and it will be collected after six months or so, and when it is collected as described before, the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscesses of the knees
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 Know that in the treatment of this disease, there are many precautions because of its multiple forms, therefore it seems more suitable to leave it [the disease] untreated; and I will tell you the treatment and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, many abscesses come from the body, and especially the eyes; this happens in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 It is by excessive sour and feverish spreading in the joints, or by impact; and the abscess's color depends on the body's color; and there is no pain, and the abscess is serious; and sometimes an abscess is hard and stony, of that color, and on occasion it comes from an artery, or from a vein inflammation.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 If it comes from an artery, this is known by the hot abscess position when you press it with your fingers; and it is not advisable that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 A person with swelling of the vein is known by his disposition to the expression of the touch on the fingers, and he can well make an incision on this resemblance, and on others; and it is that you cut the core of the bones, then is the yolk in the upper part, and the white thread stretches out, and delivers the suspensory from all parts of the yolk.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the yolk is already swollen with these resemblances born, then you must draw out the yolk and cut it; if it is at the white thread or in that which is within the vessels, you must deliver all of that tender part and cut roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the birth of the placenta is on the back side, then you must crush the whole thing and draw out the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, apply the wound with dampened wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then heal it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscesses of the knees
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a thorn, with the softening of bones, and the patient becomes silent with great pain when he goes; and the cure for this disease is indeed as fearsome as what has been mentioned above, and nevertheless we will tell you its work, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 You must make the patient sit on the elevated seat, then push the suspensioner of the testicles downwards towards your hands, to all the things nearby the penis, and tie them with strings, and stretch them out; then cut a deep slit in the scrotum from one side to the other, so that they are exposed, and then peel it apart from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples; then insert a double-threaded needle there, and tie it at the first place where the blood vessel appears, and tie it again at the other end; then hit it accurately, directly along the length of the body, removing the corrupted matter; then treat the wound as one would treat an arrow wound, so that no testicle falls out due to the incision of the scrotum; for this is not harmful, and if all the testicles are present, you must draw the testicles back at each opening; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the scrotum, and they dry up and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	From the cutting of the siphac
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The manifestations of this hernia occur through a section that comes out or is extended on the abdomen in the area of the groins; due to this, the intestines descend from that rupture towards one of the kidneys. This rupture can be either of the syphac or of its extension and there are two ways of it happening: through percussion, jump, fall, lifting of heavy objects, and similar things. The signs that it is a hernia of the syphac are that it occurs little by little over a long time and does not happen suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the fullness, because the hernia follows the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the symptoms are when it is of the section where the intestines are cut open, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear variously beneath the skin near, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body expelling them through the opening of the incision.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines burst out from the anus and are retained within, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, there is fear, for which it is necessary to escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	1. And the method of work is that you command the patient to pull the intestine with their hand inside through the wound, if it can enter; then hold its neck on top of its body between your hands, and separate the legs; then raise the skin above, and cut all the fat from the flanks completely; then insert fingers of one hand into the openings required to open the wound, and make them such that the intestines can come out; then scrape off the attached fat that is under the skin of the flank, until the white fat is completely exposed on all sides; then insert your index finger into the place where the intestine was, in the place between the white fat under the skin of the abdomen, and the second layer of fat, and separate what is behind the abdomen, and the second layer of fat; then turn the intestines with your right hand inside the fat of the flank, and expose the white fat to your left hand, and lift the abdomen towards the back; and command the assistant to stretch the abdomen upwards, and separate what is in front of the ligament; and feel with your fingers if the intestine is twisted or hard white fat, and if you find anything, push it into the abdomen; then take a needle with thick thread made from ten threads, and insert it in the rear part of the fat, after the skin of the flank; after the abdomen, then cut the pieces that appear to have threads, until there are four threads; then arrange them one on top of the other like a cross, and tie the fat, which is under the skin of the flanks, with a strong cord of two fingers wide; then wrap the threaded pieces and tie them again with a cord of two fingers, so that no vassals who nurse it can enter inside, except for clean cloth; and place the cord immediately in the same place as the first cord, and after these two cords leave the fat which is under the skin of the flanks a long distance of one finger; and after all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part that is under the skin of the flank, as far as it needs to correct, and bend it, as we have said earlier; then apply oiled linen cloth to the wounds, and apply the cord that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white ones are cauterized as we have said, after incision, due to fear of bleeding out.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 For this happens frequently, and let the ligament remain until it has chosen to loosen itself; and if it is slow in falling out, it should be softened with hot water, and place on it what was previously mentioned, until it has loosened completely; then cure the wound with another treatment until it is healed perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	Of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy, I have never seen anyone who dares to heal by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is made like a graft that is attached to the bone, in this manner that you tie the vessels after the cutting of them gently below; then break it in half, and treat the abscess with what was mentioned, until the vessels have loosened; and heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Sometimes rottenness comes in the entrails, as previously mentioned, and no intestines should be drawn from the anus; and if some do come out, it is bad, and repair it every hour; and yet if it remains too long in that place, the wound or syphilis occurs, because the intestines are extended, as previously mentioned, for it is stretched out, then softened and inflamed the entrails and opened; and the healing is done by cautery, as previously stated; and sometimes it is healed by iron in this manner: and the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then break the swollen part of the rottenness with a width according to the size of three fingers; and then pull out the syphilis that is below the skin, then take the rod and place it on the visible part of the syphilis; and press towards the abdomen, then cut the two visible parts of the syphilis onto the head of the rod, and cut one and the other; then pull out the head of the rod, but do not cover or extend the egg nor any other thing, as I have told you in the treatment of the intestinal graft; then heal by wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads (of a wound), if they burn and heal the wound, let it remain open until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The blister is constricted, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved to this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the knees
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the knees becomes soft in some men, because the charms inside are made soft and there is pus visible; and it is necessary, when it is seen to be cured, that you make the patient lie on his back, and bind the softened skin over the natural skin; then gather the two lips together into a stitch, and if you see, sew first the superfluity of the softened skin in four or six stitches firmly; then bind between the stitches, and let the cure be as for other wounds, until it is healed, and bind the thread.
dou chastrement	The correction or punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 I will omit the charms that are enlisted in our law, as it would be inappropriate to discuss them in this book; and there is no need to speak of them except for two reasons: one is that the mirrors in a charm respond when asked, and offer a cure; and the other, because we often have need of charms on certain animals to help us, such as bulls and sheep and cats and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 I say therefore that charms are made in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the one that we do by attraction, sit the animal in hot water until its limbs are softened and remain in this state; then take hold of it with your hand, and keep it in place until you no longer feel it.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 From the castration of the animal: you must first dye the beast, and press its scrotum with your left hand, then tie the suspension cord, and strike each testicle with the hammer where you have well scored; leave no small amount of skin or fine skin which is on the vessels; and this method of castration is better than the one made by attraction, because at attraction something remains accidentally in the scrotum, causing the beast to desire lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 Hermaphroditism is according to the two ways in men: one where there is an opening between the two scrotums as the figure of woman's nature has, with hair, and sometimes in court the urine flows.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And another way it is with women, and it has above the penis like a rod and they copulate.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment for men and women is to copulate all the affected areas, and treat them like other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the penis, it has no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tension
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 An ulcer that is adjacent to the natural part and is too ugly to see is called a tentigene, and some women have one as large as a hand, and this is the treatment for it.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 It is necessary that you stain the excess of the tentigene with your hand or onions and lightly copulate it; do not go too deep, so that no excessive blood comes out, then cure it until it heals; and at another ulcer that grows from the mouth of the husband, and it bursts and forcibly discharges pus, and is similar in appearance to a cow's udder, and because of this it was called by the ancients "the disease of cows".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 It is necessary that you cut it, as we have said in the prescription, and cure it until it heals.
de erratique	Of the dislocated joints
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 It is erratic when the nature of a woman is not perceptible or small; it can be natural at birth, or accidental due to disease that comes about in this way; or it can be through unnatural union, or by subtle or gross artifice, and it is made full in marriage, or in ribs, or sideways, or however it may be; and they must try to conceive and give birth, and unfortunately the flowers may not come to fruition; and this knowledge is obtained through observation of the woman's belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the obstruction is close to appearing, either at your hand or at your side.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If it is a subtle pain nearby the liver, and it is close to the breasts, hurry and do the following: place your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back with legs spread open; then form the two breasts round so that the subtle pain is firm, and cover them with oil-soaked wool; then lie the woman down every day so that she cannot touch herself.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 If it is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula resembling the leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the discharge is made of new flesh, stop it with onions and cut it; and have the medicines made from blood-stoppers, like acacia, dragon's blood, incense, combined abundantly with egg; then prepare a wide tube of linen cloth so that the wound cannot heal; and in this way, let it be long, and provide a dry tent of flax; then cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when in marriage snow comes, it should be covered in this manner, unless abscesses are aggravated.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For to the aggravated abscess in marriage, one should not touch to do it.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which, without court, are not treated as usual, and when hemorrhoids become old, they turn into throbs; and we have said in the division their similarities, and signs, and I will say here those that receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and throbs, when they are full in marriage, and do not appear to touch, should not be cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those who are at the mouth of the vagina, they can be felt, are those which one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Therefore, you should place the woman in a cold house, then stretch her legs at the ankles, break the leg at its roots, then sprinkle medicinal powders that restrict blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood powder and incense, and similar things; then leave her feet exposed for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; if bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and ivy leaves, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make a plaster to apply on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if bleeding stops, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If this does not stop bleeding, make it bleed again at the back and breasts without wounding; then take linen, wet it in plantain juice or elder juice with old wine, and apply it to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the abscess subsides, treat the place with ointment until it heals; and the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough crust, if necessary cover it as I have said in the thelul; and then continue treating it until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	the abscesses of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many kinds of abscess come in marriage (a metaphor for the body), such as carbuncles, painful abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 Therefore, I will tell in this treatise the treatment of hot abscess that comes in marriage (the body), which is not one of those that stick to the skin; and if you wish to know the work of iron, look to see if the abscess is acute at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Then do not hurry to pierce, but let it heal as long as the pain is alleviated; and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have two small seats or one where he can lean, and support him on his back and gather his legs at the parts away from the leg; and let his thighs be spread out, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good ligament; then bring the ball towards the right side, and bring the instrument used to open the mouth of the bladder, from which the shape follows; and it is necessary that when you bring this instrument, that you pierce the tip first to know the depth of the bladder, so that what enters within of the instrument does not go too deep as it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the bladder with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt it; and it is necessary that you place the horn of the instrument above, and mark the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 And when the abscess is opened, and one touches it with a soft hand, it should be covered with a spatula of lard; and when the boil is emptied, you must put damp linen cloths in oil of roses or green dry oil into the wound; and place the damp cloth from the wound to the full extent of the marrow, and place over the marrow and over the tendon a clean, damp linen cloth soaked in vinegar or malvaceae that have been cooked; then heal it after two days of ointment following this, until it is healed; and sometimes lift the marrow and the wound with a clyster of vinegar and honey, and then with vinegar or longis aristolochia that have been cooked; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is healed in a marriage (scar tissue), you must be careful not to burn it with iron, but rather treat it as we have said in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 It is necessary at the beginning for the woman to recognize the shape of natural childbirth, and the signs when you see her dilate afterwards and desire to urinate; then hasten the birth of the child; then know that this childbirth is according to nature's figure, and it issues from the head, and the second one comes with it; and when you see these signs, gently press her belly so that the child is born quickly; for when it descends on its head, the second one also comes with it, and the membranes of the birth are cleansed from excess by good cleansing; and he who comes in another way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 It sometimes happens that something falls upon the feet, or the body or shoulder, or the hands, or upon the belly, or back, and it may turn around the neck, or in other bad ways; therefore it is necessary for a wise and skilled baler to be there, and to avoid error and deception. I will show you all the figures as to how one should help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes out upon its head by natural childbirth, and the woman labors painfully, and her strength is weak, let her sit on a saddle or have women hold her; then anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then insert the small spatula between her legs in the form shown:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 Then cut the second finger, and strike its nail where the moisture that is inside is located; and hold the woman's belly until the baby comes out, and if it does not come out, you must fumigate her with musk from fenugreek with camomile oil; then make her take and vomit some concoction, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: thus the baby will now come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two hands come out, you must gently pull them back bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on the seat, and lift her feet up; then turn the seat on the ground, and hold the woman so she does not move when turning it; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, strike the hands with the knife that is placed before, extract the child, and pull back equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 of the birth of the child upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes upon its feet, you must push it upwards; and then turn it bit by bit until it is equal; then take hold of its feet and stretch them out bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If it can jump up to any height, when commanded to seize and make it vomit from fear, and if it jumps away, then may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, turn it bit by bit until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it will be easily.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if it does not come away as we have experienced, then say to take musk, from high places, and oil of ambergris, and melted resin, and grind all in a mortar; and put the nature of a woman within it and apply this ointment on the outside; then make her sit in hot water until below the ribs; and when she is softened below, apply collyrium of myrrh and place it on her, and leave her for an hour; then have her sit on a seat, then make her vomit and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, because the infant now jumps around.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's excrement over its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this form, place it on its back with its hands folded one over the other; then lay it on its neck, let the feet hang downwards, and lie it on the bed; bend the hands little by little, then take hold of them above the belly, and remove the hips from below until it is arranged properly below; if the child does not come out, seize the feet and push them strongly, then push the belly upwards, then put your hands; pull the child little by little; and command the woman to hold herself as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the delivery of the child that comes forth with one hand wide.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It is necessary to devise a method for returning the hand: if it cannot be returned, then raise the woman and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, spread out the legs forcefully; then bring the mustard that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the chair, study to return the hand; and pull the child according to its natural shape, and make it vomit, and command her to hold herself as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Of the birth of the child on its neck, and if it has spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the bailiff hold his hand, then he turns it slowly and gently, and when it is equal, he puts natural musk on high altitude oil on it as we have said, then he commands it to move slowly; and when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and command her to grab it; and make her vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way, support her all the second time.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When it comes to be delivered in this manner completely, you press the delivery against your nail until the moisture is voided; and if the baby swells upon her face and neck, you strike from the buttocks so that it is not retained, and the infant dies; then push the child in as far as you need, and command the woman to grab it lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is known that twins are born frequently and sometimes even four; and this is not strange and does not happen rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 These are strange things that do not live unless they are named; I know that they multiply and become desperate by the one who conceives them, which is linked to filth; and sometimes they issue out naturally like worms under a skin, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they issue forcefully, the cure is as we have said, and let the balm be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what it does; and do so as it is worth moving to salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 Sometimes they are formed in the third or fourth or fifth or sixth or seventh or more, up to fifteen, and they are all shaped like a child by the measurement of the wise glorious one, and it is necessary that the balm knows all this, for by chance similar things happen; do so according to what is required.
de l’enfant mort	of a dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you treat the woman for a dead child or miscarriage, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out by itself and you are compelled to manual labor; then you must know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fears death; then the woman should lie on her back with her hips inclined downward and her legs raised; and the minister should press her two parts, or tie her to the bed so she is not treated in the removal of the child; then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oils mixed with musk and fenugreek seeds and linen seed, then anoint the hands of the minister with these oils and these musks; then push gently into the woman, ensuring that she pushes out the afterbirth where it should come, and be careful that the child is not appearing at her head; if the afterbirth appears in her womb, vagina, mouth, palate, under her beard or in the navel or near the sides, or near the costal areas, then pierce it or pinch it and press it gently to the middle ribs; and hold the afterbirth with your right hand, and place the curved instrument between your left hands, and push gently into any of the places we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty state; and this is the shape of the afterbirth:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then push against each other one by one, as needed, so that the extraction is equal; and then adjust them equally by moving from side to side to make them move out, and grind them down to keep them in place, as shown in this figure:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if part remains, the doctor oil some of his fingers and thrusts them into that part and pulls out the other; and if none remains, place the splint or higher up in its place, and do this until it all comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be returned due to constriction, you should roll up the cloth over it until it comes out completely; then bend it at the joint of the foot or the ankle, and do this for both hands and feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if the child's head is large and it is narrow at the exit, or if there is a narrow opening of the skull assembled, you must insert the pointed spatula between your fingers, and press the skull and extract the pressure; or you may use the instrument called "almidach", from which the forms come with the instruments or chapter that follows this one; and in the same way proceed if the child has a large natural swelling; then pull the bones apart using pliers, and if the head leaps out and is held back by force, it may be split as necessary until the pressure that is in the narrower position is released; and if it cannot come out, you must cut it into pieces where you can. If it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, you must pierce it until the pressure subsides.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, it is a light attraction, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is gentle.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And if it is strained in the abdomen or thigh, you should straighten it with the cloth rolled up on your hand; and making the abdomen or thigh, correct the strains that are there; and if the other members are dislocated, and the joint remains, put the ball of your hand into the deep part of the wound, and draw it out to the mouth of the wound; then put in oil or egg yolk, and draw it further; and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to an abscess that has come there, you should not work on it, but instead administer moist and fat substances; and administer ointments, and apply them with warm softening and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if the infant is on its side, and you can straighten it, do as we have said in the living child's case; and if there is no power to do so, draw it apart into pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when you have done this, apply as we have said in abscesses that come in marriage; and if bleeding comes forth, it should be put in a sharp restraint, and other treatments applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman whose womb had been dead due to an infant being born, then another one was placed on top of it, and the death of the other was prevented.  (This line is referring to the survival of a second fetus after the first fetus died in the womb)
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came into the armpit, and swelled until it opened, and began to suppurate greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned for treatment, and for a long time, I could not heal the wound.   (Literal translation)
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong adhesive plaster, and an bone came out, and after some days another one did.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly because the stomach has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I think it is the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I wish to treat the wound, and take out many bones as long as the woman is in the best condition; and the woman may remain thus for a long time, and later, a small amount of pus comes from the wound; and I have no recollection of this chapter being useful except when the master finds something foreign, which he knows how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the dislocated joint back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the form of the pressor, by which books are weighed; and at two turns, the heads of the two links.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 The cornels should be more delicate for the restrainer, and should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the rod should be wide, and the margin of the trees must be, and a half palm in length; and between the two limbs there should be two joints of the same rod, which should be closed on one side and the other, half a palm in length or slightly more; and these two joints are inserted into the mouth of the marrow to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, similar but more delicate and lighter in appearance, should be made of rod of ebony or boxwood, similar to pliers; and have two joints for the shoulders, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide; and when you are ready to open the marrow with the whole tool, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging and legs apart, then insert the two joints together into the marrow, and hold the handle of the tool between her thighs; then work your hand with the whole tool, as you have done with pliers, according to the amount you want to open the mouth of the marrow, until the girl does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is covered and multiplied in their similarity; and when the mirrors have arranged them, the work becomes more urgent, and higher for humans due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disperse the instrument unless you have arranged it, for its necessity cannot be excused.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, it is necessary to instruct the patient to retain her afterbirth, and then make her vomit bile, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose; if she jumps due to this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If it is not good, take the purgative and the pot or basin, put herbs that can open the mouth of the deceased, such as rue, anise, camomile, cassia, centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a string or a basin from the pot and the other end into the mouth of the deceased, and hold it until the vapors enter the body of the deceased; then make her vomit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then immediately apply the second one.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 And if it remains after this treatment, and does not heal as commanded, instruct the woman to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or musk of aloes, then apply it to nature and wait; when she has found it, take it and stretch it gently straight, so that the man does not resist extraction; but it must be moved lightly to the right and to the left, and then draw it out; it will come and detach itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 If the opening of the man's anus is stretched (as in a tear), we have mentioned the cure for cleaning and fumigation of herbs; and if it does not heal as described, ensure that you do not force extraction; but it is necessary that he who is at the man's opening ties himself to the woman's thigh, then anoint with ointment four-formula; when she can bear it and returns, it will heal; however, when she comes back, if there is bad smell coming from her stomach and head, and burning of the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, it is necessary to use suitable fumigation for this: no one has proved fumigation of dill and dried figs in the past.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and the afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And it is like glass-looking substance resembling a dog's head, and the neck is made thin in its nature, and the shoulders are wide over the fire; and let there be fumigation over the coals, and the tar until it is ruined, and start another one.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the foundation.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many children are born without a pierced foundation, but it is stopped up with some subtle plaster; therefore you must cut open the plaster at the appropriate time, and do not cut it with a sharp spatula, and be careful that it does not touch the foundation; then place moist linen on it in wine and oil, then anoint it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will not reform, then put or pierce a plaster of lead, and let it remain for many hours, and remove it when the wound appears to heal in rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess comes; it must be covered. If it is healed, it should be treated with the lead plaster as we have said.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodules, and those that come out from the side of the foundation swell, or in the space between two parts, if it is one fistula or more; and when that nodule becomes old, it opens, and moisture makes it white or thin boils, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; they are recognized by those who know because there is either discharge or windiness when the patient has a discharge, and in some cases, water gushes out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if it is fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; they reach up to the knee joint, and up to the navel of the cow.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula at its base, not persisting; and it is that you bite your thumb or the base, and bite a fine awl of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twist.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 If there is a twist, then insert a thin splint or horsehair until you feel the splint or hair at your thumb; and if you do not feel it, and it does not cause pus discharge, wind or water, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is open up to the bladder or up to the channel of urine, if it gushes out urine and cannot be sealed with medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is pierced up to the joint of the calf, then the splint comes up to the level; if there is no twist and the pain disappears around it, it remains thus, and neither medicine nor salve by ointment works for it; and in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure but labor and folly of fools who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In a woman who is neither paralyzed nor old, seeking health through iron, as I have experienced, and the patient lies prone between your hands on their back; lift their legs up to their thighs, and have their thighs inclined towards their stomach; then push a tent of iron or wood, if there is tortuosity, until you know where the hernia comes out.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels it around the foundation, then you must push your index finger there, if you feel that the hernia has been pierced; and uncover or find where the intestine or flesh is, then know that it is paralyzed; do not move it as one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 One should know that one can heal some things, but it happens rarely; and the aid one gives, it is this: heat the cautery subtle according to the width of the fistula, as before said; and push it all hot into the fistula, until it comes out from the base; and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred things should be burned, which are similar to a feather of an eye; and then heal with wet bandages in butter, until that char is gone, then heal with ointment soothing and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If it cannot be healed otherwise and if it swells up and does not perforate the hole which is at its base, put a thick cover of leather or fabric between your finger and the swelling, so that you can see the fistula under the covering of the finger; then strike from the beginning of the fistula, push forward the swelling first, and then the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the end of the swelling; and the swelling will be released and charred; then remove those charred things which are like a feather of a bird, and let none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the limb goes away by itself, and breaks through [the skin], you shall cauterize it with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 The fire cautery brings about two good things: the burning of these sores joined together, and the stopping of blood and removal of moisture; then it heals wounds filled with moistened tents made of butter or crushed cheese until the flesh hardens, and it treats the wound with dry ointments.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	And when it is restored, it heals and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	If a fistula comes up to the full depth of the foundation and is removed from the body, push your finger or foundation into it, and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the tent, and between them is cloth or lining or sores that are close to piercing, there should be no opening except for a way of trust and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods: you can cauterize it as we have said, or you can cut it down to the bottom, or if you can, put on tents and heal it as before; do not go too deep that you cover the foundation holding structure, and let the purulence come out by its own will; then heal it, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is cut away from the bottom, either through a tent or another instrument appointed for it; then remove the infected tissue in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part furthest from the foundation: it will be easier on the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And sometimes fistulas are formed in this manner: when you bite the tent (?) into the fistula and it is on the side close to the foundation beneath the skin above, take a punctured tent (?) at the top in this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert one twisted thread into two, and push the tent with the whole length of the thread through the fistula as far as it reaches on the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it persists on the side of the foundation inside, then draw out the thread of that punctured tent (?), and bite your tooth or foundation into it; pull out the head of the thread, and bring together the two ends, and bind them together, and hold one against the other, and leave it for a day or two; hold it once in a while until the threads touch those things between them and close up (?); then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst on its own, make it burst in all possible ways, unless it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it should not be covered with a plaster if it is too deep, and then heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The shape of the spur-like spinous part from which the fistula is made is very sharp at one end and blunt on the other; and yet it should not be struck where it should not be struck, as you see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 There are two kinds of emorrhoids: those that are inside the base, like a piece of resin, and have both small and large ones, with blood coming from them, and they have one or more, and are turned away from the base and at the top of the base; but those that are turned away have some moisture, and there is either a little or a lot of clear citron juice or blood, and have the color of the body; and the treatment for these that have them inside the base, it is that you instruct the patient to strain for urination in bed, until the bases become visible, and the filaments appear; then hurry and clip them with scissors, or hold with your nail, then strike at their roots; and if the filaments cannot be held due to moisture, take cotton or lint, or a piece of camel's hair; and bind them with your hands, then strike, and sprinkle hot powders on top, such as those used for cautery; or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery, afterwards curing them with other treatments until they are healed; and if the bases cannot come out, instruct the patient to be clisterized with a sharp and biting clisterium for washing the affected area, so that it comes out easily; when the patient strains, and the filaments are visible at the base, the treatment is easy; and it is that you take them with your nail or scissors, strike them, and cure as we have said, until they are healed, and that the patient fears the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 You must perform the stitching in this manner: take twisted thread and put it on a needle, then draw the thread above and pierce the needle from another side; then turn the two ends of the thread below the needle and make them as wide as necessary; tie the thread securely, then untie it, remove the needle, and do the same with all the others; leave the excess for the blood to drain; place a damp linen cloth soaked in rose oil or resin on the wound foundation, and place it there, and command the patient to rest; then let it heal until it scabs over, and when they have fallen off, treat them with ointment and other cures until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	the drying of the wounds or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often the drying of wounds occurs in the intestines due to natural constriction and when the disease is old and medicine no longer helps.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary that you cauterize the tip of a splinter or your nail with a knife, so that it does not get wet; then cure it until it heals as needed; and if it cannot heal, you should shave more strongly than before, until it drains pus and is scabbed over; then cure it until it heals.
dou fremit	great trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 Fissure is a small opening in the body, and it extends deep within; sometimes it affects the frostbite, and it feels as if death is near, and it spreads throughout the body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the cure for this is to take a reed from an ostrich feather, or a strong quill, and place that reed on the frostbite until the purple circle encloses it completely; then turn your hand around the entire reed so that you cover all of the frostbite, push it in deep, and remove the frostbite from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, do this with a chain made of iron or steel according to this form, and be careful beneath and pull above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce (it), to keep the tooth in place, and press it. And if you wish, cauterize the limb as described in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of a clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	At times, they make a silver or arsenic enema, or molten lead or mercury, and at times they make such small and large instruments, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, when it is used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffering, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema, whether it is large or small, should be above wide, or the belly should be bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 And it should have an opening where the belly is sewn, as you see, and the shoulders should be pierced within; and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other one; and put inside the belly the medicine of a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierce all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be some space, then insert strong thread through these holes, either crosswise or in X shape, and assemble the belly like a goatskin; when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then press; this is the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clistere with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it gently; then the ministers should pull on both ends of the clistere until it is completely stretched out, then remove the clistere, and tie the patient's legs to the outside when the medicine appears; if it oozes out, hold it tightly as much as possible; if he sleeps all night, it will be a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize it in case of disease of the intestines, and the medicine hastens to heal, keep applying it until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if the hemorrhoid is either based or an abscess, it should be treated with a suppository as gentle as for a child; and this is the form of a gentle suppository where the skin should be stretched:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division [section] the treatment of wounds; now we shall tell you the treatment for hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places or wounds where they are made, and from how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 Things that wounds are done by are by stone cutting, sword or knife cuts, lance or arrow wound, shield-beat, or similar things; or those that are done according to the laws of the body, such as a wound on the neck, head, leg, belly, liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds in the head, since it will remind you in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 I say that when a simple wound or abscess comes and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is caused by an arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large; doubt the presence of an abscess warmly: let it drain immediately from the head itself if blood comes from the wound, and let it drain to the opposite side of the damaged part; and let the patient evacuate repletion with wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it does not want to drain, let its meat be reduced, and let it not drink wine, nor eat any fat; and put on the wound, if an abscess hot comes, dampened wool in rose oil only, or in vinegar steeped; and if there is no hot abscess, put fresh linen on the wound, all its blood, and it is not moved by air, a small amount of powder, which I will say a little later; and if the fire has moved it, put some onions on it until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like the size of a sword and cannot be closed with stitches, join them by sewing, as I will explain for abdominal wounds.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is exposed of the bone, and opens, and does not hold but only a little, close it; then cure the wound with medicine, and replace hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large foods such as cooked heads (testes) and wheat, also like peas, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if you find pus or rotten skin on the bone, and it does not reach the bone, then cut off the entire pus and throw away, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped without surgery, and it does not stop bleeding with medicines, then try to stop the artery; and if you find the artery dislocated, tie it up with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy; it is that you put this powder on it so that the arrows have stuck.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And the way of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; three parts live coal and grind finely, then apply to the wound, press it firmly until it ventilates well and joins with all its blood; then tie it well, and leave it to heal if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes they do this with just boiling water, when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the wound has not yet opened.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the fire has burned the wound, it should be treated immediately without using this powder; instead, apply some appropriate remedies such as a paste made of barley flour and water or honey, until it stops oozing; then heal it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if a bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with subtle forceps; and I will tell you afterwards about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	Of the collar wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes from the neck and it is simple, without a difference between it and the one on the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it's nerves, there should be no other tool but to let them heal naturally and not apply anything restricting, as this harms the nerves and causes them to retreat; do not put anything cold on the wound, since nerve substance is cold, and its growth continues with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be warm, such as water boiled in sweet vinegar and mixed with rose oil, heated water treated likewise in sweet vinegar, and other similar things moistened.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, tie it up with strips, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wounds are deep and she is swollen and full of pus, pierce or pierce lower; and if the arteries are cut, and bleeding comes out, stop it, and lance, cauterize if necessary; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the windpipe, and the conduit is kept, so that the meat goes through the windpipe, and does not touch the windpipe but put it back according to its natural shape; then hold it straight, and let it stay for some days, then treat with scented ointments until it heals; and if the wound has pressed against the bone, drill; and if there are pieces of bone, pull them all out as you can, and those that you cannot have, leave until the wound festers, and let the pus issue and heal the opening; and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder on it as I said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of a wound from a lance or knife   (This line suggests that the text is discussing treatments for wounds inflicted by weapons.)
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a sword or knife wound and the wound is deep, check if the patient's breath comes quickly from the wound: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it at first hour, nor bind it for the blood that will clot completely, and return to the heart, and kill the patient; but apply attracting ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound 3 or 4 days, or more; there will be no spasm, nor bad tremors of heart or other signs of pain; and when you see good dispositions, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat the disease and other remedies as long as he is healthy; if it cannot heal, and an opening occurs, then know that there is a fistula; treat it as it should be treated.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 If the wound is a sword or knife incision, and it is simple or worse, or at the back, treat it according to what is in front of it; if it is large, stitch it; if it is small, apply powder, and if it has penetrated the bone, remove the pieces as necessary, and pull out the protruding pieces if they are dislocated; if they are not dislocated, let the wound heal by itself and align the extractions. And for other wounds on various limbs, the judgment is according to what we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The first dismemberment of the abdomen is large, medium, and small; from a large wound, any intestines occasionally protrude, or the intestine's layers, due to which the insertion is difficult; and suturing is more troublesome, and often a small wound is worse than a large one because it requires more care when replacing the intestines in; since the intestines inflate suddenly when they feel cold, they return more easily, and therefore a medium-sized wound is preferable; since it is necessary to repair moved intestines to their place rather than other ones. And you should know that the incision of the abdomen follows four ways: the two common sutures in the abdominal incision, and the sutures of other body wounds, as well as other specific ones are common for other wounds; but they are more related to the abdominal suture, and I will explain each one individually.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestines protrudes from it, it is easily set, this is by one of the two methods: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or dampen a cloth in hot water only, or you cook in hot squill and cyperus and spike, and anoint the intestines until the swelling is removed; and sometimes make this wine-restraining, and it is moved that away to deswell.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling separate, if you moisten the intestines with hot or warm water and bitter herbs are cooked, for in this way the entrance is opened a little; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision at the instrument with which emorrhoids are struck; and the first cure is to cut that away, for we should not cut too much unless there is great necessity; and this is the instrument for breaking: slice within the cavity and do not push out, and see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines leap out, put them back in place according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power to do so, for it is necessary.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is in the part beneath the stomach, you must make the patient lie on their back and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part beneath the stomach, raise the head and buttocks higher than the parts beneath; and in the same way, when the abdomen is torn in one of the two halves, pay attention to making the damaged side higher than the other; and in this way, administer as I say for large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 Small wounds should be treated with what suits you, then have a compassionate person who anoints the entire wound with his hand and pinches it shut; and this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or more than one, according to the width of the wound, then leave space from the edge of the wound and pierce it with a needle where it has good strong thread; and pierce the two layers of skin with the two layers of flesh beneath, which is under the skin inside, as far as you make it pierce from that side, and gather the four edges together; then tie a double thread around the needle in two parts, then gather the two sides of the wound together and leave space, and pierce another needle; then bind the thread as you did with the first needle and do not stop doing this according to what is needed for needles, until the entire wound is tied; and the needles should be medium-sized, neither too thin nor too thick, because thin needles pierce all the flesh and large ones cannot enter well: therefore they should be medium-sized. And it is not good to push the needles too far away from the flesh and skin so that they do not injure and open the wound before it is sewn; and then tie the heads of the needles, so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and place threads or cloth around the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed. This method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires one needle or two assisting needles for larger wounds; and when you have pierced all four edges together, remove the needle to the part where you started, in the manner they cut cloth. I sewed a wound on a man who had a stomach, which was wounded with a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and his intestines were well two palms wide, and the wound was inside the stomach.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestine when it had been twenty-four hours away, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and it was cured, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 They had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; I did not treat him with any salve, because I was at a place where none were found nor any medicine; and I placed cotton old twice a day over the wound, and washed it with water of honey until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Now I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing: take the needle, and insert it from one side to the other; when it has pierced through straight in straight, then place the tip of the skin or hide where you inserted the needle, and pierce it from the other side from inside out; and the meaning of this stitching is that you sew as the pelletier sews fur, and leave a gap once, and take it up again, until the stitching is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second method of stitching, which Galen calls specifically, is done in the same way by those who assemble the two parts naturally and apply one head of the needle to the other, following this method: drive a needle or the point of the mirror through that place only, leaving the two heads of the needle; then turn the needle, and drive it from the outer part towards the inner, into the two heads of the needle; then drive it from the outer part towards the inner, into the two other heads of the mirror on the opposite side; and this is the moving method of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galiens said this word and it is true, one should stitch the stomach with two needles, having thread in each; one needle must be driven from one side and the other from the opposite, in the manner of those who sew sacks; and know that when the incision is inside the stomach, the stitching is more severe than in other parts of the stomach.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgement of the wound is similar to that of other wounds: it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as soon as the arrow has moved it, you should put back the intestines and skin; then put powder-healing char on top, and if the arrow has moved, you should put any ointment available on top until the wound heals over; suture the flesh, bind it with threads, and let it heal; then care for the wound as for other wounds, until it is healthy; and if you don't have medicines, put old cotton on it, and stir it two times a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 You do not need any other medicine in many situations when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound infects the principal members, it is necessary to moisten light linen with warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the swellings, and under the saddle; and if pain or corruption occurs in the bowels, and this happens often, clisterize with black wine that is warm, and also when the corruption comes up to the intestines; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine called "yew" cannot heal when it is perforated, and this is due to the planting of veins in them, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 And if the hernia jumps out of the wound, put it back in place as one would with an intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned or blackened, you should cut away the black part, so that no blood flow comes, because there are veins and arteries; then take hold of what is between the hernia sac, and hang both heads hanging from the part below the wound to facilitate extraction when the hernia falls out, and the wound swells.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the bladder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, as I have seen a man pierced or stabbed by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, with discharge and flatulence; I cured it according to what I knew, and did not stop refining until it healed, and the edges sealed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I see it stitched, I suspected that the patient had illness in his stomach; but there was no illness, but he improved in better condition, and ate and drank; and any experimentor said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied up in this manner: take deep breaths with large bellows, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the breath has opened the mouth, place it on the two lips so that it stretches out; and then strike the head, and hold it so it cannot dislocate, then put another breath after in the same manner until the wound is completely closed; and sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 If the head (of an injury or lesion) becomes swollen inside the intestine and brings no harm to the patient, it can be stitched with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in this way: take the end of this intestinal thread which is sharpened, then tie it to the head of a thread of flax twisted together, then insert the thread into a needle, and sew up the intestine and tie it off; and this method of stitching should not be far from faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, there is no trick or healing, but rather depends on subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or when it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that every wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "fistula", and equally when it opens and swells up.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And fistula is according to truth a hard and white nodule, in which there is no pain, and is as swollen as the feather of a bird; and sometimes it clearly pops open, and at other times thickens; sometimes it is small, and at other times quite large; and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, is otherwise by one of the nine causes: namely, because of the small amount of blood or body heat; or due to its malicious nature; or because there is hard flesh within, and above the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or it has too much pus; or the place is pushed in, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or it is a corruption that is like pestilence; or due to the property of the region, digestion is slow and health is late and festering by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I will tell you the cure for fistula that is made by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or intestines, bladder, ribs, spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and sometimes they come to the property of the main member and similar parts.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And all the fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is nothing except labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have mentioned, and you have confidence in its cure, and you know it, take a tent of honey or iron, if the fistula is straight, pierce it; and if the fistula is twisted, look for a thin probe of wood, because wood bends with the twists; and if the fistula has been punctured and you cannot find it by probing, cleanse it through one of the punctures, because moisture flows from one puncture to another and cleanses it; then pierce it skillfully as far as your power allows, so that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and whether it is completely healed, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and where he feels it; and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is distant from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places I have mentioned, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the damaged tissue and corrupt matter that are inside; and then heal it as long as it is healed, and if the fistula is well located in the right place, you must cut completely, as far as you can, then put moistened bandages soaked in medicinal oil into it, and push them up to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluous matter that remains at the bottom; and then put ointments made of clean fat into it, until it is healed; and if it does not heal by this means, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If no vein or nerve is affected nor the principal members [are], as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, remove the corruption as much as possible, then treat with things antiseptic until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and returns swollen as before, know that you are not done yet: expose and cut as deep as you can, and remove all the corruption, then restore the joint; and if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If the corruption is too deep, you cannot reach it; if there is only a little corrupted bone, and you can extract it with the pliers, remove it according to the situation suitable for that bone, and if there are many bones, extract them all, do not leave any one behind; and if moisture prevents you or there is error or fear, strike and push back moisture and the pus, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And if you cannot remove [the foreign object] within an hour, put something irritating pus on the wound and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then the bones will be easier to extract; and if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, press down on the corruption only until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a large part of rot and it reaches the bone marrow, you must remove and cover everything up to the corruption, then heal it until it is healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so you can take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 The young man was about thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, such that materials came into the leg, and he developed a large abscess, and there was no suitable place to open it; but they foolishly opened the abscess repeatedly, causing much drainage of materials, and it became a fistula, and much pus flowed out that all went bowel and moisture from the body; and many fools tried to cure him for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine until I was summoned, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what was leaking through the sores at great cost; and the body of the young man turned red, and had a citrus-like color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I inserted a tent in one of the wounds, and then I sought all the wounds, and found that some came towards the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 I then hurried and cut in one of the wounds as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and broken, and corruption was coming towards the bone from within; I saw the corrupted part of the bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except for what remained; and I began to heal the wound with healing salves for a long time, but it would not heal; then I tried again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and it was corrupted, and I left it, and I tried to heal the place; but I could not until I cut around a palm of the bone, and removed it entirely, and then I healed it with salves; and it became healthy and healed quickly, and no further work was needed except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation often bloodied, but it became entirely healthy, and grew in the bone a hard cyst, and was of good condition and had no harm or contrary to anything at all, neither on the outside nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated thus: take thread and tie at the end of the opened bone and command someone to pull up; then place another thicker thread of linen over the cyst that is on the bone, and hold tight so that you draw out the corrupted cyst from below, and expose the cyst on the site where it should be, so as not to prick the cyst; place fire or a wedge beneath the bone to move the corrupted cyst; and must stay as long as one can see and feel the corruption, and stay further times.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, you should remove all the flesh; then place the iron under it, and then press from one side to the other the corrupted part, as we have said; and if the corruption is at a joint, you should break the corrupted joint, and the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut it; and if the corruption is at the tip of the hand or foot, it is a very difficult matter, but nevertheless you must investigate the corruption and how it opens; and clean it in all possible ways, but do not harm the vein or nerve; and know that the instruments for cutting these bones are many, according to the type of bone and its appearance, and its thickness and its subtlety, and its size and smallness, and its hardness; and therefore you must prepare an instrument for each type of work; and know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to the understanding of this art, and the experience of the types of diseases; and think about the tool you need in accordance with what is required.
dou feu	Hot iron
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The shoulder may dislocate either internally or externally; and when you have medicine to treat this corruption by the means of medicines, but it does not improve, it is necessary to cover that member up to where the corruption begins, so that the patient escapes from death due to this defect of the limb, or from the greater evil, the lack of function in the member; and the signs are that the limbs become black, as if burned by fire, and afterwards it turns black, because the corruption of the member spreads from one to another and takes over the entire body; act quickly to cover it, and if it is due to the bite of some venomous animals such as sea scorpion, viper and similar, if the corruption is at the head of the hand, cover it, do not give it any space to reach up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 And if it comes up to the hand, strike it at the joint so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, strike at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and no remedy outside the quantity of its virtue can help; and thus you do when the corrosion comes or in the foot: if it comes in the first joint, strike after the next joint; and if it comes in the foot, strike the entire foot; and if it goes up to the leg, strike at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than letting the patient die; and the method of striking or searing the member is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister on the lower chain, and another minister on the upper chain, and you sever the flesh that is between the two chains with a spatula wide enough so that the bone is exposed; then strike or sear, and place linen cloths on either side, so that the searing does not touch healthy skin, and brings the patient further injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 And if bleeding comes when you work, cauterize the area promptly, or apply certain powders to restrain; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the limb with a suitable ligature, and cure it until it heals; and I will tell you what happened to a man in my time: there was a blackness resembling fire burn, and this corruption first came upon his foot, consuming all the foot; and when the man saw the corruption, he covered the foot with copper, and it healed; and a long time later the corruption returned to his toe or his hand, and it came to me, and I treated him with medicines after cleansing of the body, but the corruption did not stop; and he asked that I amputate his hand, and I refused, for I had hope to cure the matter; and I also feared that if I amputated his hand, he would die, for the strength of the man was weak; and he despaired, returned to his earth, and covered his hand with copper, and it healed; and I have not told this story except for this reason: one does otherwise if needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 Aposteme sometimes comes in charnut place and remains for so long that it causes a large swelling of the bowels; then it turns and perforates, and the bowel leaps out, staying visible like a vassal's; and the skin above is as delicate as unbleached linen and does not reach the bone or the nerve. Such disease is called "sain" and not "fistule"; but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone in full, it is called "fistule"; and the skin should be cut around it, just like unbleached linen; and it does not heal due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	1. And if the skin hardens and the corruption is not complete, and the flesh is thick with pus, cure it with a poultice in this way: Look to see if the breasts are large, and the sore that is within them stinks; then apply an Egyptian-made poultice which is made thus: Take asafetida, oil, litharge, equally, cook them in a pot over fire until the medicine becomes red and thick like honey; then take as needed from this, make it into water and honey, and apply the poultice to the breast, and tighten the wound; leave the poultice for two hours, then remove it by unwrapping; do this many times, until the breasts are healed, and the pus is expelled; and sometimes poultice with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and take vine ash, pour water over it, then apply the poultice, until you know that the breasts are well healed; and if the patient cannot endure it, or the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, poultice with water and honey or mead, so that the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the blood thicken; and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breasts are well cleaned, poultice with whatever grows new flesh in them, and take emplaster of roses and oil; or poultice with various medicines and ointments, whose properties I have told you before treating sores; and if the opening of the breast is small, and the cloth of the poultice cannot enter, widen it a little with an iron, and place a piece of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment over it, until it is widened; and if the wound is too large, cover it and leave only enough space for the poultice to enter, and if the sore smells foul, press down or lower it somewhat.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the bowel is fully expanded, do not let any air enter it; and if you cannot cover the belly under it as you see, arrange it in such a way that the bowel moves to its lowest position, for when the bowel is fully expanded, do not let any air enter it and if you cannot cover the belly under it as you see. Arrange it in this way: the bowel moves lightly downwards, do not leave anything from the bowel; take medicines that consolidate and put them on the wound, and place a linen cloth over the entire wound; then press strongly towards the injured side more to the right than the first time, as there is already an opening there, and bind again with another cloth according to the size of the injury, and place it on the injured side to align the bowel, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days once; and the one who is on the injured side, often removes to remove the bowel, and recognize what comes from the bowel, whether it is poison or pus or undigested or indigestible. Take care that the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been spread out in this way and you see the nature that arises on the injured side, then recognize that the bowels have opened and approach health; and then unbind it in the morning, or the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the binding.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts sag due to indigestion after many days, know that they will not correct themselves.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle poison spreads for a long time, do not despair of health, because health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 For those who suffer from pus in their wounds and those who do the opposite; and if he swells his breast indigest for many days, know that the breasts do not swell; and if the breasts are slow to heal and are hardened, use drying medicines with a dry substance and moist virtues, such as oil of roses, equal parts of old wine, mix it together and boil it, and then apply it; and when oils of roses are not present, take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire, and then apply it to the cloth and place it on the breast, and sometimes administer an aromatic long oil and celestial roots, which is also like flour and centaury; and use simple or compound remedies: grind them, make into powder, and add to the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the wound is deep and not cured by this cure, then know that corruption has spread throughout, and causes pressure on the bone, or hard tissues, or ligaments; cure it with the cure of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of an abscess at the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 Parasitic abscess is a boil that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, and sometimes appears in other places; and when it matures without care being taken, if it is left untreated, it causes a contagious boil to spread, running and exuding pus until it reaches the root of the nail, possibly destroying it completely; and the corrosion reaches the bone, causing pain that smells foul, and the joints become large and discolored.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When treating it as we have previously mentioned in the section, and if the treatment does not help, you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The cautery is a great aid if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound; and if the nail presses into the flesh, and begins to swell and inflame, it is necessary that you place the iron under the nail so as not to touch the flesh, and push upwards, gently and lightly striking the inflamed area; then apply the remaining charred and corrosive substances on top to remove all of it; afterwards, heal it with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 If the corrosion is in the bone, strike it and draw it out, because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; if you see that it needs to be corrected, strike it with a sharp spatula as described before, then heal it until it heals; and if it is wounded and hurts a lot, it is necessary to first heal it; then cut the nail with a sharp spatula in a transverse manner, but ensure that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, place something on top to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The deafening pain of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 One must align the fingers that are born in some men by chance, which are entirely flesh and sometimes contain tendons or bones, and occasionally nails; and none of these grow from the root of a joint, but they grow in some parts of the hand or in the knuckles.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 The one who grows from any finger in the hand does not move, and the one who grows at a joint of the hand, by chance may move; the size of the fleshy one is slight, as follows: cut it off at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	One who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: keep yourself covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the one who grows or should grow in the last finger, it is necessary that you cut the round part up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and cure it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	Simultaneously, swelling in the joints comes from birth, or from injury of the wound, or from burning by fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 If it is necessary to seal that wound, let it heal according to its natural shapes; then place between two tents or dampened cloths in oil of roses, so they do not stick together; or you may place between two thin pieces of wood until the edges are sealed as required.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If one of its two (joints) comes with the palm, then strike that weld as necessary.
des vils	 of the simple folk
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 These are large veins filled with melancholic superfluities that come in many parts of the body; and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should sometimes administer purge of bile, and then heal the basilica (abdomen).
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The iron cure is of two kinds: the first is to seal it and draw out black blood; and the second kind is that you tie the vein and let all the blood out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The shape of the incision is as follows: first, heat a sharp and very hot knife, until the flesh becomes soft, then hold the patient's leg above the knee to the lower part of the thigh; then make an incision in I, II or III position, large in size, then separate and draw out black blood up to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the strength of the sickness can bear; and then bind it, and order the patient to eat foods with stimulating dark wine; and repeat the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and this is harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The swelling is as follows: raise the patient's leg, if there is much hair on it, then put it in warm water, and heat the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins become swollen; and if you do not have warm water, heat it over fire, and then strike it near the long part of the thigh or below the knee; then peel off the skin at the edge, and scrape the vein from both sides, as far as it appears; and you will see it red and black, and when it comes out or the skin seems like a white cord; then push the fat down, until it is raised above the skin, and then cut it lightly along the edge, then strike another incision in another place within III fingers; then peel off the skin over the vein as far as it appears, then draw it out to the fat, as you have done, and make another incision, as you did before; then make another cut, or more if necessary, then draw it out, and cut it at the end of the foot, then pull and draw it up to the second cut; then remove it piece by piece, until it is all drawn out, then cut it; and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, put a double-threaded needle through it all along, tie and draw it, and push it down under the fat, and turn your hand from one side to another, until it comes out; and be careful not to cut, as if it cuts, you cannot draw it out or lift it, and this is harmful to the patient; and when you have completely treated it, put linen soaked in wine and oil on the wound site; and cure it until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And if the face is constricted, twisted and rolled together, and it's not straight as we have said, then you must break it forcefully but do not cover it; pull it as we have previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The shape of the iron used to break the face should be curved, but not thin, so it does not pierce the vein; and it should be large because if it is fine, it will pierce the vein, but be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
de la voinne civile	 Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is inserted in the legs, in hot areas where no grass or tree grows and in dry ground; and by chance it may grow elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes from under the skin, as it comes within the body serpents and worms and penetrates between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a very large swelling in the leg, then the flesh changes and the vein begins to protrude, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the thigh is opened, you should wrap around it a piece of plank about 7 to 8 inches long and bind it, leaving the plank on the leg; every time it starts to ooze, you should re-wrap around the plank and bind it again; if it is too long, cut off a part, re-wrap the remaining and do not cover its root, because if you cover it, it returns into the flesh, causing abscesses, corruption and illness; so it must be treated gradually until it reaches the groin and there remains nothing on the body; sometimes this vein, when treated, can be up to 5 or 10 feet long, and once I had a patient whose vein was 10 feet long, and when you cut it, it bursts out with pus or blood, and you should empty the material inside, introduce medicines for abscesses every day, then treat it like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And sometimes at this vein, many injuries occur, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or hand, and there is much damage, and it jumps around; treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 The worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land because it often affects cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, moving and swelling throughout the body, causing pain in the joints of the limbs as it goes, tearing the skin where it passes, and jumping out; it is caused by the corruption of certain humors, such as those found in snakes and lizards and tapeworms or intestines; there is suspicion about its harmful effects, for when it moves through the body and reaches the head, it can enter the oil and destroy it; this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it to be treated and drained, one can force it out only when it moves: therefore, you must lie the limb above and below with a strong cord tightly tied; then strike on top and pull it out, and if its opening is completely in the flesh and you cannot feel it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm that it causes is that it bursts oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold a spoon-shaped instrument beneath it, then strike on top and pull it out; and the patient must use body purification of medicines soluble for evil humors, and avoid consuming foods that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 The pain coming from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This disease is called "vakirir" on our land, and it is a pain that moves from one member to another. I have seen this happen as I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to a sick woman, and when I examined her arm, I saw a small swelling in the armpit; and shortly after, it began to rise like a worm at the shoulder, faster than anything else, as sharp silver cuts from one place to another; the pain left that place and lodged in the shoulder, then ran quickly through all over the body, until it came to the other arm; then she said that it returned around the body again, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered greatly how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 All in all, I wished that many who wanted to move pain from one place to another had not wished this, but I did not want it, as I saw in the woman; and I thought this was because the woman had a dry body, and veins uncovered, and for this reason these constricted windiness appeared; and it is not the case according to this reasoning for those who are delicious, and who have moist bodies and veins hidden.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see to cure this disease and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, lay it above and below quickly, then strike above so that this constricted windiness leaves at the place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it at your eyes, cure it with those who expel the windiness, such as fetid pills, pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	 arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the places in the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 There are various types of arrows, some with large points, small, pointed or blunt, and some with two tips, others with tongues, and those that have splinters; and when one of these falls into any member it falls in one of two ways: either into a principal member like the head, heart, liver, stomach, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it falls into any place of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you afterwards appear, you must be careful about the extraction of this arrow, for death comes in many ways; and when this illness does not show signs or the arrow is not completely embedded, pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the sign of the brain when an arrow hits it and pierces the bone, and the skull swells up above the brain, is when there is scotomia (partial or complete loss of vision), scod (blackening or purplish discoloration), esvertin (convulsions), roujor (redness) in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of the mind, vomiting of bile; and perhaps without fever from the nose or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and swelling appears from the wound white like pus, and also as bubbling of pus; and if this sign is apparent, avoid treatment, and pull out the arrow if it isn't in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The sign of an arrow wound when it pierces or strikes the chest is that it is near the left breast, and feels like it has been thrust into a hard object, not empty; and by chance the arrow may also swell up as the fingers do, and produce black cold blood, and chills and cold sweats, and fainting: hence there can be no doubt that death follows.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of an arrow that penetrates the flesh deeply is when there is no scum discharge from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, breathes heavily and seeks a warm place.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls into the cover of the mattress, it should be removed through the small openings; and you must release great pain and great suffering and groans; and all the members of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls into the stomach, by chance, something of indigestible meat may jump out from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the belly or abdomen, and does not jump out through the intestinal route, there is no hope in the cure nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the arm and neck and throat and shoulder and loin and hips and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it does not move, as I will tell you what happened to me, for this reason that you do the following:
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to a man that an arrow pierced or struck his neck at the root: I pulled it out from the other side beneath the ear fat, and it was healthy without injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And pulled out an arrow that pierced the oil gland beneath the paper below, and the arrow was round, and could not be grasped except by the tip towards the body, and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bow, entirely sharp at both ends; the youth remained unharmed, and no harmful accident occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And draw an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I was beardless, and sharpened it until I drew it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And draw an arrow that was stuck in a man, whether in his head or belly, and I thought he would die; but after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, tricked it, drew it out, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And if a man has an arrow fall on his back or spine, and the wound is sewn up; and the arrow remains inside him, and does not alter his natural conditions, nor causes harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And to another man, a arrow struck him in his face, and the wound was sewn up; and he endured so for a long time suffering great pain; and many similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And to the man of the princes, the king, who fell among the snow and was slightly sloping towards the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded. I was summoned for his treatment after he had fallen for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 I found the wound narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 I pierced it with a very fine needle and did not feel it myself; but he felt prickling and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was the arrowhead. I put on the right side a plaster adhesive and absorbent, because the side did not swell; and the arrowhead appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I placed the emplastrum (medical ointment or paste) on [the wound] for several days, and straightened the wound directly, and the patient stayed like that for a long time until he felt the arrow within his flesh; and he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 For several days, I applied the corrosive medicine over the wound until it opened, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow protruding from its place; then I applied the medicine corrosive around the opening of the wound for several months, until the tip of the arrow became visible; and after more than four months had passed, the wound that I stitched with pliers could not heal; so I did not stop trying to find ways with various tools, until I made the pliers properly according to what its shape will be at the end of this chapter, as I drew it out, and returned the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the men judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored; I then restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was entirely well.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 And I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, but do not take my word for it completely, because books cannot encompass everything; but wise masters understand a little about many things, and in dealing with what is present and failing, they reveal new work, and they invent nine tools, to the removal of foreign bodies which occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows do not leave the body where they are lodged except in two ways: either through the place where they enter, or from another side; and one which jumps out at the place where it enters is called an arrow in the flesh, and sometimes jumps out again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And if it does not jump now, leave it until the flesh is swollen around it and the opening is wide; and similarly, if it is pierced in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for some days, and move it every day; and then it will jump, and if it still does not jump, perforate it all around with a sharp instrument until the area around it is widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If the arrowhead is embedded in the bone of the skull and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, or any of the accidents I have mentioned earlier: do not pull it out, but leave it until it is even after some days, because if the arrow comes as far as the subdural space, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow is not driven deep into the bone only and does not reach to the surface, and the patient remains for some days with bad condition, then try to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it (the arrow) is deeply embedded and cannot be removed, administer tourniquets around it as I told you, then heal the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 If the arrow is lodged within the body so that it cannot be seen, try to find it with all your efforts; if you feel it, try to draw it out with any implement available; if you cannot do so due to the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then enlarge the wound as much as possible; draw the arrow out if you can, and if there are ears on the arrow like they hold on, remove the flesh that is embedded in two parts as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can draw it out; be careful not to break the arrow while doing so, but try to draw it out gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot dislocate it once, push the leg towards the joint, then draw it, for extraction will be easier in this case.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And if the flow of blood hinders you, apply what we have said in its chapter for treatment; and beware of incising the nerve or vein, and use an apparatus to draw out the arrow as safely as possible, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and position the patient according to how he was when the arrow struck him, because this is the greatest aid that can be given, and if you cannot, do so according to what the signs indicate.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 The arrow that comes from somewhere else, or opens something with it, or the skin is swollen in that place where you can see or feel it clearly: cut then above, as far as the tongs can grasp, and then pull it out; if it jumps away now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And if it cannot be drawn out, leave it alone for the time being and then continue the extraction until it comes forth; and if there is an arrowhead inside it, push it to its full length; and if it has fallen, and you wish to administer a cure, use pliers so that the point of the arrow enters the hair of the instrument; and then push harder, and when the arrow is removed, push the pliers in further with the pointed end entering, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 If the arrow is touched, it is necessary to cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if the arrow falls into the side, chest, abdomen, bladder or ribs, and is near the surface, and you can cover it, do so; but be careful to not cut the vein or nerve, then extract it, and stitch the wound, if necessary; and care for it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pincers used to remove arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The form of the buttock hair is also like the feather of a bird, to push at the point of the arrowhead, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tweezers for pushing and testing is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The number of veins from which one drains is thirty-one, of which the head is sixteen, to wit: two bladders that are after the ears, which are called the "doubles herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the temples apparent; and the two veins that are on the eyes, which are called "aspirées"; and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two glands that are at the neck; and the two veins that are in the upper lips, and these veins are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins that are commonly healed in each arm are V: one is cephalic, located on the left side of the chest and called by laymen "arm vein"; the median is called "fistula", composed of the cephalic and basilic, and laymen call it "vein of the heart"; the basilic is located on the right side of the chest and laymen call it "ventral vein" which is above the elbow and is the one through which blood is drawn, appearing manifestly at the elbow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And the cubital vein is the one between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two rain-like branches; and in the leg there are three veins: one is below the elbow on the left side of the chest, the second saphenous vein which is at the right ankle; and the vein called "nase" which is at the other ankle's wrist; and in the other leg there are also three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The patient should aid the sinuses located behind the ears with old cathartics and emetics; and the quality of the sinus cleanser, as I tell you, is that you seize the head of the patient, and rub the place where the sinuses are with a harsh cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a pin until the two sinuses appear behind the ears in the two dependent places of the head: then bend down when you feel the pulse under your chin, and press firmly; then take the lancet, and push it through the sinus up to the bone, then pull your hand all along the sinus, and strike the skin and the sinus well two times through; and make the blood come out until you see; then bind and tie it until it is healed; and I have already said about the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The first artery of the two located in the temples, has the ability to drain old, soft, and common otalgia (ear pain); its properties are as I say: a patient must turn their neck so that both veins appear clearly; feel the pulse beneath your jaw, then apply pressure on it; next lift the vein up towards the neck at the indicated place, insert the lancet, lift the vein up and squeeze, just like you have done in the other veins, and release the blood according to your need; then release the patient, put your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton; next, shape it (the vein) and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about their treatment and extraction, which begins the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The vein of the forehead is as valuable as the cephalic vein in old facial diseases, and it has migrated and turned red; and its qualities are such that the patient turns his neck while twisting it until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 And place the point on the vein, and press from above with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see; then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein when it is healthy and never stop working with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Moreover, the flames should not be too sharp; and slice across as the bone is near, so that the flames do not break when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The veins in the two eyelids help with eye problems, redness, swelling, and facial diseases; and the qualities of their vein are such that the patient turns his neck while twisting it from any link, as before; then tie the vein and let the traverse vein be slightly longer and wider than usual, because there is no heat involved.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, they may break [the patient's skin]; then make a wound of blood, as much as you need, and then cover it with linen, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The opening of the vein in the neck is useful for ague, scurvy, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that come from the face, and especially when it is old; and the qualities of the vein are that the patient squeezes his neck, then squeezes his nose with your left hand, and takes fine, long flame, and inserts it into the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well anywhere else, and the pulse will begin to beat now; and do not go too deep, and make the bleeding according to your need, then stop for a night, because it is very quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The following of the two veins assists in the contraction of the aneurysm, and at the beginning of the formation of the anastomosis, and in many diseases, and ulcerations, and inflammation, and suppuration, and herpes, and strangulations; and the quality of the vein is such that the patient stretches his neck under one and the other, as we have said; and the master standing over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on the bed, then open the long vein a little widely, then draw out the blood moderately, or as much as necessary; then repeat this process in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and gently tighten all the veins so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	 From the liver surgery
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The purification of veins in the mouth above helps to cool [the mouth] and promotes decay of the gums, fissures in the lips, toothache, and surrounding areas.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 And the qualities of the liver surgery are to make the patient sit in front of you and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the liver, and look at the two veins, one on the right liver and the other on the left, and they are known by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that there are smaller black veins around them: therefore strike both, and if you do not know which one it is, or if you are uncertain, strike the largest of each, and the same applies to the upper and lower veins because it is done in the same way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 From below the tongue liver
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The liver surgery of the veins beneath the tongue is performed after the cephalic surgery, and it is at the incision of the throat, and for diseases of the eye and mouth; and the qualities of the liver surgery are that the patient lies down with his hands between the sun, and he lifts the tongue and looks below on each side for a black vein: therefore pierce both, but do not go too deep, because beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The veins from which one commonly heals are healed in two ways: either by pricking with a large, thin instrument, such as a lance or subtle olive oil, and it is called "anesil"; and they are large and fine according to the size and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirrhine is very renowned, and it is wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And it is necessary to open thick veins full of large, apparent blood and containing large, turbid blood; and this is the shape of olive oil flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is pointed more subtle, and it is for treating subtle veins that contain subtle, yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The healing of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are under the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen; and it is necessary for the healer to heal quickly and for him to release the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And if the artery is touched, and bleeding ensues, it must be stopped, as I have said; but the flame should not be pricked, but cut like a lance.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the basilica does not open manifestly, you must force it to open, and change another; or you may wish any relief from it, or you may sanction in its place the vein through the arm: it opens manifestly; and touch the flame with a lance, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you wish to know the location of the vein, then it is necessary that you force the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the point of entry, bind the arm, and burn the vein with a lance; and beware not to wound the artery when you see the vein swell, for it is of the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you see it rising high like the urine of a child, and the wound is red and subtle, know that it is not from an artery: therefore hurry up, and place your finger firmly on top for a long time, then remove your finger until the bleeding stops; often this happens; if the arm is affected, leave it as it is, and do not let the patient move it; and be afraid and do not let him move it until it heals.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If the artery does not appear swollen and it inflames, and there is no medicine present, cut open the artery if it is open, as the head of the wound recedes; bleed the limb.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 Take a piece of willow bark, cut it in half and place one part on top until the next day; if it stops bleeding, that's good; if not, cure it as we have said, with powders that stop blood; and the stopping of bleeding should not be delayed for various reasons due to the small size of the wound or the thickness of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The vein in the middle helps to drain blood from both the head above and the body below, because it is made up of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and the healer must beware of the nerve that is underneath, and if it pricks too deep, and he finds the nerve, and inflates and the patient's condition worsens or there is no recovery; and this nerve opens up frequently, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must drain it with an instrument; and avoid the nerve to your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The vein of the head helps to drain blood from the head and aid in healing; and it must be drained with olive oil or myrtle fire, because it is the safest among all veins, because there is no nerve or artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Therefore, one must seek the easier joint, and not worry if it is necessary to do so for the first time, and one can start again; and sometimes the joints swell in some people when it is necessary for the first time, but it should cause no worry.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the urine is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing that you need to know about bleeding is that it should not be done except to maintain health and to avoid future illnesses; and the bleeding should be performed in one of the three veins that are commonly known: namely, the cephalic, femoral, or basilic; and the bleeding should begin during the springtime, at geun, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear; and the first bleeding should be done on either the first or third day, three hours or four days later.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The first sanitation given for illnesses has no set hour, but when necessary day or night, in every hour and at all times; and it is not appropriate to sanitize children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman bearing a child except during the fourth month up to the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	One should not treat the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 And when someone wishes to be sanitized, in any manner that may be, it is required that their intestines be emptied with a light enema, if they have retained much feces, so that the veins do not carry waste products to the main organs; nor should one sanitize someone who is overly salty from foods, drunk, or excessively sweating, nor those who are ill from colic, vomiting, stomach problems, excessive urination, heavy labor, staying awake and working, and those who suffer from exhaustion, or from something related to the weapon or body; then soften the humors, if it is too thick, with foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power; then immerse them in water, unless anything prevents it, to refine the blood, and sanitize the vein on the side opposite the third, as we have said; and keep that day from labor, pain, lust, and similar things; and be careful and cheerful, and let the sanitizer stand higher than the one being sanitized, and rub their arm II or III times, then carefully stretch the sinew above gently, for when it is too tight or narrow, it cannot heal without; then rub the area with the hand until the veins inflate, and feel them; then moisten the sanitizer's fingertip with a little old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand below that vein where he wishes to sanitize, so that the vein does not fail or bleed when cut.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 For there are veins that resemble ropes in a sieve, and those which are full of windiness, so that when flame is applied, it contracts with the flame, and cannot open the vein; and such cases exist; and if the vein opens, the wound is too narrow, therefore the sewer should be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If the vein opens again later or too quickly, and the wound is not inflamed:
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 And if the limb is swollen and the patient fears, let him rest for a day or two and not tie his arm: perhaps pus will come out; do not enter a bath, then resume sewing if it pleases him; and if the puncture is small or narrow, cauterize it carefully and doubt that too much blood will flow from it, and apply the flame directly to the puncture itself; and open it slightly, so that the limb swells; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the joint swollen, do not start healing immediately, but place a drop of oil on it, as the oil alleviates the body from blood and is thickened in this joint like oil; and administer the oil in every wound where you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same is done with treacle and bandages when applied to the joint; if it becomes too thick, refine it.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if there is a large abscess, which happens often, especially when the opening of the vein is small, hurry up and place a damp sponge soaked in hot vinegar on it and hold for an hour; you must do this after the blood flow from the vein has stopped, and if it remains at the joint after several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not matter; if you see, put something containing aloes or myrrh, refreshed in ashes, powder, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and appearance occur at the base of the basilica; place your hand on it then, if you find it soft to the pressure of the hand, this is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then be careful not to apply anything mentioned above, for by chance it is in court without the artery; but let it have one dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with another medicine until it heals and becomes healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw blood according to its quantity based on its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it turns red; and if you see it swollen, let it drain until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And it is necessary for the one who is swollen and protruding, who needs extraction of blood, to make a larger incision; let the veins be wide. And for the weak one, do the opposite, and it should be drained little by little, and it should be drained by cutting across, not by pricking; and this method of draining is safe from displacement of blood and compression of nerve, and short drains are more effective than long ones.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 For the one whose body needs draining, give soft bread soaked in pomegranate seeds below; if it is heated, drain the blood 3 or 4 times. And for those of cold complexion, juice the bread before draining with a syrup made from pomegranates or honey-based aromatic syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and make it well-scented.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if it [the wound] festers at the wound site, after much bleeding, then it is necessary that he drink a broth of char, and an aromatic subtle syrup, and use other things as we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if you want to fracture some bone, and heal it again as needed, when it is weakened by excessive healing, it should heal little by little, according to the quantity of its power continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if you want to fracture some bone after the first healing, and it has strong flesh, it heals seven hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if you want to heal from another part, it should heal on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 For there is much blood inside the body which is already heated and causes fever; in such case it is necessary to draw out a large amount of blood, and to open the sore until it festers at the wound site; then you reward all conditions of healing, and place your hand above the pulse when the wound heals, so that death does not come instead of pus, and this happens many times when healers are negligent; and it is not necessary to dislocate the arm, and to draw blood a second time, and the sore is closed, but you press strongly; nor if it is curved, that you stretch out the arm hastily, for that would be bad; but leave it until the wound heals a second time; or place the tip of the fire at the sore until the congealed blood flows out of the vein, and put a piece of fresh linen on top of it, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is burst, leave it and do not squeeze it until the abscess has been soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if the necessity arises to draw blood a second time, do it in the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are healthier than the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the manner of bleeding is that the patient pushes their hand into hot water until the flesh becomes red; then it should be tied gently, so that the vein appears clearly, then prick it carefully, neither wide nor long; and make large holes, and bleed well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be drained, put the hand back into hot water, and let the blood flow out in the water until you have enough; and if this is a vein, do not pound the hand with hot water again because it puts more winter there than summer; and the bleeding from this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The vein of the salvation of the right hand is effective for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done: Strain the hand, and apply hot water until the vein has fled, if you see it; and if the vein runs sideways, and if you cover it all over, it causes no harm; and do not go too deep, for the nerves are entirely bare of flesh underneath, then put the hand back in hot water, so that the wound is congealed and cannot leak.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drained the blood as much as necessary, put oil and linen over the wound to bind it quickly, and do this with each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The purgative of the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do as I have told you regarding the right one.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The vein of the spine is effective for all diseases that are under the body, such as ailments of the back, and retention of phlegm, and diseases of the lungs, and knees and old legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 And the qualities of his health are such that the patient puts his foot in hot water and rubs it over the vein until it perishes, and ties it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot there are many rain-like outflows; therefore, the wider the flow, or at the ankle, is more effective.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cut open above the foot, guard against the nerves that are beneath, and cut through as well as possible like in cutting; let the flames be still.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the bone cannot come out, place the foot in water and let the vein empty well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 If the vein needs to be treated for the first time, then start again slightly above a finger's breadth as the skin is salty; do not doubt of the nerve, as we have said, and similarly treat the sole of the other foot in the same way.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The wound of the sciatic nerve is at the knee joint, and its cleaning relieves pain in the ankle, when it is hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And the qualities of his health are that the patient immerses himself or herself in water and pulls above the ankle four fingers' breadth while twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, let it be drained in all ways you can, and by crossing; and it is more effective to cut it, for the skin is tough, and it is much obedient to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 And if you don't treat it, there will be no healing for the pain in the back or side of the foot, and move toward the small toe, and beware of the nerves; and make as much correction of the blood as you see, then undo the bandage, and put cotton on it and bind it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 open abscesses
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Corns or hair, or glass are used for blistering, and blistering is done in two ways: either by making an incision to draw blood, or without making an incision.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 This ventosation that is meant to hurt is of two kinds: one is for all fire, or with fire; the ventosation made by wounding and bloodletting is performed in twelve leagues of the body, from which one is entirely in the head; and the others are under the neck; and the others on both sides of the neck; and the abscesses under the chin; and the abscesses under both shoulders; and the abscesses above the ankles; and the abscesses under both arms; and the abscesses under both legs; and the abscesses under both wrists; and ventosation does not treat blood, unless for small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it should not be administered at all, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if due to necessity or custom it is required to bleed, we will do so every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every case; for there are those who, when they need to be bled, have a heavy head; and those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness in their eyes; and those who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue has swollen, and they bleed; and there are those who dream, and see blood and pains and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially if it is in the month, we order to ventose after 3 hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The bleeding of the nose helps with headache ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of the entire body; and this bleeding is in place of the cephalic bleeding, and those who are of cold complexion should not perform it, or who have a cough, as it does them great harm; and for this reason those with cold head diseases should not perform it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal themselves become negligent, and for this reason, the cupping glass should be placed a little lower due to the fear of negligence.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The ventosation in the neck is located near the carotid artery and the basilica, and for this reason it is beneficial for pressure, for cutting the channel of the throat, and for complete filling; it must be pressed lightly because if it holds too firmly, it can cause oblique fissure or stomach and heart damage.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 The ventosation in the neck towards the chest causes headaches, otalgia and migraines, strangulation, pain at the roots of the teeth, and is located near the carotid artery; you must instruct the patient to press gently with their hand without pressing the artery and not causing bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilations under the chin are useful for mouth diseases and gum decay, as well as other mouth illnesses; they should be placed in the locations of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilations under the armpits are useful for diseases that originate from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The ventosations of the ribs are as much worth as three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; instruct the lord not to press too deeply, for the muscles are bare of flesh, and knows beneath nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventose on the buttocks is worth as many emorroids from the bottom and diseases below, and it must be large, and made of metal, for it needs to draw well; and in case it is too thin, it will break; and it will cause large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The swellings in the legs open widely, because they attract blood from all over the body; they are similar to ancient rain sores, scrofula (neck swelling) and bladder stones; they weaken the body after a long time, and bring pus into various conditions. They are located in the area of the knee joints and ankles.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of treating the swelling is to first empty it, suck it quickly, press it evenly, and continue doing so until you see the area turning red and inflamed, and the redness of blood appears; then stop, and place the swellings, and take care in the disposition of the body, because there are some who have thin skin and clear pores: if this is the case, it should be cut once only, and the wounds should be large and deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the skin is thick, it should be cut twice: the first time to make the way for thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the wound is very thick, it should be cut three times; and when we want to draw blood drop by drop, we should only prick once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 If we want much blood, let us often do it; if the flesh is thick, press deeply and limit where the nerves are pierced, and it is necessary for those who have thick skin and hard, with narrow pores, to anoint the muscles of the ventosations with stimulating and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, use stimulating oil such as violet oil, sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil; and if it is in winter, use oil of parsley, watercress, camomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balsam oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if the person to be healed has a tight and narrow wound, no oil should be put on it, but it should be washed after being lanced with rose water, cold water, lemon water, curds water, or porcelain water, or any similar thing.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture should rise from bed with the aid of aspen wood, or water of myrtle, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 Those with excessive fluid stand up from old wine or sour water, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or any similar thing; and it should not be sained by lancing before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two; and they should not sleep after lancing, and it is necessary that they warm themselves, when they must lance and when they have been lanced.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And let him who is recovering from being coleric and excessively sharp and inflamed, take cold things such as green apples, endives and lettuces, and similar items; also, cooked leeks, meat of young cocks, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And one who has a cold constitution should take honey syrup, fragrant wine that is neither old nor new, cooked grapes, and cooked pears and young birds and sparrows; and on the day he farts, he should drink more than eat; also, it is necessary to give some men certain times triacetum or musk to strengthen the main members before or after the farting, and let them be subtle but not too hot for those who drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The ventouses placed to wound are those placed on the liver, spleen, gout, stomach, back, kidneys and loins; for such limbs cannot be wounded elsewhere except to draw blood from one member to another, as we do with the nipples when they are not sore; to remove the viscosity of the member, as we do with a plaster on the stomach or loins to reduce swelling; and to alleviate pain where there is blockage or stone, as it may draw the blockage by accident, or dislodge the stone from its place; and thus it works when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these ventouses are administered empty for this purpose only; sometimes they are administered with fire, and at other times filled with cold water, like in diseases of the pleura, and in such a way one fills the ventouse with hot liquid or warm liquid in which cooked herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the bladder treated with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And it should be two fingers and a half in width and depth, and have a small hollow around the middle, like pushing an awl, made of bone, soft enough not to prick the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle there should be a rod of bone or iron, for placing a splint, and they should be large and small according to the illnesses and age of those who take them; because the blisters of children are different from those of the old, and thin from those who are fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And this splint should be placed on the limb in such a way: take the linen or wax splint and place it across the rod within the blister, so that the light is at the bottom of the blister and does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, with the fingers above the hollow that we have mentioned, so that when one looks, one can see the vapor, and remove the blister; and take the linen as before, and repeat it often, if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the bladder, therefore, which is administered in disease of pleurisy, not having a worm nor an abscess, and it is not brought forth except when it is full of water, and is placed on the member only; this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Sores not brought forth except in members where bladders cannot be administered due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and in bare flesh areas, such as palms or fingertips, and other similar areas; and the nature of the bladder is that when you find sores that are in sweet clear waters without pus, if you take them; put one nut in sweet water with them until they become familiar, and have nothing inside; then let it be drained by bloodletting and bladder, then rub the member until it turns red, and place the sores on it; and when they become full and warm, if it is a place where a bladder can be administered, place it there, for it is very effective.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If the shoulder is not in place, lift it up lightly, then press down firmly, and then sprinkle with salt; and if the shoulders remain unhealthy too close to the body, wet a linen cloth with cold water and lay it on, until the sores are dried; and if the sores multiply, lay vitriol powder, or other similar things on them, until they are dried; or you put half-peeled beans on the shoulder and leave them until they adhere to the shoulder, which will now stop the bleeding; and if it requires more care, take other sores.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the sores do not want to take, rub the shoulder with fresh blood, or you insert an awl into them until the sores come out, and then lay them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will clot; and when you see that they are bleeding, pour some powder of aloe and soap or ash over it, which will now stop the bleeding.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Inform the dear son that foolish men depart from this chapter who have never seen any of the old books, nor read any letters; and because of this, knowledge is alienated in our land, for I have never found it good; and I know nothing about it except through the science of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated its content, and by experience, and by the habit of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, let us say the summary of this book, the number of words and chapters where the wise put their understanding and dwell on truth, so that those who have been proven knowledgeable will know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 When fracture or dislocation or torsion or curvature comes to anyone, it is necessary that you cleanse the patient from both sides, if nothing prevents you, such as weakness of body, or children, or old people; or if the time is not too warm or too cold; and do not eat cold meat, namely cold beef and mutton, nor drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, nor stuff yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you doubt about abscess heat or spread of matter to the member; then the patient returns to their first care as they have used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with foods that make large stools, or they have thick consistency, such as cooked wheat in water, and peas, and heads, and feet, and pork belly, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For this nourishment brings on softened stools and the broken bones heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that broken bones in the elderly and weak cannot be well regained or sewed according to their nature due to the relaxation of members, neither those who are too tender, such as children's bones; but it does not matter, set on the fractured bone large splints which hold and join the member together, until it heals as it was before; and do not let it touch at all, and therefore nourish it with large foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the breaks are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the neck is different from the break of the foot, or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of break.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There is a break that grows over time, and another that sharpens, like the quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a break with a wound, and a break with a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And each type should have its own device and tool in restoration, according to what memory comes to mind; and it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs when the joint is twisted, and it opens widely and swells at the touch; and when there is no twisting or pressure, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; but it can have twisting, or fissure, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	Do not move the hand, but apply medications that follow, and then hold it gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the fracture which goes into the joint, and are the two parts disjoined, they must now be set equally, so that abscesses may grow in them; and if abscesses grow there, let him leave it for one day, until the abscesses have subsided; then make it equal to the healthy part that you can easily and skillfully adjust, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations where there are pieces; then hold it, as needed hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And if in the bone there are broken pieces, extend the two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or with your hand a small member, or with two tendons or one tendon and with your hand; and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, adjust all additions in their places as you can, and ensure through your work that no injury or pain comes to the patient; align well the two bones of the bone according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And you should feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: straighten it out nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who bring it forth by their work abscess heat and contraction to the member, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is set in place, punish the patient well so that he does not move it, neither when watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and be careful that the limb is secure enough so that it feels no pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 For if it feels no pain, then it is not set in place, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain; be careful to set it straight so that deformities do not come when it is restored; the qualities of the broken limb are as I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are various in smallness and largeness and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 For there are small members such as the arm and leg: you should wrap them in soft and thin linen cloth; and those that are thick, like thighs and legs: you should wrap with a wide and stiff rope, for the wide ropes embrace the whole large limb and apply even pressure to all parts so that there is no swelling; then wind strips of bandages lightly around it, 3 or 4 times depending on the member, and hold one part of the rope with your hand, then go above the break and apply less pressure, leaving a gap at the break; and soften the rope a little at a time, taking care to take a large piece of healthy skin; then take another rope and wind it around in the opposite direction over the broken limb; then return to the part below the break, and apply moderate pressure, not too hard or too gently, as we have said in the first lesson above; then place strips of linen or cloth between the ropes, so that they are all even, then bind everything with a bandage and then place well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 And if there is a swelling or abscess, place something soothing for the abscess above it and let the swelling be for some days; then press with your poles, and they should be about half the size of a large cane sharpened carefully, or of a stick that is made for splitting wood, or of reeds, and they should be in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 The poles that one puts on the injury should be slightly larger and wider than the others; and they should be as long as necessary for the limb (whether small or large); then press with your poles in the same way as you did in the first instance, and then bind it with a cord, following the same method as in the first instance on the injury; the binding should be tight at first and less so later; and it should be of medium thickness, not too thick or too thin, and be made of flax yarn; for if the binding is thick, like I have seen in the works of fools who make their bindings of twisted linen thread, it is a great error, because the binding cannot be even if it is too delicate, and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each pole.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is gored by the shafts of arrows after being wounded in healthy limbs, you should place linseed oil or linen cloth on them to prevent bleeding.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is fractured and the ligaments are torn apart, here is the remedy I shall tell you.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to hold splints on all broken limbs for the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 For when the limbs are large, it is not appropriate to put hot irons on them before five or seven days, or more according to your certainty about the abscess healing; and here comes the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: and it is that you take flour that is kept at the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundant egg, and put this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, on, and this is the common method of restoring the fracture for various positions, and similarly for women and small children, because it is neither too cold nor too hot.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster for healing fractures, dislocations and twists: take alum, radish, onion, asafetida and arabic gum, mix .x. parts; add myrrh and aloes, .v. parts; 8 parts of alechil; make it into powder, and melt with yolk of egg; if the patient's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition, and quickly heals broken bones, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another method of plaster useful for twists: take mugwort and mallow, ten parts; myrrh and aloes, nine parts; cumin Armenian pepper, six parts; mix well, and moisten with vinegar or abundant egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another way to splint joints and dislocated bones, relieve the resulting pain, and treat it by cutting the bone, breaking it: take new linen, moisten it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This splint does not restore [the bone], but it is good for relieving abscess heat and bone pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of setting broken bones: take dry fig leaves and ground-up pawpaw (earth-apple) leaves, grind them together to make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another way to splint for the healing of the fractured bone and for encouraging the return of abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take the root of marshmallow, chamomile, violet flowers, beeswax flour, from each one a part; grind them together with wine, and if the limbs are scalded, grind it with moist coriander water or vinegar, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of emplastrum (medical plaster) stronger than the first, when an abscess hard comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take roots of comfrey, flax seeds, balm, clover, wormwood, and chamomile flowers, in equal parts; grind and cook with salt water or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates states in his book that no other substance should be placed on a broken limb for restoration except for a plaster made of beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between soft and firm but not too soft or too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen that dry and slightly warm things should be placed on a broken limb for restoration, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make a plaster for wounds and pain: take mugath and horsehair cut into pieces, or feathers of birds, and almonds, and grind them all together, and make a plaster with it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then loosen it a little after some time, and make sure the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved out of its place; do not loosen it for many days. And if pain or pruritus comes to the place, without rest or swelling, hasten, and loosen it, and remove the plaster now; take a light cloth and sea sponge wet, dip in water, and rub the place until the pruritus stops, and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it tightly enough to ensure the abscess does not become hot; and let the inflammation of the member subside, and the pain disappear, then continue the binding gently, and a little plaster, and do not strain it too much as before; and apply the binding until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that an abscess has been opened and drained, reddened, painful, and swollen, and you need emplastrum and linen, start it as before equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 And if no swelling comes to the limb from what we have said, it should not be dislocated except after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes it is left for twenty days, as I have seen, until the break heals and the joint approaches the flesh; then you must hold it more firmly than before, and thicken its meat, as I said earlier; and if you see the joint drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot enter therein; therefore give it hot, moist heat, every third day, and loosen a little the bandage; by this method you cut off nourishment from the limb, and quickly heal what the foolish surgeon leaves twisted: this is bad, and it is dangerous work, and I see nothing else but to rest and work correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	In various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 Many kinds of fractures exist and are diverse in their shapes, and the causes are designated; for there are fractures that are made by sword strikes, and the bones at the collar are completely broken up to the shaft which is under the bone, as happens with a cleave or split; and for this reason, such a method of fracture is called "cleavage".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword strikes the bone from above piercing through, it is called this kind of fracture "absolute"; and these are the two types of fractures, large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is impacted percussion, cleavage, fractures from falling on stones, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if the fracture penetrates through to the membrane underneath the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if the wound is in the bone as fine as hair, and it has a small fissure, it is called this fracture "hairy"; and if the wound is made by being struck by a stone, or falling, or similar things, causing the bone piece to enter below, and the bones are split like a smith when he hammers over pots; if a splinter goes in.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And this happens more in those who have a moist skull bone, such as an infant's skull; and it occurs in all kinds of fracture where small bones are displaced, like splinters; and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we shall know all ways of breakage by the dislocation above them, and the inquiry into their cause, and by the corruption of the flesh that is on top.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairy resemblance is known by those who, when the bone has been uncovered and scraped above it, the breakage appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of breakage, beware of the patient's accidents; and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, paralysis, fever ague, and the eyes to come out and redden, and other similar signs in various dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a doubtful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the navrez comes first to you and it is in winter, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the muzzle.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue below the bone is corrupted, and the accidents as we have said come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 If the fracture of the bone reaches the membrane that covers the brain, you must cut the broken part as follows: take hold of the patient's head, uncover the bone in all possible ways, and over the wound make an incision more gentle than possible, and if pus or abscess comes out when uncovering the bone, help it with what is needed; and fill the area with damp linen soaked in rose oil; let the wound rest until the pus or abscess subsides and be sure that no more pus comes out; then begin to remove the bone, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you make a narrow cut in front, and it is shaped like this:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then insert another cutting tool larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have numerous sizes, some narrow and others wide, sharp and made of iron not pointed; and work lightly, so as not to strike the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and protruding, then you must perforate it around so as to administer sizes with drills, not piercing through the bone of the head, and it should have a margin or one circle above the point that does not let the point pierce through the bone; and you must have more than one, so that each one comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for all bones; and this is the shape of the four types of drills:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for perforating around the broken bone are that you place one drill on the bone and turn it with your hands until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the drill a little further and do this all around, then cut the gap in the bone between the fractures, and do this as delicately as possible, lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or any of the tools you have such as pliers, tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is necessary that you reset the gap that remains between the bone with all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other incisors; and if something of the small bones or scales remain, do not press hard on them; rather, gently remove them with the instruments; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of work is that which the Greeks call "saussage," and they hold it in high esteem, and this is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you expose a part of the bone, where the open break moves, so that when you have exposed that part, you place it under the head of this lever-like instrument, as follows in shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 And do not cut through from one side, but the part should be split into two edges, so that the cut is towards the bone; then hit with a small hammer so that you gently chip around the bone, and take care of the cloth that is beneath it; if it tears against the bone, remove it gently, because it can be chipped badly without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the membrane, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to smoothen them out afterwards, and remove the scales with a sharp rasp of various sizes, in order to provide the most suitable solution for each case, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Then pass over with a large rasp, and afterwards with smaller ones, and continue doing so until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	For each other type of hair-thin fracture and subtle, it is necessary to provide remedy according to its guidance; and this is not something easily understood by one who has devoted his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 If the wound is open, you must take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled over once or twice, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; do this as lightly as possible so as not to burden the wound, then administer through another linen layer, and do not strain it more than necessary to cover the wound only; leave it like that for a day or two until the abscess subsides, then remove it, and administer medicines such as root of lilies, flour of wheat, incense powder, arsenic, and similar things; from these things make powder and place it on the wound, and administer other reliable medicines without mordication; and be careful that the wound is always clean, do not leave oil or pus in it, nor let it become assembled with a cloth, for when pus gathers on the brain tissue, it corrupts and causes great harm to the patient; for when something mordant is placed on the wound, it breeds more pus.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, if any bad accident happens to the patient as we have said, it is doubtful that he will recover his senses.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if blackness comes violently except for medicine that has been applied to it, whose virtue has been, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and apply the ointment to it; then cure it as necessary until it heals.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one of them only, because there are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it causes swelling or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 If one of the two parts is broken, you must put your little finger or thumb into the nostril, and place the fracture equal to that part inside the index finger, and at the corner, so that the nose returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part near the neck, and the arm cannot come to its place, then you must align it with the head of a straight stick, about a finger's breadth.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If the fracture is of two parts, you should do the same thing, and hurry to restore it in the first day if possible; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has calmed down, then press the tip of linen cloths at the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you step on one with the other, if it breaks there; and they are so thick that they fill the nostrils of the nose. (Translation)
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And they said to some restorer that one should moist the tents with butter, and to stir each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It does not seem good to me, but they should be moistened in the concoction of egg yolk and flour powder; then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardens.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes you step on goose feathers instead of swellings, and if there is a soft cloth around it, and hold the breakage, and blow into the patient's mouth; then do as you please. (Translation)
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess breaks out while you are working on it, put either beeswax or softened cotton in oil of roses, or a pinch of turmeric.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess does not come out, apply plaster from flour and incense powder mixed with egg yolk, then place light drains on it and do not tie them; if the break in the neck is small and broken into small pieces, remove them with appropriate tools, then cut the wound, and treat it with healing ointments or salves suitable for this case; and if there is no wound within the neck, treat it with tents, and place cloth cords on it until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured beneath and there is no wound outside, and the break is only external, but not broken in two, it is curved within, if this can be recognized easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary that, if the break is in the right part, you insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left jawbone, insert your index finger from the right hand and gently press the break from inside and align it with the other side.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is separated by 2, then you must administer an extension of 2 parts, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If the moving of the teeth occurs, whether it's fracture or breakage, hold them with a gold or silver thread or silk, then place a pad on the broken jaw and place one double cloth on top; then place a large well-made bandage or a piece of equal-sized leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it above where you can, and command the patient to rest, and provide him with light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then put it back in place what is changed; and apply a poultice over it with flour or mill powder with eggs or linseed meal after removing the pad; and put a light linen on top of the poultice, and if the poultice adheres, and the patient's disposition does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it heals in four weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess swells up, bring what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, be careful not to remove any bone fragments from the fracture; only remove with cautious instruments suitable for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, dilate it with fire according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all the bone fragments and there is none left over, stitch up the wound if it is wide, and put on one dressing suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it heals completely.
de la forcele	From the armory (or forceps)
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The armory breaks many times in front of the shoulder, and the break occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated into two parts, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the treatment is when there is a break without an injury, that you have two assistants, one holds the armory where it feels broken; and the other stretches out the neck towards the affected area; then align the break with your hands so that the form is as required, and it has no appearance or bulge.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to stretch more, place a round ball of cloth or linen around the patient's shoulder, as large as necessary; and extend and tighten the armory, and hold the ball with your hand, so that you align the break as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw out the head of the shoulder by force because it comes in fully, then the patient should lie on his affected side and place a small pillow under the shoulder, and the attendant should push the shoulder forward, until the bone of the collarbone is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you find debris, then you must cut through it; pull the pieces apart gently, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, then break it at one of the incisions that you have made; but place this instrument under the collarbone to prevent it from coming out:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And it should seem like a ladle, and not narrow, and be as wide as required, according to the size of the bone and the nature of the work; and let it have two prongs, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as the opening of the wound that you made when treating the bones; and when you are sure that the abscess has cooled down, if the opening is small, or if you doubt that the abscess has cooled down, use linen and cotton to dress the wound, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscess becomes cold, immerse it in rose oil and asafoetida and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The setting of the broken bone, when there are wounds and incisions, is that you place a plaster made from mill powder and egg yolk on the bone, put light stoppers over it, and put a splint under the affected area if necessary; then take a very wide bandage, one palm wide, then lay two layers of linen over the stoppers and the plaster; then take a narrow strip of cloth three feet long and wrap it around the bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang out; and place the strip over the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the patient's arm, and under the affected side; and tighten it on each side, and when you see that the bones hold the fracture properly, and you can clearly see that the strip does not move above the broken bone, you should check it every day, and when the linen becomes loose, you should tighten it; place the patient on his back and put a small pillow under the affected area to lift the shoulder up; this will align the fracture of the shoulder blade by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it except for bad accidents, until 20 days have passed; then reapply the plaster if necessary, tighten and leave it like that until it is healed; and it is usually healed in 28 days, but in fewer days for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 It is necessary that the shoulder break or dislocate not heal on its own, and one can only force it back with touching; then arrange it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it in accordance with its natural form, in all possible ways; then place powder from a mill on the joint with plenty of egg, light bandages, and put it under a double cloth; then put a large and delicate splint over it, about one finger wider than the shoulder, and if there are any hollows anywhere on the shoulder beneath the splint, fill them with linen bandages so that the splint fits evenly; and then bind it tightly with a great bandage so that the splint does not move from its place, and watch the ligament every day; and whenever it softens, bind it again, and make the splint equal if it is out of place, and have the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be reset in twenty or twenty-five days, and when this number is completed, loosen it, and be sure, for it is not bone that easily becomes dislocated.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment protrudes in front, but not underneath the skin, lift it up and remove the bone, and follow what was said earlier in the setting of a fracture to treat an abscess with hot cautery.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture (of the) thigh
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The injury is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the back.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 When it is broken in the middle, it declines below and causes the patient great pain, and lack of nourishment, and immediately vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the bones that are broken, and he feels it all very acutely.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and one places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides to your hands, and subtly puts it all in place in all ways possible until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then put splints and pillows over the thin part of the bone where salt or another light substance is, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; then turn the ligament round and round towards the back, and tighten it gradually, and check every hour if it has healed, and if it softens, tighten it again; and if it needs to be untied, due to corrosion or itchiness at the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry and untie it, remove the splint, and attend to those who have come in matters of cures; then reset the splint, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the rib fracture
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of the ribs occurs only in large ones behind the back and near the chest, and they do not bend unless because they are slippery; and it is felt well at the inquiry of the fingers.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the restoration is that you set the fracture equally as necessary.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then put a splint, and tighten it with a stick if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	If the fracture of the ribs is inclined inward, causing great pain and swelling, similar to pleurisy, for the bone pierces the lung; and it swells at the tips, and immediately vomits a large amount of blood, which is a sign of grave illness, and the ancients had used much effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the abdomen in order to push out the fracture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not let hot irons come if they have not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have arrived, make them healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say to put leeches on the joint for swelling, which seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the leech does not attract the excess to the joint due to its weak constitution.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say to cover the joint with damp linen in hot oil and put tents between the ribs to make it equal on all sides; then it should be cured with pleurisy cure, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the patient feels intense pain that he cannot bear on the bone that is not covered by fabric, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision above the level of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put something under the instrument to prevent infection; and then you must split the bone, extract it lightly, and then sew the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat the wound with splints until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when an abscess swells up, lay on it a moistened cloth soaked in rose oil, and place the heat source over it; cure the abscess as required, and let the patient lie still on the side where it is located until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes breaks occur in the collarbone bones and they bend; and likewise in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And if this happens and you want to know whether it will be healed or not, take note if his hands become softened, swollen, and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, there is no pain felt.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that it is mortal in many ways, and if the hands are silent and feel well when they are pulled or pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and that the patient should be cured if care is taken.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And if a similar thing happens at the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is hollow or not, beware if the feet are soft, and if there is an accident that is in hands, and over the back sudden swelling and evacuation without will; and when it has been prodded on the stomach, there is evacuation without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And if it is prodded on the back and it wants to heal, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Know that it is mortal: do not labor at its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this accident does not happen to him, it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply oil to a hot abscess, either rose oil or egg yolk oil, until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying ointments, bind it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If any bone is dislocated, you must cover it with oil; then remove the bone, join the two sides of the wound together with stitches, if it is large, until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow", put your left hand in its place and hold it equal to your right hand, then apply the ointment and plaster if necessary; then tie it, and if it dislocates again, push it back into place, remove the bone, and heal the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the leg bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It often happens that the bone of the shin is broken, and if it happens, there is only a little lessening at the head; and it becomes long, declines to the front, comes to the patient pain at the place, and points and swells where it breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the break; and recognize which one is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the head only, then make an equal incision in the same natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or declines within, then make the patient lie on his belly, so that the restoration of the break is presented to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it straight (the dislocation), put a splint above it, then put a stick or a rod on top and hold the break so that it does not move; and apply the area below the ribs until the breaks are level.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess swells up, do not touch it until the abscess swelling subsides, and put on what was previously mentioned (the bandage); then return to treatment, and hold it as needed, without any bad incident occurring; and that is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is between the chest and the neck of the upper arm, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two ways: of which one is that you take a splint thicker than a thumb, in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two heads together with two ropes, and bind them upwards, and make the patient lie on one seat; then let him throw his broken arm over the splint, until it comes to rest, and have a hump of splint in the middle, then bind above something heavy or the minister extends it downward; then put the mirrors the break even with their hands together, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another method is that one restrains the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two servants that one holds the one who is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below along all the limb, and extends each one to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 If you see that the extraction is too strong, hold the ligament under the break, and above the break, and extend each of the attendants to their own part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the break is near the neck of the shoulder, then you must place the splint underneath the neck and the other side towards the break; and similarly, if the break is towards the side, then you must gently place the splint, without effort, so that the break is level with its place and with the side; then make the break equal, as needed, and hold it in place, unless an abscess develops.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If abscesses have come up, do not hold it for more than 7 days, and place soft linen cloth soaked in rose oil on it until the abscesses are calm; then hold it, and the method of holding it is that you put a wooden splint on the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest; and tie the bandage, and hold it on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in its normal position, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moving.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone moves, use a probe, and place a larger and stronger probe over the fracture, with one inch of space between each probe, and let each probe be as wide as it passes the fracture two inches from each side; then hold the probes in place, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about the fracture, firmly and slightly less in alignment.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 And if you see the position of the bones and the compression, as we have said, during the time that you are restoring the broken limb, and you doubt an abscess forming, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine every three days the binding, to ensure pus does not swell or come to the place, nor the blood flow to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If the direction, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And if no such accidents occur, the dislocation should not be treated before three days or more have passed, and the patient should lie on his back with his hands on his stomach; and place a linen bandage of equal thickness beneath the shoulder, and observe every hour of the day or night that the limb does not move or become softened ligaments; treat it with the direction through the power of medicine, and give him the meat as previously specified, in such a way that the meat is at first tender; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be set in 40 days altogether; and then you must dislocate it again and administer a bath and ointments to guide its direction.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the stricture is deformed and blocked, it will take days or two months to dissolve.
de la brisure du bras	In case of a broken arm:
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the "forearm," of which one is small and forms the lower part of the elbow; and the other is large, and is located under it near the little finger. By chance, only the large forearm may break or both, and sometimes they break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the small boils are broken, the restoration and healing are easy; but when the large ones are broken, the healing is poor, and more difficult than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it is only the small boil that has been broken, one should extend it slightly and make it level.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it is the large boil, one should tighten it more forcefully; extend it over the spoon, and place the thumb of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient lie crosswise on top of it, and the spoon in front of it be raised higher so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then stretch out the attendants' arms to the part below his hand or his leg, and one attendant at the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then the mirror adjusts it to its equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	If the break is in several places, put each one back in its place, and if there is any displacement that pricks the bone, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut and remove it, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if it is wounded by breaking, I have spoken about it in the individual chapter; take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 If at the beginning of the resetting there are abscesses boiled, apply a thin cloth made of rosin oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; adhere the cloth to it gently until the abscess is soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 Then remove the rosin cloth, and apply a plaster made of milled powder with plenty of egg, then insert the splints; the splint of the fracture should be more prominent than the others, and slightly larger; it must have six splints or more in different positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two. Hold the fracture more firmly above than elsewhere, and less so in alignment, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are over the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or coarse; and let the threads, which bind it, be of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And hold the limb and the joint afterwards for some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 If any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that happens to the limb, then you must irrigate the limb with hot water until the itching is relieved; and let the limb not rest at all.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then begin the binding again, and if the joints are weakened and the bones dislocated, or something similar, advise accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the urine cannot reach the member because it is too narrow, you must soften it with a little medicine, and leave it like that for some days, until the urine flows into it, and then hold it closed.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of the things that we have said come to the patient, do not undo (the binding) until twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 And in any case, then he will hold his hands at his neck, and let the necks be even, and keep watch over movement and turning, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty or thirty-five days, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the properties.
de la brisure de la main	of the break of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and in us at the fingers, there are few breaks, but it only occurs multiple times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is broken or sprained, the patient must cross their arms, place them straight in front of themselves equally; then they should place their hand on an extended cloth, and the attendants should extend the broken bones, aligning them as needed, until they are well joined; and apply a plaster and poultices, unless an abscess forms there, then a splint according to the size of the break should be applied; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is around the belly of the sole, make a bandage from several cloths, and instruct the patient to wrap it around their broken sole; then tighten a long cloth, and let the splint be as wide as the sole of the hand, and tighten it as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is on the outside [of the bone], then you must place a splint above and another below in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it completely around the hand, and compress the ligament between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the break is in any of the fingers, if it's the thumb, make it even as necessary; and hold it with the sole, and if you see that a small straight splint should be placed to lift the break and prevent movement; and if the break is in other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, make them even, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; or tie all of them in one bandage, which is as good as using a splint; and take care in the restoration and the placement of the abscess heat, and treat those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	broken leg
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are frequently broken, and it can be seen when it twists forward and backward; and the restoration is that one ligament is tied above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each minister extends their ligament evenly to their respective parts; and this is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the break is near the root of the thigh, it is one of the ligaments toward the knee, and the other ligaments below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And if it is near the knee, then the ligaments are below the knee and the extension is below; then place the hands on the bone, equal to its two hands, as natural, and then set the plaster and the splint, so that abscess does not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess that is hot, let it be soothed first, then return to your work and treatment; the treatment is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 You must wind above the break with a bandage doubled in two or three, and leave the superfluity, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the shin, and thread the long cord between the thigh and the leg, below, toward the knee, and bring the end of the cord above; then turn the leg up and the bandage up, over the break, then put splints on the break and a splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to equalize the tension, then begin to bind three or four times around the break; and as you go higher above the break, and less constrain it; then attend to the two cords that you have threaded between the leg and the thigh, and bind three splints that are above, then return to below at the end of the cord, so that you come down to the foot; and constrain it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, until no abscess or swelling or any other similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If there is a piece of bone that protrudes, loosen it and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that pierce, you should cut or saw through the area, drain pus, and treat it as we have said until it heals completely.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that splints are placed on it, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration, this does not cause discomfort to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the thigh is restored within one day, or a little more or less, according to the various complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the road of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the knee joint there occurs little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 If it breaks, it is not so much a fracture as a fissure or a wound that causes pain everywhere and feels painful.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when one equalizes the bone that is broken to its joints, as long as it can be assembled; then place the splint and put on a round pin, if needed, and tighten it as required; then check all the arrangements we have said in other fractures, such as an abscess, burn and others; place at each accident what is needed for it, until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the leg fracture
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is correctly called "hammer," and the others is called "shinbone"; and it breaks similarly as in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the operations are all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	If the thin bones are broken, they turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 If the large bone is broken, there is great pain and it can be seen; and it turns underneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then apply traction and make it even, and tie the bones equally; but still, if the fracture is unsightly, and there are more pieces, let the traction be smaller and lighter; align according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of splints that extend the leg from one side to another, and be as long as the leg from the knee down to the sole; then wrap them in two layers, one above and one below, and bind it in the middle so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and in this way it is good; and apply one bandage the length of the leg, made of splints, and place the leg for immobilization, and make it exactly at the fracture where there is pain; and move the leg every day, to check if there is abscess or other accident; treat it until it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones from the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes have a fracture and the toes also, and there is no cure except with many positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones lifting one over the other, place the patient on his feet on the ground as if he wants to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are elevated, then press it until it returns to its place; then apply an emplastrum and poultice on top, and put a small board under the foot with two even holes, then tighten it around the foot as needed, then once you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things that you may need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, loosen the linen, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two (shoulders) are broken, restore them as we have said regarding the hands of the hand; then place a splint on the broken shoulder according to its length, and let it be slightly larger, then place beneath the affected area the table I mentioned, and bind it securely; and if there are more than two or three (broken shoulders), break each one with a splint, enveloped in one linen cloth, and bind the affected area below the table; and ensure that the table is positioned above the belly of the affected shoulder, so it covers it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, when we have spoken of them; and treat each case according to its needs.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the wrist bone fracture
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the natural bone of the woman is broken, make her sit upright, then lean her to the small of the back and hold her from behind; then fill the cavity with the patient's cotton and also stuff it as tightly as possible; then separate the woman, lift her buttocks a little at a time, and pull the cotton out until it reaches the entrance of the cavity, and let the bone come out with the stuffing; and when she wants to urinate, remove the stuffing, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or more: the fracture will heal, and if you see, take a bladder of hemp, and tie one end to the wound, and push the entire bladder into the cavity; then blow through the rope strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside: the bone will return to its place; then fill it with cotton, and leave it for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bone of the thumb of man is broken, or woman, restore it as we have said in the wristbone; and these breaks shall not be hidden from him who applies his study and use to them, and read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 The term "brisure" signifies various positions for the right way of restoration; therefore, let's proceed to them.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the shaft when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put the shaft in it; then wrap fabrics around it, and leave for 3 days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of breakage with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a breakage with wound, especially if it is large such as the bones of the leg or shoulder, that it be healed now, so that the wounds that we have mentioned bear witness to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, anoint it with vitriol (if you have no other), then immediately begin to heal the breakage in that same hour or day, unless abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If abscesses appear, wait until the ninth day for healing to begin, allowing the abscesses to subside; do not touch it on the third or fourth day as it may cause harm.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks out near the opening, it should be gently set back into place with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the limb does not align itself for you to set it evenly, then you must straighten it with this tool made of iron, which is about 7 to 9 inches long, and the width according to the size of the wound; and for this reason, the mirror should grasp 3 or 4 fingers, depending on what is needed in each treatment of a broken bone; and it should be round and slightly large but not fold under compression on the member during your work, and sharp at the tip, and thick from the middle to the end, like:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "palainche", which means that the curved bones should be placed on top of the visible bone's head; and press it once, until it returns, and make them equal one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the break is subtle and the tool cannot grasp the bone well, you must cut the head of the bone, so that the tool has power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, strike it with an appropriate instrument, either a chisel or a saw, to your ability; then remove what is immobilized in the bone with sharpness and small chips.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 Then make sure it is in its natural place, moisten the cloth in black steeped vinegar, and apply it directly if it is warm; do not put any oiled gauze or anything over the wound that may cause decay and corruption; then administer cold water when you have reset the bone, leave the wound open, cover it with a dressing according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not tightened with the break; and many times this has been done by foolish physicians, causing the patient to suffer or death or decay occasionally; and the bindings should be softer and more supple than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident will come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, do not put splints on it; but wrap around, instead of splints, hard cloths and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And after a day or two, when the wound has begun to swell, take away what you have put on it and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as healing ointment made from four substances and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you should loosen the limb two times a day, in the morning and at evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limbs should be aligned in such a way that the bone moves downward gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it passes for many days and cannot heal but again bows, you know that there are small bone fragments; therefore, you must press the wound with force, and remove all the dislocated bone fragments that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula or other form of corruption comes to the place, you must treat it, according to what is written in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And when the bone is broken and open on the member, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and similar large bones, do not drain it, for many times death comes from it; but leave it until it can heal; perhaps later it will harden by itself after twenty days or thirty. Then treat the wound if you can; but if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The burning cautery commands the sick to let their hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see sores after the breaking of bones, especially near the joints, and it is a displeasing sight to observe the appearance of the limb; and by chance, the limbs cannot perform their natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, take care: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and saraccoline, acacia, and similar others, taking any one of these things or all together and grind them with strong wine or egg whites or oil; then apply the mixture on a poultice and hold it tightly and do not remove it for many days; then break it open, and start another, until the inflammation is removed; or you can place a piece of well-made plank over it because the properties of the plank are such that they remove all swellings from the limbs. If the inflammation has already hardened into a stone, it must be removed by cutting through it, and make the excess matter apparent, or you can shave it with any rasp until it is removed, and cure it until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb which is weak after being treated
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains afterwards, the limb becomes weak and delicate due to several reasons: one is because it was tied too tightly and not properly; or because there were too many splints, and the nutrients could not reach the member; or because of excessive irrigation; or because of excessive movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, causing weakness.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body strong, until the blood multiplies in him; then provide bathing, and give joy and rest; then put ointment on the member, so that the ointment attracts a great amount of nutrients to it, and irrigate it often with cold water, until the nutrients return to the member; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	twisted limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is disfigured, yet it does not lose its natural function; do not believe the foolish who say that a limb should be broken anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and this practice is condemned, and brings great harm, and perhaps death. However, if the swellings and torments are fresh, it must be treated with hot water or softening herbs such as daisy-of-May, roots, medick, and similar things; and you prepare one poultice soothing, such as dittany well made, and take the musk of daisy-of-May, and mix it with gelatin oil or sesame oil, and make a poultice. Or you take fat figs, and grind them with wheat bran, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes, the dislocation is opened by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 Movements should be brought to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is strengthened and hardened, as stone, and iron is required to be applied, it should be covered up to the bone, making an incision subtle and gently; then place cushion and study in the care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in any limb, it must now be reset carefully.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 For if it is delayed, the joint swells, and if it is put back on the limb at a weak point; therefore, it should not be moved while it is swollen: many times this causes pus and other pains; nevertheless, when it occurs, make the patient purge, then let him rest, until the abscesses have subsided; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as its cure requires.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the lower jaws (jawbones)
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It rarely happens that the lower jaws (jawbones) are dislocated in two ways: either they are partially separated from their place and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the bottom, causing saliva to spill out of the mouth, preventing it from being held or closed, and wrapping the tongue around with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is small, it often returns with multiple displacements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 If it is whole and complete, you must quickly reset it and not tarry; in such a way that the minister grasps the head of the patient, and presses his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other hand should be spread out, to make it even; and command the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the patient must keep the meat equal, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	If the dislocation is of the two jaws together, anoint them with warm water and oil, and gently bring them back into place; do not press too hard, as we have said earlier.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they (the dislocated parts) are put back in place and the patient's mouth is closed well, soften with warm poultices made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with several threads; let the patient sleep on his back, with his arms between two cushions so that he does not move them to either side nor tries to force them more, but takes only light food until the pains are gone, and the jaws have been healed; and then eat lightly whatever he wishes, and do not exert oneself in opening the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaws have been well healed and become healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be set right within an hour and are not restored to their place, fever and usual symptoms may occur, and possibly a stomach problem or vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, know that it is destruction; and many times he who experiences it dies within 8 days.
de la forcelle	of the noose
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The noose cannot dislocate from the inside along its length and width, but it can be dislocated at times from the outside, and one feels it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then presses the shoulder firmly to your palm, and it will return to its place; then put the splint and bind it, and keep it immobilized; and the arm which is out of its socket cannot dislocate again; if it does, reset it to its place as we have said; then put the splint and bind it, and keep it immobilized, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the same way, the shoulder blades are returned to their place when they are dislocated.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 Know that the shoulder dislocates in only three ways: one is when it dislocates at the socket below; the second is at the part of the hip; and occasionally it dislocates at the upper part, but this happens rarely; it does not dislocate behind or within the nerves; and sometimes it dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those with little flesh, for it can be easily displaced; in those with enough flesh, it can be easily displaced upward, but returns quickly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some men that they receive a blow or break and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary therefore that you test it, as long as you are certain; then commence the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 Also, know that the dislocation towards the socket and distinguish between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest difference between them; and you will find on the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the socket at the place where the top of the shoulder touches it, as if it were an eye; and the sick cannot return their hand to its normal position or make any movements; similarly, if dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can see it clearly on the other side; and this type of dislocation is not difficult to correct when it is new, unless the patient has a fracture.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The method is that the minister lifts the hand of the patient upwards, then places your hands under the dislocation joint and forces it upwards to its place; and the minister lifts the hand and stretches it upwards, then puts it under; it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said in hand for several days, then the patient must be bathed in hot water; and bring a soft and soothing poultice made from decotion of elder and fenugreek and melilot in water, and apply it; then have the patient lie on his back, and place a piece of even linen under the affected shoulder, not too soft nor too hard, then place the foot of another person on the linen, and lift the head of the shoulder skillfully, and pull the hand of the patient; and another attendant holds the head of the patient downwards; that shoulder immediately returns to its place, and if you find it dislocated in this manner: it is necessary for a person larger than the patient to be present; and straight towards the side, push the shoulder under the patient's affected shoulder, lift the affected shoulder upward so the patient hangs on the arm, and another attendant pulls the patient's hand downwards towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too weak, they cannot bear any heavy thing, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 Also, one can perform the reduction in another way: one should thrust a long needle into the ground so that the head is as round as a pea and not too thick or thin; then it should be placed beneath the patient, but with soft cloths under him, and he should stand straight; then his hand should be extended on the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return due to all these things we have said, one should perform this cure: take a needle from both hands of a good length and four inches wide, which has a rounded tip to enter fully into the socket, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then put the stick on top of the joint's head wrapped in cloth to prevent it from hurting the patient, then place it inside the patient's joint; extend one arm above the stick, and hold the shoulder above the stick, and the forearm at the end of the upper arm, then place the forearm on a piece of wood about as wide as your hand, and stretch the hands below, and leave the body hanging from the other side; the joint will be reset at this point.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when the joint is reset, whichever way it may be, you must place an equal piece of woolen cloth beneath the joint; then apply an ointment made with flour from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk over the entire shoulder and around it; then hold the limb below the joint, and twist the linen thread around the ointment, and embrace the hand at its neck, and keep the hands in place.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eats little food, as long as the limbs are comfortable, for it will heal more quickly; and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is hardened and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or for some other reason, then you must administer fire cauterization at three places as stated in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you do all of this and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint cannot hold or raise the arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is severed, crushed, or weakened; and know that the joint will never be relocated in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the hip, and limbs, whether front or back, is made by pressure and stretching of hands, and some other means are administered to it; and care should be given until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing comes pain in the member, and slow movement, then the patient uses warm baths many times, until the pain subsides and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation cost
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint at the elbow is dislocated by points, and it goes in by points; and if it dislocates from all parts, front and back, and the dislocation is not corrected, because one can clearly see and feel it; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the bone of the patient with the healthy one, you should see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is thick, and cannot bend the arm nor reach the shoulder completely.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it must be reset as soon as an abscess comes to the place, for if an abscess comes to the place, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be completely reset at all, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perhaps there the death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is as follows, when it can be returned to its original state: you extend your hand to his two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and his hands towards the mirror according to the cue around, above and below, and push the joint back to his shoulders together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it will return when you fold your hand to the other, and press from the root of the palm on the side that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 If it does not return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two men must extend the arm, and they burn it with two torches, so it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then you have wrapped a double-long and wide cloth around it; and when the eyes see the joint joined together at their hands, they oil it to soften the joint, then push the joint forward until it returns; and when it is in its place, put dry plaster with egg on it, and hold it firmly, and let the arm hang from the neck of the patient for several days, then unbind it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firmly in place, remove the bandage and leave it; if you see that the joint does not hold well, renew the plaster and bandage, and leave it like that for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 And if it feels sore after the reset of the joint, and it swells, bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or you put a sheep's wool pad on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath; and when it bleeds, rub the joint gently, then replace the wool pad, and then enter the bath again; and do this two or three times until it is healed; and if you see, put warm, moist cow dung on it and apply pressure; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the wrist occurs, and its reset is easy compared to other joints; however, it should be returned to its place as soon as possible, in the same hour that it becomes dislocated, before the limb swells or an abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 And the resetting of the hand: you place the sick hand on a table, and extend your fingers, and align them, so that the palm is above the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns to its normal position; it is important that you observe if it is properly placed; then have the patient place the back of his hand on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's back of their hand on the table, and have them place their other hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, it is well; if not, apply the plasters to the abscesses with a soothing substance, and let them rest in this condition.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 If it cannot be endured, and you are unable to put it back after some days, the dislocated joint remains; and this does not harm the patient as long as their hand is weakened and cannot exert force: therefore know that the nerves have been severed, or the arteries; there is no other remedy except to draw out by cautery from the case, and in extreme cases, it has no other value.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is injured, apply the plaster as we have said, then strap and leave for five days, then unbind and let be.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot move well and there is no swelling, moisten with warm water and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or belly; then press the dislocation towards your pockets until it returns, then hold the finger's head, and turn it towards the side where it is disjointed; leave it for two days, then make it equal to that day; bind it tightly, as we have said, and loosen it by a day, move it and bind it again; do this frequently until it becomes straight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals; and do the same when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	When the vertebrae of the back are dislocated.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the vertebrae of the back or neck are dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, for death soon follows the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 And the signs are that the excretions jump involuntarily, it cannot be held, and many times one member becomes soft, either one knee or both arms or the spine; when the spine becomes silent at four parts, this is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you observe whether the gilbositez has come from childhood: if not, there is no cure nor healing from it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And that which comes from falling or from blows or similar things, the ancient methods of cures used to say with great words, but there was no great benefit in all; but I have abridged it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that in the inflammation that comes before, there is neither trickery nor health; and similarly that which comes straight to both sides, and cannot be cured except by the one that comes from behind, as I said; and it is that the patient should be spread out on his face in one equal place, and have a restraint beneath him, so he does not bleed; then insert the needle into the head of the bone into the earth, and another into the feet, and tie a bandage over the patient's soles, and another at the ankles, and at the knees, and at the shins; and two ministers should know the bands, one at the head and others at the feet, between the two needles; and they must be tightly bound, the needles as we have said, and the mirrors place their hands on the spine formed, until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if the dislocation does not return by this cure, take a beam three feet long and bend it below, and have the patient be on their side, and push the head of the beam beneath the patient, then place the middle of the beam on the spine; and put the hands at the other end of the beam, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it on a pulley that rotates by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And it is that you insert two large thorns into the head of the patient, one on each side, and have space about a foot between each thorn; and have in each thorn a pulley that turns, and let the thorns be firmly fixed in the ground so they do not move; and between the two thorns have another thorn turning, as cords turn, and have in the two turning thorns two small thorns of a foot long, to turn the pulleys; and then tie the rope that is among the pulleys to the beam, and the other rope to the other pulley, and each of the helpers turns their pulley along the entire rope, and the master adjusts the spine as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 And when it is evened, place a drying plaster made with egg and apply heat, then apply cupping glasses, then hold a flat piece of wood of three fingers length against the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a rope as we have said, and use subtle nourishment until it is healed; and if anything comes at the end of the healing, administer softening and soothing medicines along with the flat piece of wood that has been mentioned above; and sometimes a piece of plank is administered, and sometimes the appearance is in the back part of the spine and it seems to be dislocation; and this is the bone that opens, which means one should not have any presumption, for perhaps death will come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of the dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the shoulder and the joints of the upper arm come from dislocations only, and not otherwise like other joints; and the joint of the shoulder is dislocated in four parts: internally and externally, front and back; and more internally than the others, slightly dislocated front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when the sick leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and wider at the knee for the sick than for the healthy; and the sick cannot bend their knee in fire; and it is the joint that is displaced due to abscess heat that becomes inflamed, because the thigh of the calf comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of the one who experiences this happening, is that this event is contrary to those beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of the one whose leg is straightened according to completion; however, do not double the knee in pain, and if you wish to make it walk, it cannot move forward, and it holds its urine, and the ankle swells, and when it walks, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one whose leg is twisted behind, is that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the calf is below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The translations for the given lines are as follows:
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the fresh dislocation, which has four types of dislocation, hasten that you turn the joint and push it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, there is no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare the strong minister, and hold the leg firmly by his hands or tied above the knee; another minister extends his hand over it in such a way that he presses his hands under the thigh, then tightens a strong rope above the calf; another holds the head of the rope; all stretch upward and downward at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If the joint is not in place, it requires treatment for its likeness. When a dislocation is at the front, you must remember to hold the patient on their healthy side, then place a rope around the thigh's root and under the affected angle, then lift the rope up towards the angle and towards the forceps; then take another assistant to grab the large thigh of the affected leg and stretch it outwards: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together tightly with a strong rope above both heels and both knees, and the affected leg should be extended two fingers more than the others; then hang him by his head from a post, and suspend both arms from a long distance above the ground; then command the assistant to grab the top of the thigh, and have another assistant hanging with the patient, who grasps the thigh in form, for the joints will return quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And when the dislocations are at their furthest point, the patient lies down, as we have said in the one who has gilbositeit; then you pull on the ligament above the affected leg properly, and also above the foot; then put two needles, one at the head and the other at the toes; then thrust the needle between the thighs of the patient in the shape of a T; and wrap moist cloth around it to prevent the patient from bleeding; then stretch each minister towards him, and the mirror place his hand equal to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns (to its place), that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, put it on a table and press it as we have said in the gilbositeit, and let the patient lie down on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it must be extended as quickly as possible, and according to what I have said; and place his hand on the side of the injured angle, then press with the other hand, and stretch it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And if the dislocation is at the shoulder, it should not be extended downward, nor lifted up off the ground, but rather it should remain as when the hip was dislocated to the opposite side, as we have said in the lying-down position on two hips; and let it be facing that way, and the limb extended as we have said before, and pressure applied to the joint on the table; and it will be ready when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then align the thighs, and place the splint, and bind with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then unbind, and place the splint again; and if you see that they are even, bind again as before, and leave for three more days; then unbind, and let him walk well, until the limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	The dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees are dislocated in three ways: inside and outward, behind; and not forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated; and restoration of all is that you have the patient sit straight, extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his thigh, and place his foot on your feet; then take his knee with your palms, pull it between your hands, then bend the two sides of the knee so they face each other; another assistant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it bends his leg easily at the knee; apply the plaster, and hold his leg to the thigh firmly for three or four days, then release him; do not let the patient walk until the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not broken, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of dislocation, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and try to feel in the part where it is dislocated: repositioning should be gentle, and it must be gently stretched with hands when only swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit straight, and hold him by the leg above the ankle; then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, then to the left hand twice, then lift it up, and push the foot up forcefully; do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, restart the process, as it may return; and if it cannot return, place the patient on his back on the ground, and fix the splint firmly in the ground between his knees, and cover it with rags so as not to hurt the patient; then hold the knee, and another person holds the foot at the ankle or the shin, keeping it raised above the foot; each person holds equally, and the splint should be close between the patient's knees to keep the patient when lifting him; then place mirrors equal to the dislocation in their hands, and another person holds the leg straight below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And when it is at the point, put the plaster and poultice on top, press firmly, and tie the leg to the foot, and watch the nerves that are above the heel behind, that the bandage is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage softens, straighten it; then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and let the patient walk for four days; and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess opens, you must calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it heals.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, they must be stretched out gently without effort, and it is an easy thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the dislocation is in any way towards the back of the foot, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or a bed straight up, and put your foot above the joints, then press firmly until it returns; and when it is even and there is no gap, place a two-fingered table under the foot sole, then tighten it, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest until he recovers.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound comes with dislocation and it is to be restored, many times the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in the cure, unless you are wise in the art and have long used it; and be compassionate, merciful, and slow; do not be hasty; and first use warm poultices on the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of healing; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the poultice arrives where it should; and when the limb is in place, administer warm poultices to the abscess, heal the wound as necessary, using strongly desiccated herbs; and if with dislocation there is a break, and small bones are displaced, set them, and do what we have said for simple diseases; and beware of entering into fear, as I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your weapons and body.
Amen	 Amen (So be it)
